
α.Sa1.1.1 KAh na mo howae wosketomp ut Ramathaim$zophim, ut Ephraime wadchuut, kah ussowesu Elkanah, wunnaumonuh Jeroham, wunnaumonuh Elihu, wunnaumonuh Tohu, wunnaumonuh Zuph, wut-Ephrathit.
E.Sa1.1.1: Now there was a certain man of Ramathaimzophim, of mount Ephraim, and his name was Elkanah, the son of Jeroham, the son of Elihu, the son of Tohu, the son of Zuph, an Ephrathite:

α.Sa1.1.2 Kah nees8kauan, pasúk ussowesu Hannah, kah ongkatog usowesu Peninnah: kah Peninnah wunneechaneu, qut Hanna wann[é] wunneechaneu.
E.Sa1.1.2: And he had two wives; the name of the one was Hannah, and the name of the other Peninnah: and Peninnah had children, but Hannah had no children.

α.Sa1.1.3 Kah yeuoh wosketomp kokodtumwae wutch papau[m]shau ukkeitotanat waussummuónat, kah séphausinat en Jehovahut ayeuhteainnitt8ut, ut Shiloh, kah neesuoh wunnaumonuh Eli, Hophni, kah Phinehas, wussephausueneumoh Jehovah, na appuog.
E.Sa1.1.3: And this man went up out of his city yearly to worship and to sacrifice unto the LORD of hosts in Shiloh. And the two sons of Eli, Hophni and Phinehas, the priests of the LORD, were there.

α.Sa1.1.4 Kah adt8cheyeu88k sephausu Elkana, ninnumauau wutchippiyeum8ash Penninnah ummittamwussoh, kah wame wunnaumonuh kah wuttaunoh.
E.Sa1.1.4: And when the time was that Elkanah offered, he gave to Peninnah his wife, and to all her sons and her daughters, portions:

α.Sa1.1.5 Qut aninnumauau Hannahoh neesip[s]ke chippai. (néwutche womonau Hannah, qut Jehovah uhkuphamauoh wutôontomuk.
E.Sa1.1.5: But unto Hannah he gave a worthy portion; for he loved Hannah: but the LORD had shut up her womb.

α.Sa1.1.6 Kah noh ayeuohkonont 8saume m8m8sqheuh, umm8sqheonat, newutche Jehovah ukkuphamauoh wutôontomuk)
E.Sa1.1.6: And her adversary also provoked her sore, for to make her fret, because the LORD had shut up her womb.

α.Sa1.1.7 Kah ne wutussen nish$noh kodtumm8, k[ó]hkuhqueit en wékit Jehovah, ne wuttinne m8m8sqheon: newaje móg kah matta méetsu.
E.Sa1.1.7: And as he did so year by year, when she went up to the house of the LORD, so she provoked her; therefore she wept, and did not eat.

α.Sa1.1.8 Neit Elkanah wessukeh wuttinukquoh, Hannah, tohwutch m[a]uan? kah tohwutch mat meetsean? kah tohwutch kuttah neuantam8m8uk? sunnummatta nen anuehkauoh ut kuhhogkat, onk piogqussuog wunnaumoniinneunk?
E.Sa1.1.8: Then said Elkanah her husband to her, Hannah, why weepest thou? and why eatest thou not? and why is thy heart grieved? am not I better to thee than ten sons?

α.Sa1.1.9 Neit Hannah neepau mahche meetsehettit ut Shiloh, kah mahche wuttattamweh[e]ttit (kah Eli sephausuen quenappu appuonganit, kishke [n]e[é]patunkquonkanit ut wuttempleumut Jehovah)
E.Sa1.1.9: So Hannah rose up after they had eaten in Shiloh, and after they had drunk. Now Eli the priest sat upon a seat by a post of the temple of the LORD.

α.Sa1.1.10 Kah weesogkinwoh ukketeahogkóunoh kah peantamauau Jehovah, & m8cheke mau.
E.Sa1.1.10: And she was in bitterness of soul, and prayed unto the LORD, and wept sore.

α.Sa1.1.11 Kah quosho[a]e quoshauau kah n8wau, wôi Lord ayeuhtéaunit, wunnamuhkut monunnéaman wutu[X]quanumoonk kittinneume mittamwossis, kah mehquanumean, kah matta wananumoadt kittinneum qut anninnumauadt kittinneum mukkatch[o]uk[s], neit pish nummagun en Lordut, nisohke pomontog, kah [m]atta pish mosum8un uppuhkuk.
E.Sa1.1.11: And she vowed a vow, and said, O LORD of hosts, if thou wilt indeed look on the affliction of thine handmaid, and remember me, and not forget thine handmaid, but wilt give unto thine handmaid a man child, then I will give him unto the LORD all the days of his life, and there shall no razor come upon his head.

α.Sa1.1.12 Kah nnih nagwutteae peantog anaquabit Jehovah, Eli kukk[i]nneasu wutt8n.
E.Sa1.1.12: And it came to pass, as she continued praying before the LORD, that Eli marked her mouth.

α.Sa1.1.13 Kah Hannah kutt8 ut wuttahut, webe wussissitt8nash mamonchem8ash, qut wuttauatonkqussuonk matta n8tunkquodtinno: newaj Eli unnant[o]g kogkeu[ss]ippa[m]8.
E.Sa1.1.13: Now Hannah, she spake in her heart; only her lips moved, but her voice was not heard: therefore Eli thought she had been drunken.

α.Sa1.1.14 Kah Eli wuttinuh, uttoh kussohke kogkeissippamwin? amaunsh k8wineum.
E.Sa1.1.14: And Eli said unto her, How long wilt thou be drunken? put away thy wine from thee.

α.Sa1.1.15 Kah Hannah namp8ham kah n8wau, matta nussontimom, nen néuantamweteahh8wae mittamwossis, matta n8tattam8 wine, asuh onkup, qut nuss[ó]kin nukketeahogkou anaquabit Jehovah.
E.Sa1.1.15: And Hannah answered and said, No, my lord, I am a woman of a sorrowful spirit: I have drunk neither wine nor strong drink, but have poured out my soul before the LORD.

α.Sa1.1.16 Ahque ogquanum kittinneum wuttaunut Belial, newutche wutch monatut nunneuantamwe natwontam8onganit, yeu nuppajeh nukketohkam.
E.Sa1.1.16: Count not thine handmaid for a daughter of Belial: for out of the abundance of my complaint and grief have I spoken hitherto.

α.Sa1.1.17 Neit Eli namp8ham kah n8wau, wunohteae monchish kah um-Manitt8moh Israel aninnumunkqush kuppeantamoonk ne wehquetumauadt.
E.Sa1.1.17: Then Eli answered and said, Go in peace: and the God of Israel grant thee thy petition that thou hast asked of him.

α.Sa1.1.18 Kah noh n8wau, kittinneum namehteauitch kitteamonteanittuonk anaquabean, neit mittamwossis monchu kah meetsu, kah wutti[n]nussuonk matta wonk neuanâtamween8h.
E.Sa1.1.18: And she said, Let thine handmaid find grace in thy sight. So the woman went her way, and did eat, and her countenance was no more sad.

α.Sa1.1.19 Kah nompoae omohkeog kah waussumwog ut anaquabit Jehovah, kah qushkeog, kah peyaog wekuóut ut Ramah, kah Elkanah 8wâheuh Hannah ummittamwussoh, kah Jehovah ummehquanumoh.
E.Sa1.1.19: And they rose up in the morning early, and worshipped before the LORD, and returned, and came to their house to Ramah: and Elkanah knew Hannah his wife; and the LORD remembered her.

α.Sa1.1.20 Newajeh nnag, ahquompi áunak, mahche Hanna wompequait, neechau wunnaumoniinneuh, kah wuttissowenun Samuel, newutche n8wehquetumauo[n]apuh Jehovah.
E.Sa1.1.20: Wherefore it came to pass, when the time was come about after Hannah had conceived, that she bare a son, and called his name Samuel, saying, Because I have asked him of the LORD.

α.Sa1.1.21 Kah wosketomp Elkanah, kah wame wek, kuhkuhqueog, magunat en Jehovahut kokodtumwae sephausuonk, kah ukquoshaumuwaonk.
E.Sa1.1.21: And the man Elkanah, and all his house, went up to offer unto the LORD the yearly sacrifice, and his vow.

α.Sa1.1.22 Qut Hannah matta kuhkuhqueu, newutche unnau wessukeh, matta nukkuhkuk8h nô pajeh mukkies wut8chinin[ô]nat, kah neit pish nuppas8, onk woh neepau anaquabit Lord, kah na woh wutapin micheme.
E.Sa1.1.22: But Hannah went not up; for she said unto her husband, I will not go up until the child be weaned, and then I will bring him, that he may appear before the LORD, and there abide for ever.

α.Sa1.1.23 Kah Elkanahoh wessukeh unnuk, ussish utto[h] án tapeneaman, ne apsh nô pajeh kut8chiniñaheonat, webe Jehovah menuhk[e]tauitch wuttinnowaonk: neit mittamwossis wutappin, kah wunn8nuh nô pajeh wut8chininnáheónat.
E.Sa1.1.23: And Elkanah her husband said unto her, Do what seemeth thee good; tarry until thou have weaned him; only the LORD establish his word. So the woman abode, and gave her son suck until she weaned him.

α.Sa1.1.24 Kah mahche 8chinináheont, wunnashpenuh, nashpe nishuog cowashenemesog, kah pasuk ephah n8khik, kah wishquie wine, kah uppas8uh weekit God ut Shiloh, kah mukkies peississeup.
E.Sa1.1.24: And when she had weaned him, she took him up with her, with three bullocks, and one ephah of flour, and a bottle of wine, and brought him unto the house of the LORD in Shiloh: and the child was young.

α.Sa1.1.25 Kah nushaog kowashineuh, kah pas8áog mukkiesoh Elut.
E.Sa1.1.25: And they slew a bullock, and brought the child to Eli.

α.Sa1.1.26 Kah noh n8wau, woi nussontimom, neane kukketeahogkou pomóntog nussontimom, nen mittamwossis ne adt kechekompauwehtauunop, paantamauog Jehovah.
E.Sa1.1.26: And she said, Oh my lord, as thy soul liveth, my lord, I am the woman that stood by thee here, praying unto the LORD.

α.Sa1.1.27 Yeuoh mukkies n8che peantamunah; kah Lord nittinnumunk n8wehquetumóonk kah nanompassumogkup.
E.Sa1.1.27: For this child I prayed; and the LORD hath given me my petition which I asked of him:

α.Sa1.1.28 Newajeh wonk nunnoguhkouheónuh Jehovah[;] uttohsohkepomontog, noh pish nam[a]kouheonuh Jehovah. Kah na wuttit wowussumon Jehovah.
E.Sa1.1.28: Therefore also I have lent him to the LORD; as long as he liveth he shall be lent to the LORD. And he worshipped the LORD there.

α.Sa1.2.1 KAh Hannah peantam kah n8wau, nuttah wekontam8m8 Jehovahut, nutaskon tohshinau ut Lordut: nutt8n mishegskehtauun ánue nummatwomit, newutche n8wekontam ut k8wadchanuwaonganit.
E.Sa1.2.1: And Hannah prayed, and said, My heart rejoiceth in the LORD, mine horn is exalted in the LORD: my mouth is enlarged over mine enemies; because I rejoice in thy salvation.

α.Sa1.2.2 Matta howan wunneetupanatamweyeu8 onatuh Jehovah newutche wanne onk howan webe ken, asuh ne teague qussuk ogqueneunkquodtinno num-Manitt8munónut.
E.Sa1.2.2: There is none holy as the LORD: for there is none beside thee: neither is there any rock like our God.

α.Sa1.2.3 Ahque wonk wussaume pittuánm8e keket8kunk: mishánussuonk sohham8m8uhkitch wahteóe God, kah noh nashpe usseongash qutompagh8ta[u].
E.Sa1.2.3: Talk no more so exceeding proudly; let not arrogancy come out of your mouth: for the LORD is a God of knowledge, and by him actions are weighed.

α.Sa1.2.4 Wutahtompe8oh menuhkesuenuog poh[sh]áog, & neg togkussittasukeg, puttukquobpinóog menuhkesuonk.
E.Sa1.2.4: The bows of the mighty men are broken, and they that stumbled are girded with strength.

α.Sa1.2.5 Neg numwameechumitcheg, wuttinneumuhkausuog wuhhogkauh wutche petukqunnunk: kah nag kodtupwutcheg, newutteasheyeuunneau: nemehkuh mehcheyeu nesausuk tahshegheau, kah m8chekegheont, n8chumwesu.
E.Sa1.2.5: They that were full have hired out themselves for bread; and they that were hungry ceased: so that the barren hath born seven; and she that hath many children is waxed feeble.

α.Sa1.2.6 Jehovah nushehteau, & uppomantamwa[h]heuh, 8w8ms[uu]noh weenohkeit, kah ukkúhkuhk8unoh.
E.Sa1.2.6: The LORD killeth, and maketh alive: he bringeth down to the grave, and bringeth up.

α.Sa1.2.7 Jehovah matchekhuau, kah wenauwekhuau, tiuhquonkhuau, kah tahshinnuau.
E.Sa1.2.7: The LORD maketh poor, and maketh rich: he bringeth low, and lifteth up.

α.Sa1.2.8 Waapenau matchekuoh wutch pukquehtu, kah tahshinau we[n]sh[á]enuh, wutch annohkeit, uppon[ó]nat kenugke sontimohtu, wutahtauwaheonat sohsumóe appuonk, newutche wuñepatunkquonkash ohke wuttaiheash Jehovah, & noh ukquenohtauun muttaok
E.Sa1.2.8: He raiseth up the poor out of the dust, and lifteth up the beggar from the dunghill, to set them among princes, and to make them inherit the throne of glory: for the pillars of the earth are the LORD's, and he hath set the world upon them.

α.Sa1.2.9 Nanawunnum wusseet8óash wunnetupanatamwenúog, kah matchetowog pish chequnappuog ut pohkenahtu, newutche nashpe menuhkesuonk matta howan sohkòsu.
E.Sa1.2.9: He will keep the feet of his saints, and the wicked shall be silent in darkness; for by strength shall no man prevail.

α.Sa1.2.10 Ayeuuhkonukqutcheh Jehovah pish sukquehtahwhóog, wutch kesukqut pish uppaduhqunumauoh: Jehovah pish wussittum wáhqushik ohke, kah noh pish menuhkesheau ukketass8tam8moh, kah pish tahshinumauau wutaskonoh saséqunoncheh.
E.Sa1.2.10: The adversaries of the LORD shall be broken to pieces; out of heaven shall he thunder upon them: the LORD shall judge the ends of the earth; and he shall give strength unto his king, and exalt the horn of his anointed.

α.Sa1.2.11 Kah Elkanah au Ramah wekit, kah mukkies wuttinneumuhkauau Jehovah anaquabit Eli sephausuenin.
E.Sa1.2.11: And Elkanah went to Ramah to his house. And the child did minister unto the LORD before Eli the priest.

α.Sa1.2.12 Kah wunnaumonuh Eli, neh wunnaumonuh Belial, matta wahéauog Jehovah.
E.Sa1.2.12: Now the sons of Eli were sons of Belial; they knew not the LORD.

α.Sa1.2.13 Kah yeu sephausuenuog wuttinheaongan8 missinninnuh, howan sephausit sepháusuen wuttinneumoh nashpe peyaoh, ash pamekommet[á]g weyaus, weyáuse uhquon, nishwanitteai, ut wunnutcheganit.
E.Sa1.2.13: And the priest's custom with the people was, that, when any man offered sacrifice, the priest's servant came, while the flesh was in seething, with a fleshhook of three teeth in his hand;

α.Sa1.2.14 Kah ukkussuko[n]kon ahkuhqut asuh panut asuh Caldronut, asuh potut: kah weyausuhquon wame ne paudtonk, sephausuen wunneemunnum8un, ne wuttinheonéau Shiloh, wame Isráelitsoh neh nô paonutcheh.
E.Sa1.2.14: And he struck it into the pan, or kettle, or caldron, or pot; all that the fleshhook brought up the priest took for himself. So they did in Shiloh unto all the Israelites that came thither.

α.Sa1.2.15 Wonk chágossumohettet wees sephausuen wuttinneumoh peyaoh, kah unnau wosketompoh neh sephausinitcheh, áni[u]numah weyaus nutapwónat wutch sephausuen, newutche matta kodtantam kesittae weyaus, qut askeyaus.
E.Sa1.2.15: Also before they burnt the fat, the priest's servant came, and said to the man that sacrificed, Give flesh to roast for the priest; for he will not have sodden flesh of thee, but raw.

α.Sa1.2.16 Kah howan unnont, ahque panushonch teanuk chikossumunat wees kah neit nemunush uttoh an kodtantog kukketeahogkou, neit woh namp8hamau, matta qut yeuyeu aninnumah: k[á]h matta nan8g, neit kutchekee neemunnumauunun.
E.Sa1.2.16: And if any man said unto him, Let them not fail to burn the fat presently, and then take as much as thy soul desireth; then he would answer him, Nay; but thou shalt give it me now: and if not, I will take it by force.

α.Sa1.2.17 Newajeh ummatcheseongan8 wuskenuog missag ut anaquabit Jehovah, newutche missinninnuog jishántamwog sephamauongash Jeh[o]vah.
E.Sa1.2.17: Wherefore the sin of the young men was very great before the LORD: for men abhorred the offering of the LORD.

α.Sa1.2.18 Qut Samuel wuttinneumuhkausu anaquabit Jehovah, mogkiesuit, puttukquobpissu wompanaki[nn]e Ephod.
E.Sa1.2.18: But Samuel ministered before the LORD, being a child, girded with a linen ephod.

α.Sa1.2.19 Wonk, ohkasoh ayimunk monakenem kah uppaudtauon asekodtumokish, weech[e] kuhkuhk8mónt wessukeh, sephausinneat kokodtumwae sephausuongash.
E.Sa1.2.19: Moreover his mother made him a little coat, and brought it to him from year to year, when she came up with her husband to offer the yearly sacrifice.

α.Sa1.2.20 Kah Eli wunanumau Elkana kah ummittamwussoh, kah n8wau, Jehovah aninnumunkqush wuskannem yeuoh wutch mittamwossis, wutch wehquétum8onk nen nogohkouheoncheh Lordoh: kah nag moncheog nehenwonche wekuout.
E.Sa1.2.20: And Eli blessed Elkanah and his wife, and said, The LORD give thee seed of this woman for the loan which is lent to the LORD. And they went unto their own home.

α.Sa1.2.21 Kah Jehovah natauwaheau Hannahoh, neit wompequoou, kah nishwekheau wunnaumo[u]sinn[n]euh, kah neés8oh wuttauneuh, kah mukkies Samuel kenuppetu anaquabit Jehovah.
E.Sa1.2.21: And the LORD visited Hannah, so that she conceived, and bare three sons and two daughters. And the child Samuel grew before the LORD.

α.Sa1.2.22 Kah Eli kechisu8, kah n8tam wame ne wunnaumonuh a[n]heonit wame Israelloh, k[á]h neesinwog mittamwussissoh neh m[o]enitcheh ut mukkinneae kommukque squontamut.
E.Sa1.2.22: Now Eli was very old, and heard all that his sons did unto all Israel; and how they lay with the women that assembled at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.

α.Sa1.2.23 Kah nah wuttinuh tohwutch yeush usseog? newutche nunn8tám kummatcheséongan8oash, nashpe wamu yeug missinninnuog.
E.Sa1.2.23: And he said unto them, Why do ye such things? for I hear of your evil dealings by all this people.

α.Sa1.2.24 Pâ nunnaumonunk, néwutche, matta ne wunusseteunkquot, ne n8tam, kummatcheseaheomw8 ummissinninneum[o]h Jehovah.
E.Sa1.2.24: Nay, my sons; for it is no good report that I hear: ye make the LORD's people to transgress.

α.Sa1.2.25 Pasuk wosketomp matcheneheont onkatoge, wussittumwaen pish 8sumoh qut wosketomp matcheneheont J[é]hovah, howan woh wunnanompanwonshuh? qut matta n8tamoog 8wadtauatonkqussuonk 8sh8oh, newutche Jehovah kodnushau.
E.Sa1.2.25: If one man sin against another, the judge shall judge him: but if a man sin against the LORD, who shall intreat for him? Notwithstanding they hearkened not unto the voice of their father, because the LORD would slay them.

α.Sa1.2.26 Kah mukkies Samuel, kenuppetu, kah womonukqussu na neeswe Lord kah wonk wosketompaog.
E.Sa1.2.26: And the child Samuel grew on, and was in favour both with the LORD, and also with men.

α.Sa1.2.27 Kah na uppeon manittowomp Eliut kah wuttinuh, yeu wussin Jehóvah, sun pahke nunnogqussip wek8 k8shóg aphettit Egypt wekit Pharoh?
E.Sa1.2.27: And there came a man of God unto Eli, and said unto him, Thus saith the LORD, Did I plainly appear unto the house of thy father, when they were in Egypt in Pharaoh's house?

α.Sa1.2.28 Kah sun nuppepenauous wutch wame Israelle chippan8onganit n8sephausueneumuneat, ummagunat ut nutaltarumut, chikohsumunat incense wuthogquiñeat Ephod ut anaquábeh kah sun nummagunus en wekuout k8sh8oog, wame n8tae mag8ongásh nashpe wunnaumonuh Israel.
E.Sa1.2.28: And did I choose him out of all the tribes of Israel to be my priest, to offer upon mine altar, to burn incense, to wear an ephod before me? and did I give unto the house of thy father all the offerings made by fire of the children of Israel?

α.Sa1.2.29 Tôhwutch tattogskomok nússephamonteaongash, kah nuttinnumonteaongash, nish ann8teamoweanish ut nutayeuonganit, kah kutanue quehtianum kenaumonunk onk nen, k8nogquehtenaoont, nashpe wanegugish wame ummag8ongan8ash Israel nummissinninneumog.
E.Sa1.2.29: Wherefore kick ye at my sacrifice and at mine offering, which I have commanded in my habitation; and honourest thy sons above me, to make yourselves fat with the chiefest of all the offerings of Israel my people?

α.Sa1.2.30 Newajeh Jehovah umManitt8moh Israel n8wau, wunnamuhkut nussip, kek, kah weekou k8shog, pish pomusháog anaquabeh micheme, qut yeuyeu Jehovah n8wau, nô8sukiitch, newutche nag quohtianumutcheg, nukquehtianumóog, kah neg jishanumutcheg neg  pish nutjishanumôog.
E.Sa1.2.30: Wherefore the LORD God of Israel saith, I said indeed that thy house, and the house of thy father, should walk before me for ever: but now the LORD saith, Be it far from me; for them that honour me I will honour, and they that despise me shall be lightly esteemed.

α.Sa1.2.31 Kusseh kesukodtash peyaum8, pish nuttummetahham kuhput, & wúhpit k8shog week8, ná matta pish kechisuun8 kekit.
E.Sa1.2.31: Behold, the days come, that I will cut off thine arm, and the arm of thy father's house, that there shall not be an old man in thine house.

α.Sa1.2.32 Kah pish kenau matwau ut nutayeuonganit, ut wame wenauwetuonganit ne anumauont God Israeloh, kah na matta pish kechisuun8 kekit micheme.
E.Sa1.2.32: And thou shalt see an enemy in my habitation, in all the wealth which God shall give Israel: and there shall not be an old man in thine house for ever.

α.Sa1.2.33 Kah noh wosketomp wag kuttaiheit, noh matta pish tamuhtahwhoog wutch nut-altarumut, noh pish mahtuppahteoou kuskesukquash, kah keneuantamhuk ut kuttahut, kah wame ne adtahshegik keek, neg pish nupp8og peissi[s]hettit.
E.Sa1.2.33: And the man of thine, whom I shall not cut off from mine altar, shall be to consume thine eyes, and to grieve thine heart: and all the increase of thine house shall die in the flower of their age.

α.Sa1.2.34 Kah kuhkinneasuonganu, ne pish nohkuhkonkqhettit nesuog kenaumonog, Hophni kah Phinehas, pasuk kesuk pish nupp8og naneeswe.
E.Sa1.2.34: And this shall be a sign unto thee, that shall come upon thy two sons, on Hophni and Phinehas; in one day they shall die both of them.

α.Sa1.2.35 Kah n8waápinumom pabuhtanumukque sephausuen, noh pish asit neaunag nutt[á]h, kah nuttenantam8onk, kah nutayimau papánekommuk, kah noh pish micheme pomushau anaquabit saséqunog.
E.Sa1.2.35: And I will raise me up a faithful priest, that shall do according to that which is in mine heart and in my mind: and I will build him a sure house; and he shall walk before mine anointed for ever.

α.Sa1.2.36 Kah pish nnih, nish$noh pasuk noh séqunit wutch kekit, pish peyau kah wunnauwaeht[a]uoh, wutch kodchuki silver, & kodchuki petukqunneg, kah pish n8wáu, poneh k8wehquetumoush, sephausuenúunneat, onk woh nummeech petukqunneg.
E.Sa1.2.36: And it shall come to pass, that every one that is left in thine house shall come and crouch to him for a piece of silver and a morsel of bread, and shall say, Put me, I pray thee, into one of the priests' offices, that I may eat a piece of bread.

α.Sa1.3.1 KAh mukkies Samuel wuttinnéumuhkauau Jehovah anquabit Eli: kah wuttinnowaonk God wohquânumukquodt yeu ahquompak, na matta mo pohquáe ammansuonk.
E.Sa1.3.1: And the child Samuel ministered unto the LORD before Eli. And the word of the LORD was precious in those days; there was no open vision.

α.Sa1.3.2 Kah n$nih ne ahquompak Eli sepsuk ut wutayeuonganit, kah wuskesukquash n8che pogkénum8m8, onk matta naum8.
E.Sa1.3.2: And it came to pass at that time, when Eli was laid down in his place, and his eyes began to wax dim, that he could not see;

α.Sa1.3.3 Kah asquam 8wequananteg God úhtán8g ut wut-templeumut Jehovah, ne ohtag wut-arkum God, kah Samuel sepsin kouénat.
E.Sa1.3.3: And ere the lamp of God went out in the temple of the LORD, where the ark of God was, and Samuel was laid down to sleep;

α.Sa1.3.4 Neit Jehovah wehkomau Samueloh, kah namp8ham, nen yeu.
E.Sa1.3.4: That the LORD called Samuel: and he answered, Here am I.

α.Sa1.3.5 Kah ussishau Eliut, kah n8wau, nen yeu, newutche k8wehkomeh, kah n8wau matta k8wehkomun8, wonk sepsish, kah monchu kah wonk sepsin.
E.Sa1.3.5: And he ran unto Eli, and said, Here am I; for thou calledst me. And he said, I called not; lie down again. And he went and lay down.

α.Sa1.3.6 Kah wonk Jehovah wehqutteam8, Samuel, kah Samuel omohku kah au Eliut, kah n8wau nen yeu, newutche k8wehkomeh, kah namp8ham, matta n8wehqutteam8 nunnaumon, wonk sepsish.
E.Sa1.3.6: And the LORD called yet again, Samuel. And Samuel arose and went to Eli, and said, Here am I; for thou didst call me. And he answered, I called not, my son; lie down again.

α.Sa1.3.7 Kah Samuel asquam waheau8 Jehovah, kah ásquam wuttinn8waonk God nahtinóun.
E.Sa1.3.7: Now Samuel did not yet know the LORD, neither was the word of the LORD yet revealed unto him.

α.Sa1.3.8 Kah wonk Jehovah wehkomau Samueloh nashwudt, kah 8mohkeu, kah au Eliut, kah n8wau, nen yeu, newutche k8wehkomeh: kah Eli unnantam Jehovah wehkomau mukkiesoh.
E.Sa1.3.8: And the LORD called Samuel again the third time. And he arose and went to Eli, and said, Here am I; for thou didst call me. And Eli perceived that the LORD had called the child.

α.Sa1.3.9 Newajeh Eli unnau Samueloh, monchish sepsish, kah pish nnih, wehkomukquean, pish kussim, ket8kash Jehovah, newutche kittinneum ken8tunk, neit Samuel monchu, kah koueu ut wutáyeuonganit.
E.Sa1.3.9: Therefore Eli said unto Samuel, Go, lie down: and it shall be, if he call thee, that thou shalt say, Speak, LORD; for thy servant heareth. So Samuel went and lay down in his place.

α.Sa1.3.10 Kah Jehovah peyau, kah neepau, kah wehqutteam8 neane negonne, Samuel, neit Samuel namp8ham, ket8kash newutche kittinneum ken8[tun]k.
E.Sa1.3.10: And the LORD came, and stood, and called as at other times, Samuel, Samuel. Then Samuel answered, Speak; for thy servant heareth.

α.Sa1.3.11 Kah Jehovah unnau Samueloh, kusseh, pish nutussem ne teag, ut Israel, ne nish$noh pasuk n8tog na[n]eese wuhtauogwash pish n[u]nnukshaash.
E.Sa1.3.11: And the LORD said to Samuel, Behold, I will do a thing in Israel, at which both the ears of every one that heareth it shall tingle.

α.Sa1.3.12 Ne [K]esukok nuppakodche ussen áyeuuhkonittue Eli wame ne an8waomp papaume week kutche ussean, kah wonk nuppakodche ussem.
E.Sa1.3.12: In that day I will perform against Eli all things which I have spoken concerning his house: when I begin, I will also make an end.

α.Sa1.3.13 Newutche nuttinnonah, n8sittum wek micheme, newutche matcheseonk ne wahteunk, newu[t]ché wunnaumonuh nishkheaoh wuhhogkau[h] kah matta 8tameheuh.
E.Sa1.3.13: For I have told him that I will judge his house for ever for the iniquity which he knoweth; because his sons made themselves vile, and he restrained them not.

α.Sa1.3.14 Newutche nutchadchekeyeuwop wekit Eli, ummatcheseonk wek Eli, matta pish pahketeau8un nashpe sephausuonk, asuh mag8onk micheme
E.Sa1.3.14: And therefore I have sworn unto the house of Eli, that the iniquity of Eli's house shall not be purged with sacrifice nor offering for ever.

α.Sa1.3.15 Kah Samuel sepsin nô pajeh mohtompanuut, kah woshinum wutushquontamash wek Jehovah kah Samuel wabesu unnonat Eliah monomansuonk.
E.Sa1.3.15: And Samuel lay until the morning, and opened the doors of the house of the LORD. And Samuel feared to shew Eli the vision.

α.Sa1.3.16 Neit Eli wehkomau Samueloh, kah n8wau Samuel nunnáumon, kah namp8ham nen yeu.
E.Sa1.3.16: Then Eli called Samuel, and said, Samuel, my son. And he answered, Here am I.

α.Sa1.3.17 Kah n8wau, teaguas ne Jehovàh anukquean? k8wehquetumoush ahque adtohtah, Jehóvah ne nehikqush, k[á]h wonk m8cheke, adtahtauean ne teag, wame teagquasinish nish anukquean[i]sh.
E.Sa1.3.17: And he said, What is the thing that the LORD hath said unto thee? I pray thee hide it not from me: God do so to thee, and more also, if thou hide any thing from me of all the things that he said unto thee.

α.Sa1.3.18 Kah Samuel wuttinonásh nish$noh teag, kah matta teag wutadtahtauoh kah n8wau, noh Lord, ussitch uttoh an tapeneog.
E.Sa1.3.18: And Samuel told him every whit, and hid nothing from him. And he said, It is the LORD: let him do what seemeth him good.

α.Sa1.3.19 Kah Samuel kenuppetu, kah Jehovah 8wetomuh, kah matta unnantam8 ne teague ukkutt8wongash penushait en ohkeit.
E.Sa1.3.19: And Samuel grew, and the LORD was with him, and did let none of his words fall to the ground.

α.Sa1.3.20 Kah wame Israel wutch Dan wehque Beersheba, wahheoog Samuel menehkheau 8quoshodtumwaeneumuneat Jehovah.
E.Sa1.3.20: And all Israel from Dan even to Beersheba knew that Samuel was established to be a prophet of the LORD.

α.Sa1.3.21 Kah Jehovah wonk nogqussu ut Shiloh newutche Jehovah nágum naehtauau Samueloh ut Shiloh; nashpe wuttin8waonk Jehovah.
E.Sa1.3.21: And the LORD appeared again in Shiloh: for the LORD revealed himself to Samuel in Shiloh by the word of the LORD.

α.Sa1.4.1 KAh wuttinnowaonk Samuel nnihyeup ut wame Israelut, neit Israél sohham wutayeuuhkononat Philistiansoh, kah tuppuksinwog kishke Ebenezer, kah Philistiansog tuppuksinwog ut Aphek.
E.Sa1.4.1: And the word of Samuel came to all Israel. Now Israel went out against the Philistines to battle, and pitched beside Ebenezer: and the Philistines pitched in Aphek.

α.Sa1.4.2 Kah Philistiansog wunnahassuog ayeuuhkononat Israel, kah quentôadtehett[t]it, Israel togkomop ut anaquabhettit Philistiansog: kah nushaog papaume yauut muttannonganog kussuoh kenauwam[é]nutche, ut ohteuhkonit.
E.Sa1.4.2: And the Philistines put themselves in array against Israel: and when they joined battle, Israel was smitten before the Philistines: and they slew of the army in the field about four thousand men.

α.Sa1.4.3 Kah missinninnuog paahettit tuppuksinn8onganit, Israelle Eldersog n8wáog, tohwaj Jehovah togkomukqueog yeu kesukok ut anaquabhettit Philistiansog? neemskommuttuh 8n8wae wut-Arkum Lord wutch Shiloh, en kuhhogkanonut, kah peyom8uk kenugke kuhhogkanonut, ne woh k8wadchanukqunan wutch wunnutchégan8out kummatwomunnonog.
E.Sa1.4.3: And when the people were come into the camp, the elders of Israel said, Wherefore hath the LORD smitten us to day before the Philistines? Let us fetch the ark of the covenant of the LORD out of Shiloh unto us, that, when it cometh among us, it may save us out of the hand of our enemies.

α.Sa1.4.4 Neit misinninnuog ánn8team8og en Shiloh, ónk woh na 8tauuneau 8n8wae wut-Arkum Jehovah ayeuteanit, noh apit nanoshauwe cherubimsut: kah neesuog wunnaumonuh Eli Hóphni kah Phineas, n[aa]ppuog weeche 8n8wae wut-Arkum God.
E.Sa1.4.4: So the people sent to Shiloh, that they might bring from thence the ark of the covenant of the LORD of hosts, which dwelleth between the cherubims: and the two sons of Eli, Hophni and Phinehas, were there with the ark of the covenant of God.

α.Sa1.4.5 Kah 8n8wae wut-Ark[u]m Jehovah paaum8uk ut tuppuksinn8wonganit wame Israel mishont8waog mishe mishont8waonk newaj ohke s8wag.
E.Sa1.4.5: And when the ark of the covenant of the LORD came into the camp, all Israel shouted with a great shout, so that the earth rang again.

α.Sa1.4.6 Kah Philistiansog n8tamohettit wuttauatonkqussue mishont8waonk, n8waog, t[ò]hnauwuttam88 unnont8wae yeu mishont8waonk, ut wuttuppukkussinn8ongan8out Hebronitsog; kah wahteauog wut-Arkum Jehovah peyaum8 ut tuppuksinn8wonganit.
E.Sa1.4.6: And when the Philistines heard the noise of the shout, they said, What meaneth the noise of this great shout in the camp of the Hebrews? And they understood that the ark of the LORD was come into the camp.

α.Sa1.4.7 Kah Philistiansog wabesuog, newutche n8waog, God peyau ut tuppuk[s]inn8onganit, kah nag n8waog, missi kutonkapunnaonganun, newutch asquam ne nussittonqu[à]tinn8 négónaeu.
E.Sa1.4.7: And the Philistines were afraid, for they said, God is come into the camp. And they said, Woe unto us! for there hath not been such a thing heretofore.

α.Sa1.4.8 Missi kutonkapunnaonganun, how[a]n pish kuppohquohwhunukqun wutch wunnutchegan8out yeug matikkenukeg manitt8og? yeug manitt8og togkomuhpanneg Egyptiansog, nashpe wame unninneaongash ut touohkomukqut.
E.Sa1.4.8: Woe unto us! who shall deliver us out of the hand of these mighty Gods? these are the Gods that smote the Egyptians with all the plagues in the wilderness.

α.Sa1.4.9 Menuhkeseg, ogquesek menuhkoshketompaut, woi kenaau Philistiansog, onk matta woh kenaau 8tinneume[in]eau Hebrewsog, neanehikqueogkup, woskétompo8k, kah ayeuteák.
E.Sa1.4.9: Be strong and quit yourselves like men, O ye Philistines, that ye be not servants unto the Hebrews, as they have been to you: quit yourselves like men, and fight.

α.Sa1.4.10 Kah Philistiansog ayeuteaog, kah Israel mo togkomau, kah nish$noh pasuk ushpuhh8au wekit: kah na mo missi paguanittuonk, newutche nishwinchage muttannonganog kussuog Israelle ahkeishacheg penushaog.
E.Sa1.4.10: And the Philistines fought, and Israel was smitten, and they fled every man into his tent: and there was a very great slaughter; for there fell of Israel thirty thousand footmen.

α.Sa1.4.11 Kah wut[-]Arkum God neemunnumun, kah neesuog wunnaumonuh Eli Hophni kah Phineas nushoog.
E.Sa1.4.11: And the ark of God was taken; and the two sons of Eli, Hophni and Phinehas, were slain.

α.Sa1.4.12 Kah Benjaminne wosketomp quogqueu wutch kenauwamehtu, kah peyau Shiloh ne kesukok, wuthogk8unash nehnekshaash, kah ohke uppuhkukqut ohteau.
E.Sa1.4.12: And there ran a man of Benjamin out of the army, and came to Shiloh the same day with his clothes rent, and with earth upon his head.

α.Sa1.4.13 Kah paónt kusseh, Eli appu appuonganit kishke may$ut, askuhwheteau, newutch wuttah nunnukshau papaume wut-Arkum God, kah wosketomp paont keitotanat, kah wutaunchem8kanuh, wame keitotan mishont8wae mauog.
E.Sa1.4.13: And when he came, lo, Eli sat upon a seat by the wayside watching: for his heart trembled for the ark of God. And when the man came into the city, and told it, all the city cried out.

α.Sa1.4.14 Kah Eli n8tog mishont8wae mauonk n8wau, toh nauwuttam88 yeu wogkoueongane mishont8waonk? kah wosketomp kenuppe petutteau, kah wuttinnon Elioh.
E.Sa1.4.14: And when Eli heard the noise of the crying, he said, What meaneth the noise of this tumult? And the man came in hastily, and told Eli.

α.Sa1.4.15 Kah Eli pasuk8gun tahshinchage kah shwosuk tahshe kodtumwohkom, kah wuskesukquash pogkenum8m8ash, onk matta woh naum8un.
E.Sa1.4.15: Now Eli was ninety and eight years old; and his eyes were dim, that he could not see.

α.Sa1.4.16 Kah wosketomp unnau Elioh, nen noh sohhog wutch kenauwamehtu, kah n8sem yeu kesukok wutch kenáuwamehtu, kah n8wau, toh na$ut n$nih, nunnaumon?
E.Sa1.4.16: And the man said unto Eli, I am he that came out of the army, and I fled to day out of the army. And he said, What is there done, my son?

α.Sa1.4.17 Kah an[n]8naénin namp8ham, kah n8wau, Israel wusseemo ut anaquábhettit Philistiansog, kah na wonk mishe paguanittuonk kenugke missinninnuut, kah nees8og kenaumonog wonk Hophni kah Phineas, nupp8k, Kah wut-Arkum God maumunni.
E.Sa1.4.17: And the messenger answered and said, Israel is fled before the Philistines, and there hath been also a great slaughter among the people, and thy two sons also, Hophni and Phinehas, are dead, and the ark of God is taken.

α.Sa1.4.18 Kah n$nih, mashog wut-Arkum God, ont8nu penushau, wutch appuonganit kishke squontamut: kah wussittipuk pohkshau kah nupp8, newutche noh mo kechisu8, kah t8hkequn, kah wussumau Israelloh yauunchage kodtumwae.
E.Sa1.4.18: And it came to pass, when he made mention of the ark of God, that he fell from off the seat backward by the side of the gate, and his neck brake, and he died: for he was an old man, and heavy. And he had judged Israel forty years.

α.Sa1.4.19 Kah wushimoh ummittamwussoh Phinneas, noh mo wompequau, nahen neechau, kah n8tog unaunchem8kaongash, wut-Arkum God mammunni, kah wessenumoncheh kah wessukeh nupp8oh, nauwaeu, kah neechau, newutche wutonkquommom8ongash nuhkuhkunk.
E.Sa1.4.19: And his daughter in law, Phinehas' wife, was with child, near to be delivered: and when she heard the tidings that the ark of God was taken, and that her father in law and her husband were dead, she bowed herself and travailed; for her pains came upon her.

α.Sa1.4.20 Kah nahen napuk, mittamwussissog neg kehchekompauwehtauoncheg, wuttinouh, ahque wábesish newutche keneecham wunnaumoniin, qut matta namp8hamau, asuh 8t8wontam8un.
E.Sa1.4.20: And about the time of her death the women that stood by her said unto her, Fear not; for thou hast born a son. But she answered not, neither did she regard it.

α.Sa1.4.21 Kah wuttissowenau mukkièsoh Ichabód, n8wau, sohsumôonk amaemo wutch Israel (Newutche wut-Arkum God mammanni, kah newessenumonche, kah wessukeh.)
E.Sa1.4.21: And she named the child Ichabod, saying, The glory is departed from Israel: because the ark of God was taken, and because of her father in law and her husband.

α.Sa1.4.22 Kah noh n8wau, sohsum8onk amái wutch Israelut, newutche wut-Arkum God Mammunni.
E.Sa1.4.22: And she said, The glory is departed from Israel: for the ark of God is taken.

α.Sa1.5.1 KAh Philistiansog mamwog wut-Arkum God, kah 8táuuneau wutch Ebenezer en Ashdod.
E.Sa1.5.1: And the Philistines took the ark of God, and brought it from Ebenezer unto Ashdod.

α.Sa1.5.2 Philistiansog mammohettit wut-Arkum God, uppaudtauunau wekit Dagon kah upponamunau kishke Dagon[.]
E.Sa1.5.2: When the Philistines took the ark of God, they brought it into the house of Dagon, and set it by Dagon.

α.Sa1.5.3 Kah Ashdod apitcheg nompoae omohkehettit, kusseh, Dagon penushau wuskesuk Jehovah, kah nemunaog Dagonoh, kah upponouh wonk ut wutayeuonganit.
E.Sa1.5.3: And when they of Ashdod arose early on the morrow, behold, Dagon was fallen upon his face to the earth before the ark of the LORD. And they took Dagon, and set him in his place again.

α.Sa1.5.4 Kah nompoae omohkehettit nompuhkeik, kusseh, Dagon penushau wuskesuk en ohkekóntu ut anaquohtag wut-Arkum Jehovah kah uppuhkuk Dagon káh naneeswe wutoht8tunitchanash tummussumunash, nashpe ne pametshik ut squontamut, webe ukkeithog Dagon sequnnumau[á]u.
E.Sa1.5.4: And when they arose early on the morrow morning, behold, Dagon was fallen upon his face to the ground before the ark of the LORD; and the head of Dagon and both the palms of his hands were cut off upon the threshold; only the stump of Dagon was left to him.

α.Sa1.5.5 Newaj wu[s]séphausueneumoh Dagon, asuh howan noh petutteadt Dagon wekit, matta ohpanukeog ne pametshik wekit Dagon ut ashdod pajeh yeu kesukok.
E.Sa1.5.5: Therefore neither the priests of Dagon, nor any that come into Dagon's house, tread on the threshold of Dagon in Ashdod unto this day.

α.Sa1.5.6 Qut wunnutcheg Jehovah tuhkequan ut neg apitcheg Ashdod, kah uppaguanuh, káh wuttogkomuh nashpe Emrods, Ashdod kah wussissippoiyeumash[-]
E.Sa1.5.6: But the hand of the LORD was heavy upon them of Ashdod, and he destroyed them, and smote them with emerods, even Ashdod and the coasts thereof.

α.Sa1.5.7 Kah Ashdode wosketompaog naumohettit ne n$nih, n8waog wut-Arkum um-Manitt8moh Israel, matta pish wetomuk8unan, newutche wunnutcheg tuhkéquan ut kuhhogkanonut, kah ut Dagonit kum-Manitt8munonut[.]
E.Sa1.5.7: And when the men of Ashdod saw that it was so, they said, The ark of the God of Israel shall not abide with us: for his hand is sore upon us, and upon Dagon our god.

α.Sa1.5.8 Newajeh ann8teamohett[t]it, kah mounaog wame Philistianse sontimoh kah n8waog, toh kittinteauunan wut-Arkum um-Manitt8m8uh Israel: kah nag namp8hamwog, wut-Arkum um-Manitt8moh Israel quinnuppewuttauunach en Gath, kah quinnuppe wuttauog wut-Arkum um-Manitt88moh Israel.
E.Sa1.5.8: They sent therefore and gathered all the lords of the Philistines unto them, and said, What shall we do with the ark of the God of Israel? And they answered, Let the ark of the God of Israel be carried about unto Gath. And they carried the ark of the God of Israel about thither.

α.Sa1.5.9 Kah n$nih, mahche quinnuppewutta[u]wehettit, wunnutcheg Jehovah ayeukontam keitotan nashpe mishe paguanuonk, kah togkomau keitotanae wosketompuh naneese papeississitcheg, kah matikkenukeg, kah ahtáuog Emrods ut ukôsuonganuout.
E.Sa1.5.9: And it was so, that, after they had carried it about, the hand of the LORD was against the city with a very great destruction: and he smote the men of the city, both small and great, and they had emerods in their secret parts.

α.Sa1.5.10 Newajeh negonsh[a]uwahettit wut-Arkum God en Ekron, kah n$nih wut-Arkum God paom8uk Ekron, Ekroniitsog mishont8waog, n8waog, quinnuppewuttoog en kuhhogkanonut wut-Arkum um[$]Manitt8moh Israel kenushikqunanonut, kah kummissinninneumunnonuh.
E.Sa1.5.10: Therefore they sent the ark of God to Ekron. And it came to pass, as the ark of God came to Ekron, that the Ekronites cried out, saying, They have brought about the ark of the God of Israel to us, to slay us and our people.

α.Sa1.5.11 Neit ann8team8og, kah mounaog wame Philistianse sontimoh, kah n8waog, moncheahtau8k wut-Arkum um-Manitt8m8uh Isráel, kah wonk aum8utch nehénwonche wutayeuonganit, matta kenushhikk8unanonut, kah kummissinninneumunonuh: newutche na mo nupp8e paguanuonk pannuppe wame keitotanat: wunnutchég God na mo mishe tuhkequn.
E.Sa1.5.11: So they sent and gathered together all the lords of the Philistines, and said, Send away the ark of the God of Israel, and let it go again to his own place, that it slay us not, and our people: for there was a deadly destruction throughout all the city; the hand of God was very heavy there.

α.Sa1.5.12 Kah wosketompaog nég matta nupp8keg, togkomoog Emrods: kah ummauonk keitotan kuhkuhquem8 en kesukqut.
E.Sa1.5.12: And the men that died not were smitten with the emerods: and the cry of the city went up to heaven.

α.Sa1.6.1 KAh wut-Arkum Jehovah mo ohtau wutohtuóut Philistiansog nesausuk tahsuog nepauzsáog.
E.Sa1.6.1: And the ark of the LORD was in the country of the Philistines seven months.

α.Sa1.6.2 Kah Philistiansog wekomáog sephausuénúh, kah pauwauoh, n8waog toh woh kitti[n]teómun wut$Arkum Jehovah? ussinan, uttoh woh nashpe monche[a]htauog en wutayeuonganit?
E.Sa1.6.2: And the Philistines called for the priests and the diviners, saying, What shall we do to the ark of the LORD? tell us wherewith we shall send it to his place.

α.Sa1.6.3 Kah nag unn8wáog, moncheáhtauóg: wut$Arkum um-Manitt8m8oh Israel, ahque ne toh ut moncheáhtauók: qut kuhkinneam8k ompo[n]tinnumunat m[à]tcheseáe mag8onk, neit pish keneetskesimw8, kah pish k8wahteauwáhetteamw8 tohwaj matta nunnutcheg ámaunum8g wutch kuhhogkaóut.
E.Sa1.6.3: And they said, If ye send away the ark of the God of Israel, send it not empty; but in any wise return him a trespass offering: then ye shall be healed, and it shall be known to you why his hand is not removed from you.

α.Sa1.6.4 Kah nag n8waog teagua matcheseáe mag8onk ne woh ompontinum[â]uogkut? nag namp8hamwog napanna tahsuog golde Emerodsog, kah napana tahsuog golde mishabuhquásog: neadtahshehettit Philistianseh Sontimóog, newutche pasuk énninneáonk kenuhkukongk8 wame, kah kussontimom8óog.
E.Sa1.6.4: Then said they, What shall be the trespass offering which we shall return to him? They answered, Five golden emerods, and five golden mice, according to the number of the lords of the Philistines: for one plague was on you all, and on your lords.

α.Sa1.6.5 Newajeh pish kutáyeuwomw8 wutogqueneunkqussuongan8 kut-emerodsum8óog, kah wutogqueneunkqussuongan8 kummashabpohquasum8óuh, neg matchteunkeg ohke, & pish kittiñuma[u]ómw8 sohsumôonk um-Manitt8m8uh Israel: paguodche woh amaunum wuñutcheg, wutch kuhhogkaôont, kah wutch kummanitt8m8óut, kah wutch kutohkeyeuóut.
E.Sa1.6.5: Wherefore ye shall make images of your emerods, and images of your mice that mar the land; and ye shall give glory unto the God of Israel: peradventure he will lighten his hand from off you, and from off your gods, and from off your land.

α.Sa1.6.6 Neit tohwaj menehketeauog kuttahh8woash neyane Egyptiansog & Pharaoh menehketteauhetteup wuttahh8wóash? monchanatamwe anakausit ut nah kenugke, sunnummatta unnanumo8ussohhenneg missinninnúh nohnushagk? kah nag moncheupanneg?
E.Sa1.6.6: Wherefore then do ye harden your hearts, as the Egyptians and Pharaoh hardened their hearts? when he had wrought wonderfully among them, did they not let the people go, and they departed?

α.Sa1.6.7 Newutche yeuyeu ayim8k wuske cart, kah neemun8k neesuog wossogkodtunkanitcheg cowashinog, neg matta wayokumegig kah kishpin8k cowashineog cartut, kah pas8k calfsog wutch nag.
E.Sa1.6.7: Now therefore make a new cart, and take two milch kine, on which there hath come no yoke, and tie the kine to the cart, and bring their calves home from them:

α.Sa1.6.8 Kah neemunnum8k wut-arkum Jehovah, kah quenahtau8k cartut, kah golde nompekouunash, nish ompontinnumauogish, wutch matcheseae mag8onk, p8nam8k boxut ne kishke, kah moncheahtau8k, onk woh monchem8.
E.Sa1.6.8: And take the ark of the LORD, and lay it upon the cart; and put the jewels of gold, which ye return him for a trespass offering, in a coffer by the side thereof; and send it away, that it may go.

α.Sa1.6.9 Kah kuhkinneam8k, kuhkuhquem8uk en mayut nehenwonche wussissippoiyeumut, en Bethshemesh, neit noh kittinheukqunnan yeu mishe machuk, qut matta nan8g, neit pish n8wahteauunan matta noh wunnutcheg togkomuk8og, qut tiadche n$nih waj n8tunkqueog.
E.Sa1.6.9: And see, if it goeth up by the way of his own coast to Bethshemesh, then he hath done us this great evil: but if not, then we shall know that it is not his hand that smote us: it was a chance that happened to us.

α.Sa1.6.10 Kah wosketompaog wutusseneau, kah nemunaog nees8oh wâsogkodtunkaninitcheh cowashinneoh, kah ukkishpinóuh cartut, kah kuppohwhôog uk-calfsumóuh ut wetuomut.
E.Sa1.6.10: And the men did so; and took two milch kine, and tied them to the cart, and shut up their calves at home:

α.Sa1.6.11 Kah nag ponamwog wut-arkum Jehovah cartut & box ne aphettit golde mishabpohquassog & wutogqueneunkqussuongan8 wut-emrodsumóuh.
E.Sa1.6.11: And they laid the ark of the LORD upon the cart, and the coffer with the mice of gold and the images of their emerods.

α.Sa1.6.12 Kah cowashinnog piuhsuke auog, en anshik may Bethshemesh, kah pomushaog mayut, mishont8waog neaáhettit, kah matta pohchau8og en unnohkounit asuh menadcheanit, kah Philistianse sontimóog wutasukauóuh, wehque Bethshemesh wussissepoiyeumut.
E.Sa1.6.12: And the kine took the straight way to the way of Bethshemesh, and went along the highway, lowing as they went, and turned not aside to the right hand or to the left; and the lords of the Philistines went after them unto the border of Bethshemesh.

α.Sa1.6.13 Kah neg apitcheg Bethshemesh, kepenumwog[:] 8wheatum8oash ut 8nóuhkôiyeuut, kah spadtauwompuog, kah naumwog Ark, kah wekontamwog wunnaumunnaóut.
E.Sa1.6.13: And they of Bethshemesh were reaping their wheat harvest in the valley: and they lifted up their eyes, and saw the ark, and rejoiced to see it.

α.Sa1.6.14 Kah cart peyaum8 wutohteakonit Joshua up-Bethshemit, kah na ohteau, kishke mishe qussukquanit, kah uppapassehthamunaoash carte wuttuhqunash, kah sephausuog cowashinneoh, chikohtae mag8onk en Jehovahut.
E.Sa1.6.14: And the cart came into the field of Joshua, a Bethshemite, and stood there, where there was a great stone: and they clave the wood of the cart, and offered the kine a burnt offering unto the LORD.

α.Sa1.6.15 Kah Levitsog n8kinnumwog wutarkum Jehovah, kah box ne noh weetohtag, ne ohtag golde nompakouunash, kah nish upponamunaoash mishe qussukquanit, kah Bethshemeshe wosketompaog mag8og chikohtae mag8ongash, kah sephausuog sephausuongash ne nan kesukok, en Jehovahut.
E.Sa1.6.15: And the Levites took down the ark of the LORD, and the coffer that was with it, wherein the jewels of gold were, and put them on the great stone: and the men of Bethshemesh offered burnt offerings and sacrificed sacrifices the same day unto the LORD.

α.Sa1.6.16 Kah napanna tahsuog Philistianse sontimóog namohettit, qushkeog en Ekron ne kesukok.
E.Sa1.6.16: And when the five lords of the Philistines had seen it, they returned to Ekron the same day.

α.Sa1.6.17 Kah yeushoh golde emerodsash, nish Philistiansog ompontinnummohetticheh, wutch matchseae sephausuonk en Jehovahut, wuch Ashdod pasuk, wutch Gaza pasuk, wutch Ashkelon pasuk, wutch Gath pasuk, wutch Ekron pasuk.
E.Sa1.6.17: And these are the golden emerods which the Philistines returned for a trespass offering unto the LORD; for Ashdod one, for Gaza one, for Askelon one, for Gath one, for Ekron one;

α.Sa1.6.18 Kah golde mishabpohquasog, neadtahshik ukkeitotanáoash Philistiansog, wadchéiyeu8gish napanna tahsuog sontimóog, naneeswe wutch pummeneutausue keitotanash, kah wutohtimóinne otanamesash, wehque mishe qussukquanit Abel, na ponamwahettit wut-Arkum Jehovah, ne qussuk ash pamohtag pajeh yeu kesukok, ut wutohteakonit Joshua up-Bethshemit.
E.Sa1.6.18: And the golden mice, according to the number of all the cities of the Philistines belonging to the five lords, both of fenced cities, and of country villages, even unto the great stone of Abel, whereon they set down the ark of the LORD: which stone remaineth unto this day in the field of Joshua, the Bethshemite.

α.Sa1.6.19 Kah togkomau wosketompuh Bethshemesh, newutche posompuog wut-Arkum Jehovah, togkommau missinninnúh napanna tahshinchag muttannonganogkussuoh kah nesausuk tahshinchagkussuoh wosketompuh, kah missinninnuog mauog, newutche Jehovah togkomau monaoh missinninnuh, nashpe mishe paguanittuonk.
E.Sa1.6.19: And he smote the men of Bethshemesh, because they had looked into the ark of the LORD, even he smote of the people fifty thousand and threescore and ten men: and the people lamented, because the LORD had smitten many of the people with a great slaughter.

α.Sa1.6.20 Kah Bethshemeshe wosketompaog n8waog, howan tapenuk nepauit anaquabit yeuoh wunneetupanatamwe Lord God? kah howane woh kahkuhquehtauont wutch kuhhogkanónut?
E.Sa1.6.20: And the men of Bethshemesh said, Who is able to stand before this holy LORD God? and to whom shall he go up from us?

α.Sa1.6.21 Kh ann8naog ann8naénúh en wadohkitcheg Kirjath-jearim, n8waog, Philistiansog wonk paudtoog wut-Arkum God, w8msek kah kuhkuhk8utta[u]8k en kuhhogkaóut.
E.Sa1.6.21: And they sent messengers to the inhabitants of Kirjathjearim, saying, The Philistines have brought again the ark of the LORD; come ye down, and fetch it up to you.

α.Sa1.7.1 KAh Kirjath-jearime wosketompaog peyaog, kah neemskomwe kuhkuhk8tauog wut-Arkum Jehovah, kah uppaudtauwunau wekit Abinadab, ut wadchuut, kah wunneetupanatamwáheáog Eleazar wunnaumonuh, wunnanauwehteauunat wutArkum Jehovah.
E.Sa1.7.1: And the men of Kirjathjearim came, and fetched up the ark of the LORD, and brought it into the house of Abinadab in the hill, and sanctified Eleazar his son to keep the ark of the LORD.

α.Sa1.7.2 Kah nnih, Ark ohtag Kirjath-jearim, sepeyeu8p: newutche mô neesnehchage kodtumwae[,] kah wame Israel week mauunnitteauáog Jehovah.
E.Sa1.7.2: And it came to pass, while the ark abode in Kirjathjearim, that the time was long; for it was twenty years: and all the house of Israel lamented after the LORD.

α.Sa1.7.3 Kah Samuel ken8nau wame wek Israel n8wau, qushkeóg en Jehovahut nashpe mamusse kuttahh8óut, neit amaun8k pen8e manitt8og, kah Ashteroth wutch kenugke kenaau, kah quagwashweohtam8k kuttahh8óash en Jehovahut, kah noh webe wowussum8k, kah noh pish kuttóm8hikk8 wutch wunnutchegan8óut Philistiansog.
E.Sa1.7.3: And Samuel spake unto all the house of Israel, saying, If ye do return unto the LORD with all your hearts, then put away the strange gods and Ashtaroth from among you, and prepare your hearts unto the LORD, and serve him only: and he will deliver you out of the hand of the Philistines.

α.Sa1.7.4 Neit wunnaumonuh Israel amaunáog Baal kah Ashteroth, kah webe wowussumáog Jehovah.
E.Sa1.7.4: Then the children of Israel did put away Baalim and Ashtaroth, and served the LORD only.

α.Sa1.7.5 Kah Samuel n8wau, mián8k wame Israel ut Mizpeh, kah kuppeantamwanshinumw8 en Jehovahut.
E.Sa1.7.5: And Samuel said, Gather all Israel to Mizpeh, and I will pray for you unto the LORD.

α.Sa1.7.6 Kah nag miayeog ut Mizpeh, kah wutt8huppaog: kah wussokenumunneau anaquabit Jehovah, kah mat meetseog ne kesukok, kah na$ut n8waog, nummatcheneheomun Jehovah, kah Samuel wussumau Israeloh ut Mizpeh.
E.Sa1.7.6: And they gathered together to Mizpeh, and drew water, and poured it out before the LORD, and fasted on that day, and said there, We have sinned against the LORD. And Samuel judged the children of Israel in Mizpeh.

α.Sa1.7.7 Kah Philistiansog n8tamwehettit Israel miayeog ut Mizpeh, Philistianse sontimóog ayeuuhkonittue kuhkuhquehtauaog Israeloh, kah wunnaumonuh Israel n8taminnit nag qushaog Philistiansoh.
E.Sa1.7.7: And when the Philistines heard that the children of Israel were gathered together to Mizpeh, the lords of the Philistines went up against Israel. And when the children of Israel heard it, they were afraid of the Philistines.

α.Sa1.7.8 Kah wunnaumonuh Israel unnaog Samueloh, ahque áhqueu netahshe mauwunitteauanshinnean en Jehovah num-Manitt8mut, onk woh kuttómhikqun wutch wuñutchegan8óut Philistiansog.
E.Sa1.7.8: And the children of Israel said to Samuel, Cease not to cry unto the LORD our God for us, that he will save us out of the hand of the Philistines.

α.Sa1.7.9 Kah Samuel neemun[à]u n8nunutcheh lambsoh, kah mamusse ummagunuh wutch chikohtae mag8onk en Jehovahut, kah Samuel mauunnitteauau Jehovah wutch Israeloh, kah Lord wunn8tauoh.
E.Sa1.7.9: And Samuel took a sucking lamb, and offered it for a burnt offering wholly unto the LORD: and Samuel cried unto the LORD for Israel; and the LORD heard him.

α.Sa1.7.10 Kah Samuel maguk chikohsue mag8onk Philistiansog pas8tshaog ayeuuhkonónat Israeloh, qut Jehovah paduhquohhunéhteau ut Philisti[à]nsut nashpe mishe padahquohhan ne kesukok, nah wussohkauoh, kah nag togkomóog ut anaquabit Israel.
E.Sa1.7.10: And as Samuel was offering up the burnt offering, the Philistines drew near to battle against Israel: but the LORD thundered with a great thunder on that day upon the Philistines, and discomfited them; and they were smitten before Israel.

α.Sa1.7.11 Kah Israelle wosketompaog sohhamwog wutch Mizpeh, kah n8swuttahwháog Philistiansoh, kah wuttogkomóuh nô pajeh uppeyonat ut agwe Bethcar.
E.Sa1.7.11: And the men of Israel went out of Mizpeh, and pursued the Philistines, and smote them, until they came under Bethcar.

α.Sa1.7.12 Neit Samuel nemunum qussuk, kah upponumunau nanashaue Mizpeh kah Shen, kah wuttissowetamuneau Eben-ezer, n8wau, yeu pajeh Jehovah kutannumunkqun.
E.Sa1.7.12: Then Samuel took a stone, and set it between Mizpeh and Shen, and called the name of it Ebenezer, saying, Hitherto hath the LORD helped us.

α.Sa1.7.13 Nemehkuh Philistiansog sohkauóog, kah matta wonk petutteaog wussissippoiyeum8wout Israel kah wunnutcheg Jehovah ayeuuhkon[á]u Philistiansoh nisohke pomantog Samuel.
E.Sa1.7.13: So the Philistines were subdued, and they came no more into the coast of Israel: and the hand of the LORD was against the Philistines all the days of Samuel.

α.Sa1.7.14 Kah keitotanash nish Philistiansóg neemunnumóhetticheh wutch Israelut, nompenumunash en Israelut, wutch Ekron wehque Gath[,,] kah wussissippoiyeum8ash, Israel uppohquohwuttauunaoash wutch wunnutchegan8out Philistiansog: kah na mo wunohteaonk nashaue Israel kah Amoritsog.
E.Sa1.7.14: And the cities which the Philistines had taken from Israel were restored to Israel, from Ekron even unto Gath; and the coasts thereof did Israel deliver out of the hands of the Philistines. And there was peace between Israel and the Amorites.

α.Sa1.7.15 Kah Samuel wussumau Israeloh nisahke pomontog.
E.Sa1.7.15: And Samuel judged Israel all the days of his life.

α.Sa1.7.16 Kah asekodtum8gish ukquinnupuhkomun Bethel, kah Gilgal kah mizpeh, kah wussumau Israeloh ut wame yeush ayeuongash.
E.Sa1.7.16: And he went from year to year in circuit to Bethel, and Gilgal, and Mizpeh, and judged Israel in all those places.

α.Sa1.7.17 Kah qushkeu en Ramah, newutche na mo wekin, kah ná wuttit wussumon Israeloh, kah na wuttit ayimun Altar en L[ó]rdut.
E.Sa1.7.17: And his return was to Ramah; for there was his house; and there he judged Israel; and there he built an altar unto the LORD.

α.Sa1.8.1 KAh n$nih Samuel kohchisu8wit, ayeuau wunnaumonuh wussummonat Israel[.]
E.Sa1.8.1: And it came to pass, when Samuel was old, that he made his sons judges over Israel.

α.Sa1.8.2 Kah mohtommegheoncheh hennoneuh Joel kah nahohtoeyeuit ussowenau Abiah wussittumwaenu8og ut Beersheba.
E.Sa1.8.2: Now the name of his firstborn was Joel; and the name of his second, Abiah: they were judges in Beersheba.

α.Sa1.8.3 Kah wunnaumonuh mattá auwoh ummayut, qut qushkeog en anuhamoadtuonganit kah neemunnumwog mag8ongash kah woonkitteauog wussittumoonk.
E.Sa1.8.3: And his sons walked not in his ways, but turned aside after lucre, and took bribes, and perverted judgment.

α.Sa1.8.4 Neit wame Israelle Eldersog, miyaeog, kah peyaunaog Samueloh ut Ramah.
E.Sa1.8.4: Then all the elders of Israel gathered themselves together, and came to Samuel unto Ramah,

α.Sa1.8.5 Kah wuttinouh kusseh, kukkehchisu, kah kenaumonog matta au8og ut kummayut, yeuyeu ayimiinnean ketass8t n8sumukqunnanonut, neyaunag wame wutohtimoneash.
E.Sa1.8.5: And said unto him, Behold, thou art old, and thy sons walk not in thy ways: now make us a king to judge us like all the nations.

α.Sa1.8.6 Qut ne matchet ut wuskesukqut Samuel, án8wahettit aninnumaiinnean ketass8t n8sumukqunnanonut, kah Samuel peantamauau Jehovah.
E.Sa1.8.6: But the thing displeased Samuel, when they said, Give us a king to judge us. And Samuel prayed unto the LORD.

α.Sa1.8.7 Kah Jehovah unn[á]u Samueloh, n8tash 8wadtauatonkqussuongan8 missinninnuog wame ne anukquean, newutche matta kummishananumuk88og, qut numishanumunkquog, nag woh matta nunnanawunnounnaóont.
E.Sa1.8.7: And the LORD said unto Samuel, Hearken unto the voice of the people in all that they say unto thee: for they have not rejected thee, but they have rejected me, that I should not reign over them.

α.Sa1.8.8 Neaunag wame anakausuongash nish asehetticheh wutch na kesukok sohh8wunog wutch Egypt, nô pajeh yeu kesukok nish nashpe áhquanumukqueanish, kah wowussummaog onkatoge manitt8h ne wonk kittinhikquneau.
E.Sa1.8.8: According to all the works which they have done since the day that I brought them up out of Egypt even unto this day, wherewith they have forsaken me, and served other gods, so do they also unto thee.

α.Sa1.8.9 Newutche yeuyeu, n8tash 8wadtauatonkqussuongan8: qut onch menuhke wauwash ay[e]uuhkone nag, neit kuhk8tómau wuttinniyeuonk ketass8t, noh woh nah nanáuunont.
E.Sa1.8.9: Now therefore hearken unto their voice: howbeit yet protest solemnly unto them, and shew them the manner of the king that shall reign over them.

α.Sa1.8.10 Kah Samuel wuttinnonash, wame ukkutt8wongash Jehov[a]h missinninnúh neh wehquttumu[n]kqutcheh ketass8tamwoh.
E.Sa1.8.10: And Samuel told all the words of the LORD unto the people that asked of him a king.

α.Sa1.8.11 Kah n8wau, yeu pish wuttinniyeuonk ketass8t, noh nanawunukqueog, pish neemunau kenáumonauh, kah pish ukkuhquttumauonuh wuhhogkuh, wutche wutch[a]riotsumash, kah wunnaiyeumukqunnaoont wuthorsesumoh, kah nawhutch pish negonne quogqueog wutchariotsumash.
E.Sa1.8.11: And he said, This will be the manner of the king that shall reign over you: He will take your sons, and appoint them for himself, for his chariots, and to be his horsemen; and some shall run before his chariots.

α.Sa1.8.12 Kah noh pish kehtimau nequt muttannongane mugquompoh, kah napanna tahshinchage mugquompoh, kah nah pish wutohketéaheuh kah ukpenumukquoh, & wutayeuoh ayeuwohteae 8tauwohteaonganinneat, kah chariotse awohteaonganog.
E.Sa1.8.12: And he will appoint him captains over thousands, and captains over fifties; and will set them to ear his ground, and to reap his harvest, and to make his instruments of war, and instruments of his chariots.

α.Sa1.8.13 Kah pish neemunau kuttaun8oh, 8wowussinniñeaóo[n]t, & wunadtupp8wenúunneaóont, kah uppetukqunneganéhteanúunneaôont.
E.Sa1.8.13: And he will take your daughters to be confectionaries, and to be cooks, and to be bakers.

α.Sa1.8.14 Kah pish neemunum kutohteakonash, kah k8weenomiñeohteakonash, kut-oliveohteakonash, wanegugish, kah pish kuttinumauónash wuttinneumoh.
E.Sa1.8.14: And he will take your fields, and your vineyards, and your oliveyards, even the best of them, and give them to his servants.

α.Sa1.8.15 Kah pish néemuñum piogque chippag, k8skannemunneash, kah k8wenominneohtekon8ash, kah pish wuttinnumauonash, wutannósuéneúmoh, kah wuttinneumoh.
E.Sa1.8.15: And he will take the tenth of your seed, and of your vineyards, and give to his officers, and to his servants.

α.Sa1.8.16 Kah pish neemunau wosketompae kittinneumoh kah mittamwossisse kittineumoh, kah kummenuhkesuéneum8uh, kah kutassesum8uh, kah pish wutanakausuwehtunkquoh.
E.Sa1.8.16: And he will take your menservants, and your maidservants, and your goodliest young men, and your asses, and put them to his work.

α.Sa1.8.17 Kah pish neemunau piogque chippissinutcheh kutsheepsumoh, kah kenaau pish wuttinneumoh.
E.Sa1.8.17: He will take the tenth of your sheep: and ye shall be his servants.

α.Sa1.8.18 Kah pish kummaumw8 ne kesukok, newutche kukketass8tim8m8, noh woh pepenamóóg, kah Jehovah matta pish ken8tunk8 ne kesukok.
E.Sa1.8.18: And ye shall cry out in that day because of your king which ye shall have chosen you; and the LORD will not hear you in that day.

α.Sa1.8.19 Qut onch missinninnúog sekeneamwog noswehtamunat 8wadtauatunkqussuonk Samuel: kah nag n8waog, matta, qut pish n8ketass8tim8mun.
E.Sa1.8.19: Nevertheless the people refused to obey the voice of Samuel; and they said, Nay; but we will have a king over us;

α.Sa1.8.20 Onk woh nutogqueneunkqussimun wame wutohtimóneash, kah nukketass8tam8mun woh n8sumukqun, kah woh negonuhkungqun, kah woh ayeuuhkontam nutayeuwuttuonganunonash.
E.Sa1.8.20: That we also may be like all the nations; and that our king may judge us, and go out before us, and fight our battles.

α.Sa1.8.21 Káh Samuel n8tam wame ukkutt8wongan8oash missinninnuog, kah nish ukkenuppe nomp8onash ut wehtauogkut Jehovah.
E.Sa1.8.21: And Samuel heard all the words of the people, and he rehearsed them in the ears of the LORD.

α.Sa1.8.22 Kah Jehovah unnau Samueloh, n8tash 8wadtauatonkqussuongan8, kah nag ayimau ketass8tamwoh, kah Samuel unnau Israelle wosketompuh, monchek nishnoh wosketomp en wutotanat.
E.Sa1.8.22: And the LORD said to Samuel, Hearken unto their voice, and make them a king. And Samuel said unto the men of Israel, Go ye every man unto his city.

α.Sa1.9.1 KAh na mo Benjaminne wosketomp, ussowesu Kish, wunnaumonuh Abiel, wunnaumonuh Zéror, wunnaumonuh Béchorath, wunnaumonuh Aphiah, up[-]Benjamit mishasketomp kah weenáuwetuen.
E.Sa1.9.1: Now there was a man of Benjamin, whose name was Kish, the son of Abiel, the son of Zeror, the son of Bechorath, the son of Aphiah, a Benjamite, a mighty man of power.

α.Sa1.9.2 Kah wunnaumonuh ussowesuoh Saul, pepenamwe wusken kah wunneetu: kah na matta mo howan kenugke wunnaumonuh Israel, wutánue wunneeteumoh: wutch wuttukeet kah waabe, anue qunnunkqussúmau missinninnúh.
E.Sa1.9.2: And he had a son, whose name was Saul, a choice young man, and a goodly: and there was not among the children of Israel a goodlier person than he: from his shoulders and upward he was higher than any of the people.

α.Sa1.9.3 Kah wutassesumoh Kish 8shoh Saul wanneheó[o]g: kah Kish unnau Sauloh wunnaumonuh, neemun yeuyeu, pasuk wuttinnaumin, kah neepaush natinneáh assesog.
E.Sa1.9.3: And the asses of Kish Saul's father were lost. And Kish said to Saul his son, Take now one of the servants with thee, and arise, go seek the asses.

α.Sa1.9.4 Kah pannupshau Ephraimme wadchu, kah pannupshau Shalisháe ohke, qut matta wunnamheuh, neit pannupshaog Shalime ohkit, kah na matta wutappeineau, kah pannupshau wutohkeyeuout Benjamitsog, qut mat wunnamheouh:
E.Sa1.9.4: And he passed through mount Ephraim, and passed through the land of Shalisha, but they found them not: then they passed through the land of Shalim, and there they were not: and he passed through the land of the Benjamites, but they found them not.

α.Sa1.9.5 Kah paahettit Zuphe ohkit Saul unnau wuttinneumoh neh weechogqutcheh, peyaush, qushketuh, ishkont n8sh ahque wuttamanumau assesoh, kah onk woh k8tamanumukqun.
E.Sa1.9.5: And when they were come to the land of Zuph, Saul said to his servant that was with him, Come, and let us return; lest my father leave caring for the asses, and take thought for us.

α.Sa1.9.6 Kah wuttinuh, kusseh yeuyeu, yeu otanat wuttappin Manittowomp: w[a]me ne an8wadt, n$nih, yeuyeu na ontuh, paguodcheh woh kukkuhk8tomunkqun may ne woh áóog.
E.Sa1.9.6: And he said unto him, Behold now, there is in this city a man of God, and he is an honourable man; all that he saith cometh surely to pass: now let us go thither; peradventure he can shew us our way that we should go.

α.Sa1.9.7 Kah Saulé unnau wuttinneumoh, qut kusseh, na ôog teaguas woh kuppaudtauoun wosketomp, newutche petukqunneg mahtshau n8wisquanonut, kah na mo mag8ongan8 paudtauonat Manittowomp, teag kutohtomun?
E.Sa1.9.7: Then said Saul to his servant, But, behold, if we go, what shall we bring the man? for the bread is spent in our vessels, and there is not a present to bring to the man of God: what have we?

α.Sa1.9.8 Kah wuttinneumun namp8hamauau Sauloh, n8wau, kusseh nutahto yeuut, nunnutcheganit, pasuk quarternu8 shekle silver ne nuttinnumauon Manittowomp kummishamunkqunnanonut may.
E.Sa1.9.8: And the servant answered Saul again, and said, Behold, I have here at hand the fourth part of a shekel of silver: that will I give to the man of God, to tell us our way.

α.Sa1.9.9 (N8adt ut Israelut wosketomp moncheche nat8tomwehtéache Godoh, yeu wussin peyaush, auunontuh Naumwaenin, newutche noh yeuyeu hennau quoshodtumwaen, n8wadt hennop naumwaen.)
E.Sa1.9.9: (Beforetime in Israel, when a man went to enquire of God, thus he spake, Come, and let us go to the seer: for he that is now called a Prophet was beforetime called a Seer.)

α.Sa1.9.10 Neit Saul unnau wuttinneumoh, k8nomw[a]m, peyaush, na ontuh, neit auog keitotanat, ne apit Manittowomp.
E.Sa1.9.10: Then said Saul to his servant, Well said; come, let us go. So they went unto the city where the man of God was.

α.Sa1.9.11 Kah kohkuhquéhettit wadchu en yeu otanat namehheaog nunksquoh, sohhamw[ó]g wu[t]t8huppogo, kah wuttin[n]ouh, sun yeu wuttappin Naumwáén.
E.Sa1.9.11: And as they went up the hill to the city, they found young maidens going out to draw water, and said unto them, Is the seer here?

α.Sa1.9.12 Kah nág wunnamp8hamauouh, kah n8waog ne wutapin kusseh, noh anaquabeog, yeuyeu kenupshágk, newutche peyau yeu kesukok keitotonat, newutche na wussephausuongan8 missinninnuog, yeu kesukok ut qunnunkque ayeuonganit.
E.Sa1.9.12: And they answered them, and said, He is; behold, he is before you: make haste now, for he came to day to the city; for there is a sacrifice of the people to day in the high place:

α.Sa1.9.13 Quenau petutteáog otanat, pish teanuk kenamhéau, asquam aungkup qunnunkqui ayeuonganit, me[é]tsinneat: newutche missinninnuog matta meetseog no pajeh peyonat: newutche noh wunnantam sephausuonk, kah ne mahche usseit, neit metsuog neg wehkomutcheg, newutche yeuyeu kuhkuhquek, newutche papaume yeuyeu kénamheau,
E.Sa1.9.13: As soon as ye be come into the city, ye shall straightway find him, before he go up to the high place to eat: for the people will not eat until he come, because he doth bless the sacrifice; and afterwards they eat that be bidden. Now therefore get you up; for about this time ye shall find him.

α.Sa1.9.14 Kah nag kuhkuhqueog én otanat, kah paahettit keitotanat, kusseh Samuel uppiuhsukuhkauoh, kuhkúhquenat qunnuhqui ayeuonganit.
E.Sa1.9.14: And they went up into the city: and when they were come into the city, behold, Samuel came out against them, for to go up to the high place.

α.Sa1.9.15 Kah Jehovah mahché unnop Samueloh ut wuhtauogut, pasuk kesuk asq papeyonkup Saule, n8wop.
E.Sa1.9.15: Now the LORD had told Samuel in his ear a day before Saul came, saying,

α.Sa1.9.16 Saup yeu utt8che kesukok, nutann8n woskétomp en kuhhogkát wutch wutohkit Benjamin, kah pish kussussequn ummummugquompainneat ut nummissinninneumut Israel, onk woh wadchanau nummissinninneum[o]h wutch wunnutchegan8óut Philistiansog, newutche nummónunneau nummissinninneumog, newutche ummauongan8 nuppeyógqun.
E.Sa1.9.16: To morrow about this time I will send thee a man out of the land of Benjamin, and thou shalt anoint him to be captain over my people Israel, that he may save my people out of the hand of the Philistines: for I have looked upon my people, because their cry is come unto me.

α.Sa1.9.17 Kah Samuel nauont Sauloh, Jehovah wuttinuh, kusseh, wosketomp noh [á]nunomp: yeuoh pish nánawunont nummissinninneumoh.
E.Sa1.9.17: And when Samuel saw Saul, the LORD said unto him, Behold the man whom I spake to thee of! this same shall reign over my people.

α.Sa1.9.18 Neit Saul pas8tshau Samuelut, ut squontamut, kah n8wau, missohhamah k8wehquetumoush, uttoh Naumwáen wek ohtag.
E.Sa1.9.18: Then Saul drew near to Samuel in the gate, and said, Tell me, I pray thee, where the seer's house is.

α.Sa1.9.19 Kah Samuel namp8hamauau Saulóh, kah n8wau, neen Naumwaen: negonuhkah kuhkuhquish en qunnunkqui ayeuonganit, newutche pish k8wepimimw8 ne kesukok, kah saup pish kittinánumunumw8 nohnushak, kah kuttinnunnun wame ne kuttahhut,
E.Sa1.9.19: And Samuel answered Saul, and said, I am the seer: go up before me unto the high place; for ye shall eat with me to day, and to morrow I will let thee go, and will tell thee all that is in thine heart.

α.Sa1.9.20 Kah papaume kutassessumog neg wanhetcheg nishikqunogkod, ahque missanum, newutche, nag nameheoog: kah howane wame Israel kodtanumwáhettiche? sunnummatta ken, kah wame k8sh wek?
E.Sa1.9.20: And as for thine asses that were lost three days ago, set not thy mind on them; for they are found. And on whom is all the desire of Israel? Is it not on thee, and on all thy father's house?

α.Sa1.9.21 Kah Saul namp8ham kah n8wau, sunnummatta nen up$Benjaminit, peásik wutchippan8ongan8 Israel? kah nuttáshiyeu8onk anue peasin, onk nish wame wutteateashiyeuongash wutchippan8onk Benjamin, newaj tohwutch yeu ussean
E.Sa1.9.21: And Saul answered and said, Am not I a Benjamite, of the smallest of the tribes of Israel? and my family the least of all the families of the tribe of Benjamin? wherefore then speakest thou so to me?

α.Sa1.9.22 Kah Samuel nemunau Sauloh, & wuttinneumoh, kah nah upp[á]s8oh parlourut, kah wutappuwaheuh kéhche appu[o]nganit kenugke nagoh wehkomutcheg, neg papaume nashwunné[h]ch[o]gkussitcheg.
E.Sa1.9.22: And Samuel took Saul and his servant, and brought them into the parlour, and made them sit in the chiefest place among them that were bidden, which were about thirty persons.

α.Sa1.9.23 Kah Samuel unnau nattupp8énúh, paudtaush kutchippiyeum ne ánumauúnomp ne papaume ánomp wadchanash,
E.Sa1.9.23: And Samuel said unto the cook, Bring the portion which I gave thee, of which I said unto thee, Set it by thee.

α.Sa1.9.24 Kah nattupp8en nemunau uhpequnah, kah ne noh ohtag, kah upponamun anaquabit Saul, kah Samuel n8wau, kusseh, ne sequtteamuk, ponsh anaquabe[a]n kah meech: newutch pajeh yeu ahquomp[a]k kutahtoehch8kontea[u], wutuhshit adt n8waán, nummahche wéhkom missinninnúog: nemehkuh Saul wéhpumau Samueloh ne kesukok.
E.Sa1.9.24: And the cook took up the shoulder, and that which was upon it, and set it before Saul. And Samuel said, Behold that which is left! set it before thee, and eat: for unto this time hath it been kept for thee since I said, I have invited the people. So Saul did eat with Samuel that day.

α.Sa1.9.25 Kah n8kehettit wutch qunnunkqui ayeuonganit en otanat, keket8hkauau Sauloh ut woskechekommuk.
E.Sa1.9.25: And when they were come down from the high place into the city, Samuel communed with Saul upon the top of the house.

α.Sa1.9.26 Kah nag nompoáe omohkeog, kah nnih adchuwompog, Samuel wehkomau Sauloh ut woskechekommuk, n8wau, omkish, onk woh kummoncheaish, kah Saul omohku, kah nag na neeswe sohhamwog nagum kah Sámuel póquodchit.
E.Sa1.9.26: And they arose early: and it came to pass about the spring of the day, that Samuel called Saul to the top of the house, saying, Up, that I may send thee away. And Saul arose, and they went out both of them, he and Samuel, abroad.

α.Sa1.9.27 Kah womussehettit en wehqshik keitotan, Samuel unnau Sauloh, us kittinnéum negonshaush[,] kah negonshau qut ken neepaush ogguhsese, onk woh kukkuhk8tomoush wuttinn8w[a]onk God.
E.Sa1.9.27: And as they were going down to the end of the city, Samuel said to Saul, Bid the servant pass on before us, (and he passed on), but stand thou still a while, that I may shew thee the word of God.

α.Sa1.10.1 NEit Samuel nemunum wishquie pummee kah wussokenumauuh uppuhkukqut, kah wutchipwutt8napwuh, kah n8wau sunnummatta newutche Jehovah kussesequnuk kummummugquompaiinneat ut wutohto[o]nganit?
E.Sa1.10.1: Then Samuel took a vial of oil, and poured it upon his head, and kissed him, and said, Is it not because the LORD hath anointed thee to be captain over his inheritance?

α.Sa1.10.2 Amaean wutch nuhhogkat yeu kesukok neit pish kenameh nes8og wosketomp[â]og, kishke 8weenohkeet Rachel, ut wussissippoiyeumut Benjamin, ut Zilzah, kah pish kuttugquog assesog neg natinneahwhodcheg, namehheaog: & kusseh, k8sh ahque wuttamanumau asses[o]h, kah keneuanumukou, n8wau, toh woh nutussem wutch nunnaumon?
E.Sa1.10.2: When thou art departed from me to day, then thou shalt find two men by Rachel's sepulchre in the border of Benjamin at Zelzah; and they will say unto thee, The asses which thou wentest to seek are found: and, lo, thy father hath left the care of the asses, and sorroweth for you, saying, What shall I do for my son?

α.Sa1.10.3 Neit na pish k8tch kutchittôushonéau & pish kuppeyaum8 mukoshquttaut Tabor kah na pish kuttit nogkushkunkquneau shuog wosketompaog kuhkuhqueog en Godut ut Bethel pasuk kenunnàu nishnoh kidsóh, kah onkatuk kenunnum nishwinash petukqunnungash, kah onkatuk kenunnum wishquie wine,
E.Sa1.10.3: Then shalt thou go on forward from thence, and thou shalt come to the plain of Tabor, and there shall meet thee three men going up to God to Bethel, one carrying three kids, and another carrying three loaves of bread, and another carrying a bottle of wine:

α.Sa1.10.4 Kah nag pish k8wonkumukquog, kah pish kittinnumungquog neenesh petukqunungash kah pish adtumunumanish.
E.Sa1.10.4: And they will salute thee, and give thee two loaves of bread; which thou shalt receive of their hands.

α.Sa1.10.5 Ne mahche, pish kuppeyam 8wadchumut God, na$ut nanawehhuwaenue Philistiansog: kah pish n$nih, peyoan otanat, pish kenogskau chippanoé quoshodtumwaenuog, 8mwog qutch qunuhquiayeuonganit nashpe Psaltary, kah Tabrets, kah puhpegk, kah harp ut anquabenit, kah nag quoshodtumwog.
E.Sa1.10.5: After that thou shalt come to the hill of God, where is the garrison of the Philistines: and it shall come to pass, when thou art come thither to the city, that thou shalt meet a company of prophets coming down from the high place with a psaltery, and a tabret, and a pipe, and a harp, before them; and they shall prophesy:

α.Sa1.10.6 Kah wunnashauânitt8moh Jehovah pish kenuhkuhkunk, kah pish nag k8weeche quoshodtumomoog, kah pish kuppen8inneunkqus.
E.Sa1.10.6: And the Spirit of the LORD will come upon thee, and thou shalt prophesy with them, and shalt be turned into another man.

α.Sa1.10.7 Kah n$nag, yeush kuhkinneasuongash nuhkuhkongquean, neit ussish uttoh ônag, newutche God k8wetomuk.
E.Sa1.10.7: And let it be, when these signs are come unto thee, that thou do as occasion serve thee; for God is with thee.

α.Sa1.10.8 Kah pish kenegonne w8mus en Gilgal kah kusseh, pish k8momussuo[n]sh, magunat chikohsue mag8ongash kah sephausinneat wunohteae mag8ongane sephausuongash: nesausuk tahshikquinne pish na kuttit pahtis, no pajeh kuppeyoonunat, kah pish kenahtinsh toh wóh asean.
E.Sa1.10.8: And thou shalt go down before me to Gilgal; and, behold, I will come down unto thee, to offer burnt offerings, and to sacrifice sacrifices of peace offerings: seven days shalt thou tarry, till I come to thee, and shew thee what thou shalt do.

α.Sa1.10.9 Kah n$nih, quanupipsquann[a]it 8munat Samuelut, God wuttinnumauoh onkatuk metah kah wame yeush kukkinneasuongash n$nihyeuash ne kesukok.
E.Sa1.10.9: And it was so, that when he had turned his back to go from Samuel, God gave him another heart: and all those signs came to pass that day.

α.Sa1.10.10 Kah na paahettit wadchuut, kusseh, chippan8e quoshodtumwaenuoh wunnogskauoh, kah wunnashauanitt8moh G[ó]d nuhkuhkunk, kah na wuttit quoshodtumun kenugke nahoh.
E.Sa1.10.10: And when they came thither to the hill, behold, a company of prophets met him; and the Spirit of God came upon him, and he prophesied among them.

α.Sa1.10.11 Kah n$nih, wame nag negonne waheumpanneg, nauahettit kuseh quoshodtum ut kenugke q[ou]shodtumwaenuh, neit missinninnuog unnittuog, teaguas yeu ânak ut wunnaumonat Kish sun Saul kenugshau quoshodtumwaénúh?
E.Sa1.10.11: And it came to pass, when all that knew him beforetime saw that, behold, he prophesied among the prophets, then the people said one to another, What is this that is come unto the son of Kish? Is Saul also among the prophets?

α.Sa1.10.12 Kah pasuk ne ayeuonganit namp8ham kah n8wau, qut howan wut8shumau? newajeh nnag nupwôaonk, sun Saul wonk kenukshau quoshodtumwaênúh?
E.Sa1.10.12: And one of the same place answered and said, But who is their father? Therefore it became a proverb, Is Saul also among the prophets?

α.Sa1.10.13 Kah mahche quoshodtuk, peyau qunuhque ayeuonganit.
E.Sa1.10.13: And when he had made an end of prophesying, he came to the high place.

α.Sa1.10.14 Kah 8shesoh unnuk, kah wuttinneumoh, tohno[hk]utómwous? kah n8wau, natinneawhonat assesog, kah matta namhéogkut, nuppeyaonómun Samuel.
E.Sa1.10.14: And Saul's uncle said unto him and to his servant, Whither went ye?  And he said, To seek the asses: and when we saw that they were no where, we came to Samuel.

α.Sa1.10.15 Kah Saul 8shesoh n8waoh, usseh, k8wehqutumoush, uttoh Samuel ánukqueog.
E.Sa1.10.15: And Saul's uncle said, Tell me, I pray thee, what Samuel said unto you.

α.Sa1.10.16 Kah Saul unnau 8shesoh, nuppahke$yikqun assesog namehheaog: qut papaume tahs8tamóonk, ne Samuel weogquttukkup, matta wuttinnóun. 
E.Sa1.10.16: And Saul said unto his uncle, He told us plainly that the asses were found. But of the matter of the kingdom, whereof Samuel spake, he told him not.

α.Sa1.10.17 Kah Samuel moaeu wehkomau wame missinnuh ut Mizpeh en Jehovahut.
E.Sa1.10.17: And Samuel called the people together unto the LORD to Mizpeh;

α.Sa1.10.18 Kah unnau wunnaumonuh Israel, yeu wussin Lord um-Manitt8moh Israel nussohh8wunnomp Israel wutch Egypt, kah kuttomhennumwop wutch wunnutchegan8óut Egyptiansog, kah wutch wunnutchegan8out wame ass8tam8onganash, kah neg sánukehtóhukqueógig.
E.Sa1.10.18: And said unto the children of Israel, Thus saith the LORD God of Israel, I brought up Israel out of Egypt, and delivered you out of the hand of the Egyptians, and out of the hand of all kingdoms, and of them that oppressed you:

α.Sa1.10.19 Kah yeu kesukok kuppogkenumw8 kumManitt8m8uh, noh nagum kuttomhikk8op wutch wame kutonkapunnaonganehtu, kah kutonkquommomoonganehtu, kah kittinnau, qut ketass8 nánawunnumwah, newutche yeuyeu neepau8k anaquabit Jehovah, chachapan8onganu, kah mummuttanonganu.
E.Sa1.10.19: And ye have this day rejected your God, who himself saved you out of all your adversities and your tribulations; and ye have said unto him, Nay, but set a king over us. Now therefore present yourselves before the LORD by your tribes, and by your thousands.

α.Sa1.10.20 Kah Samuel wehkomont wame wutchippan8onganóash Israel pas8tshóm8ut, wutchippan8onk Benjamin neemunumun.
E.Sa1.10.20: And when Samuel had caused all the tribes of Israel to come near, the tribe of Benjamin was taken.

α.Sa1.10.21 Kah pas8tshatunk wutteateashiyeuongash Benjamin, wutteateashiyeuonk Matri neemunnumun, kah Saul wunnaumonuh Kish neemunau: kah natinneahwháhéttit, matta nameheau.
E.Sa1.10.21: When he had caused the tribe of Benjamin to come near by their families, the family of Matri was taken, and Saul the son of Kish was taken: and when they sought him, he could not be found.

α.Sa1.10.22 Newajeh wonk nat8tomauwáhettit Jehovah, woh wosketomp yeu peyon, kah Jehovah namp8ham, kusseh, puttogque ut kenugké maumachiit.
E.Sa1.10.22: Therefore they enquired of the LORD further, if the man should yet come thither. And the LORD answered, Behold he hath hid himself among the stuff.

α.Sa1.10.23 Kah quogqueog kah na 8s8óneau, kah neepauit kenugke missinninnútu, ánuunkqussumau howae missinninnúh, wutch wuttukkeit, kah waabe.
E.Sa1.10.23: And they ran and fetched him thence: and when he stood among the people, he was higher than any of the people from his shoulders and upward.

α.Sa1.10.24 Kah Samuel unau wame missinninnúh, noh nók, neh Jehovah pepenauoncheh, matta howan wuttinnauoh kenugke wame missinninnúog? kah wame missinninnúog mishont8waog kah n8waog, God wadchanonch ketass8tamwoh.
E.Sa1.10.24: And Samuel said to all the people, See ye him whom the LORD hath chosen, that there is none like him among all the people? And all the people shouted, and said, God save the king.

α.Sa1.10.25 Neit Samuel unnau missinninúh neaunag ketass8tamóonk, 8sukkuhhamun ut b8kut, kah upponamun anaquabit Lord, kah Samuel monchéáheaú wame missinninnúh, nishnoh wosketomp wekit.
E.Sa1.10.25: Then Samuel told the people the manner of the kingdom, and wrote it in a book, and laid it up before the LORD. And Samuel sent all the people away, every man to his house.

α.Sa1.10.26 Kah Saul wonk monchu en Gibeah, kah weechóg ayeuhteuh neg wuttahh8óash God masunuk.
E.Sa1.10.26: And Saul also went home to Gibeah; and there went with him a band of men, whose hearts God had touched.

α.Sa1.10.27 Qut wunnaumonuh Belial n8waoh, uttoh pish kittin tomhikqunnan yeuoh wosketomp? kah wussekeneauóuh, kah matta uppaudtauóuh mag8onk, qut chequnappu.
E.Sa1.10.27: But the children of Belial said, How shall this man save us? And they despised him, and brought no presents. But he held his peace.

α.Sa1.11.1 NEit Nahash wut-Amonit kuhkuhqueu, kah ayeuuhkone tuppuksinn8wontam Jabesh$Gilead, kah wame Jabeshe wosketompaog unnaog Nahash, wunn8wadtuh, kah pish k8tinninneumuhkauunúmun.
E.Sa1.11.1: Then Nahash the Ammonite came up, and encamped against Jabeshgilead: and all the men of Jabesh said unto Nahash, Make a covenant with us, and we will serve thee.

α.Sa1.11.2 Kah Nahash wut-Ammonit wunnámp8hamauoh, yeu k8tch wunn8wonan, woh nupwokhamunat wame kuttinohkoune kuskesuk88ash, kah woh nupponamun wutch kekomáonk wame Israel.
E.Sa1.11.2: And Nahash the Ammonite answered them, On this condition will I make a covenant with you, that I may thrust out all your right eyes, and lay it for a reproach upon all Israel.

α.Sa1.11.3 Kah Jabeshe Eldersog wuttinouh áninnumaiiñean nesausuk tahshikquiñe, onk woh nutann8nomun ann8neanuog ut wame wussissippoiyeum8ut Israel: kah neit mattá howan tomhikk8og, pish kussohwehtauunumun.
E.Sa1.11.3: And the elders of Jabesh said unto him, Give us seven days' respite, that we may send messengers unto all the coasts of Israel: and then, if there be no man to save us, we will come out to thee.

α.Sa1.11.4 Neit ann8naenuog peyaog Gibeah Saul$ut, kah aunchem8kaog ut wuhtauogk8out missinninnuog, kah wame missinninnuog mishont8wae mauog.
E.Sa1.11.4: Then came the messengers to Gibeah of Saul, and told the tidings in the ears of the people: and all the people lifted up their voices, and wept.

α.Sa1.11.5 Kah kusseh[.] Saul asuhkaue peyaonau néetasue wutch ohteakonit, kah Saul n8wau, toh ushpunaog missinninnuog waj mauwehettit? kah wuttinnoneaaoash wuttinaunchem8kaongan8oash Jabeshe wosketompaog.
E.Sa1.11.5: And, behold, Saul came after the herd out of the field; and Saul said, What aileth the people that they weep? And they told him the tidings of the men of Jabesh.

α.Sa1.11.6 Kah wunnashauanitt8moh God nuhkuhkunk Saul n8tog yeush unaunchem8kaongash, kah ummusqu[â]ntam8onk mishe nashqunau.
E.Sa1.11.6: And the Spirit of God came upon Saul when he heard those tidings, and his anger was kindled greatly.

α.Sa1.11.7 Kah neemunau nees8oh oxinoh, kah wutchadchabetahwhoh, kah neh wuñegonshhuouuh pannuppe wame wussissippoiyeum8wout Israel nashpe wunnutchegan8out ann8naenuog, n8wau, wuttinn[i]in howan matta nahohtoe sohham8muk Sauloh kah Samueloh, ne pish unnehe[ó]nin wutoxinnumoh, kah qushaonk Jehovah nuhkuhkunkquog missinninnuh: kah nag sohhamwog onatuh pasuk wosketomp,
E.Sa1.11.7: And he took a yoke of oxen, and hewed them in pieces, and sent them throughout all the coasts of Israel by the hands of messengers, saying, Whosoever cometh not forth after Saul and after Samuel, so shall it be done unto his oxen. And the fear of the LORD fell on the people, and they came out with one consent.

α.Sa1.11.8 Kah neh agkemont ut Bezek, wunnaumónuh Israel nishwe pasuk8e muttannonganogkussuoh, kah Judahe wosketompaog shwinchage muttannonganog kussuog.
E.Sa1.11.8: And when he numbered them in Bezek, the children of Israel were three hundred thousand, and the men of Judah thirty thousand.

α.Sa1.11.9 Kah nag unnaog ann8naenuh neh paonutcheh, yeu pish kittinnoneau Jabesh$Gileade wosketompaog, Saup, nepauz kussopposuk, pish wuttannunnumwonkannog, kah ann8naenuog peyaog, kah wuttinoneau Jabesh$Giliade wosketompoh, kah nag wekontamwog.
E.Sa1.11.9: And they said unto the messengers that came, Thus shall ye say unto the men of Jabeshgilead, To morrow, by that time the sun be hot, ye shall have help. And the messengers came and shewed it to the men of Jabesh; and they were glad.

α.Sa1.11.10 Newaj Jabesh$Giliade wosketompaog n8wahéttit, Saup kussohwehtauunumun, kah pish kittinhimun uttóh an tapeneunkquok.
E.Sa1.11.10: Therefore the men of Jabesh said, To morrow we will come out unto you, and ye shall do with us all that seemeth good unto you.

α.Sa1.11.11 Kah n$nih mohtompog, Saul nishwe chipwushheau missinninnuh, kah nag peyaóg ut nashauwe ayeuteaenuut, mohtompanae askuhwhéteomuk, kah nushaog Ammonitsoh nó pajeh kosittag: kah n$nih neg asquetawhutcheg seahshaog, onk matta nees8og wunnesiyeuh.
E.Sa1.11.11: And it was so on the morrow, that Saul put the people in three companies; and they came into the midst of the host in the morning watch, and slew the Ammonites until the heat of the day: and it came to pass, that they which remained were scattered, so that two of them were not left together.

α.Sa1.11.12 Kah missinninnuog unnaog Samueloh, howan noh an8wadt, sun woh Saul kenanawunukqun? pas8k wosketompaog onk woh nunnushonnonog.
E.Sa1.11.12: And the people said unto Samuel, Who is he that said, Shall Saul reign over us? bring the men, that we may put them to death.

α.Sa1.11.13 Kah Saul n8wau matta pish wosketomp nushoun yeu kesukok, newutche yeu kesukok Jehovah ussen 8wadchanuwaonk ut Israel.
E.Sa1.11.13: And Saul said, There shall not a man be put to death this day: for to day the LORD hath wrought salvation in Israel.

α.Sa1.11.14 Neit Samuel unnau missinninnuh, Ehoh ontuh Gilgal, kah na$ut wuskehteauttuh ass8tamoonk.
E.Sa1.11.14: Then said Samuel to the people, Come, and let us go to Gilgal, and renew the kingdom there.

α.Sa1.11.15 Kah wame missinninnuog auog Gilgal, kah na wuttit ketáss8tamwuhkonau Sauloh ut anaquabit Jehovah ut Gilgal, kah wuttit sephausineau sephausuongash kah wunohteae mag8ongásh anaquabit Lord, kah na$ut Saul kah wame Israelle wosketompaog mishe weekontamwog.
E.Sa1.11.15: And all the people went to Gilgal; and there they made Saul king before the LORD in Gilgal; and there they sacrificed sacrifices of peace offerings before the LORD; and there Saul and all the men of Israel rejoiced greatly.

α.Sa1.12.1 KAh Samuel unnau wame Israeloh, kusseh nunn8tam k8wadtauatonkqussuongan8 wame ne aseog, kah kukketass8tumwuhkauunnumw8.
E.Sa1.12.1: And Samuel said unto all Israel, Behold, I have hearkened unto your voice in all that ye said unto me, and have made a king over you.

α.Sa1.12.2 Kah yeuyeu kusseh, ketass8t pomushau anaquabeog[:] kah nen nukkechisu, kah n8wompuhquom, kah kusseh nunnaumonog k8wetomukumw8, kah nummahche pomusham anaquabeog wutch nummukkiesuuneat pajeh yeu kesukok.
E.Sa1.12.2: And now, behold, the king walketh before you: and I am old and grayheaded; and, behold, my sons are with you: and I have walked before you from my childhood unto this day.

α.Sa1.12.3 Kusseh, nen yeu, ayeuuhkonittue wauwaosék ut anaquabit Jehovah, kah ut anaquabit sasequnoncheh, howan wutoxinnumoh, nemunog? asuh howan wutassumoh nemunog? howan as8kekomog? howan nameketahwhog, asuh wutch howan wunnutcheganit nutattumunum mag8onk, ne nashpe, nuskesukquash pogkenumom8uk, kah kenompenumauwununeau.
E.Sa1.12.3: Behold, here I am: witness against me before the LORD, and before his anointed: whose ox have I taken? or whose ass have I taken? or whom have I defrauded? whom have I oppressed? or of whose hand have I received any bribe to blind mine eyes therewith? and I will restore it you.

α.Sa1.12.4 Kah nag n8waog kutas8kekomeumun, asuh kussinnukkehtahheumun, asuh matta wutch howan wunnutcheganit neemunnum8h.
E.Sa1.12.4: And they said, Thou hast not defrauded us, nor oppressed us, neither hast thou taken ought of any man's hand.

α.Sa1.12.5 Kah nah wuttinuh, Lord ayeuuhkonittue k8wauwaonuk8, kah sasequnoncheh wauwaoh yeu kesukok matta teag kummiskomm8uneau ut nunnutcheganit, kah nág namp8hamwog, noh wauwau.
E.Sa1.12.5: And he said unto them, The LORD is witness against you, and his anointed is witness this day, that ye have not found ought in my hand. And they answered, He is witness.

α.Sa1.12.6 Kah Samuel unnau missinninnuh, noh Jehovah tahshinont Mosesoh, kah Aaronoh, kah noh sohh8wunont k8sh8oh wutch Egypt.
E.Sa1.12.6: And Samuel said unto the people, It is the LORD that advanced Moses and Aaron, and that brought your fathers up out of the land of Egypt.

α.Sa1.12.7 Newutche yeuyeu chequnikkompau8k, onk woh k8weadtimunumw8 anaquabit Jehovah, papaume wame wussampweusseongash Jehovah, ne anhikqueog, kah k8sh8oh.
E.Sa1.12.7: Now therefore stand still, that I may reason with you before the LORD of all the righteous acts of the LORD, which he did to you and to your fathers.

α.Sa1.12.8 Jakob paont Egypt, k8sh8óg mauunnitteauáhettit Je[h]ovah, neit Jehovah ann8nau Mosesoh kah Aaronoh, neg sohh8wan[ô]hpanneg k8sh8oh wutch Egypt, kah wutáyeuóuh yeu ayinneat.
E.Sa1.12.8: When Jacob was come into Egypt, and your fathers cried unto the LORD, then the LORD sent Moses and Aaron, which brought forth your fathers out of Egypt, and made them dwell in this place.

α.Sa1.12.9 Kah wunnánumahettit Jehovah um-Manitt8m8uh, wuttinmagunuh ut wunnutcheganit Sisera, ummugquomp wutáyeuwehteomuh Hazor, kah en wunnutchegan8out Philistiansog, kah en wunnutcheganit Moabe ketass8t, kah nah wut[á]yeuwuhkonóuh.
E.Sa1.12.9: And when they forgat the LORD their God, he sold them into the hand of Sisera, captain of the host of Hazor, and into the hand of the Philistines, and into the hand of the king of Moab, and they fought against them.

α.Sa1.12.10 Kah nag mauunnitteau[á]og Jehovah, kah n8wáog, nummatchesemun, newutche nutohquanumómun Jehovah, kah n8wowussumómun Baalim kah Ashteroth, qut yeuyeu pohquohwussinan, wutch wunnutchegan8wout nummatwomunónog kah k8wowussumunumun.
E.Sa1.12.10: And they cried unto the LORD, and said, We have sinned, because we have forsaken the LORD, and have served Baalim and Ashtaroth: but now deliver us out of the hand of our enemies, and we will serve thee.

α.Sa1.12.11 Kah Jehovah ann8nau Jerubbaal, kah Bedan, kah Jephthah, kah Samuel, kah kuttomwuhhénumwop wutch wunnutchegan8óut kummatwóm8óog waéenu, kah kummanunniyimwop.
E.Sa1.12.11: And the LORD sent Jerubbaal, and Bedan, and Jephthah, and Samuel, and delivered you out of the hand of your enemies on every side, and ye dwelled safe.

α.Sa1.12.12 Kah nauóg Nahash ukketass8tam8m8oh wunnaumonuh Ammon ayeuuhkónukqueóg, kutussumwop, matta, qut ketass8t pish nanáwunukumun, Jehovah kum-Manitt8mw8 wogketass8tamweóg.
E.Sa1.12.12: And when ye saw that Nahash the king of the children of Ammon came against you, ye said unto me, Nay; but a king shall reign over us: when the LORD your God was your king.

α.Sa1.12.13 Newutche yeuyeu, nok ketass8t noh pepenauog, kah noh kodtanumog, kah kusseh Jehovah k8ketass8tamwuhkongkou.
E.Sa1.12.13: Now therefore behold the king whom ye have chosen, and whom ye have desired! and, behold, the LORD hath set a king over you.

α.Sa1.12.14 Qushóg Jehovah, kah wowussumóg, kah n8swehtamog 8wadtauatonkqussuonk, kah matta cheketam8og wutann8team8onk Jehovah, neit naneeswe kenaau, & wonk ketass8t noh nanáwunukqueog pish nagwutteae kutasuhkauómw8 Jehovah kum-Manitt8mw8.
E.Sa1.12.14: If ye will fear the LORD, and serve him, and obey his voice, and not rebel against the commandment of the LORD, then shall both ye and also the king that reigneth over you continue following the LORD your God:

α.Sa1.12.15 Qut matta n8swehtamóog 8wadtauatonkqussuonk Jehovah, neit pish wunnutcheg Jehovah kutayeuuhkonukumw8, neane ayeuuhkonomp k8sh8oh.
E.Sa1.12.15: But if ye will not obey the voice of the LORD, but rebel against the commandment of the LORD, then shall the hand of the LORD be against you, as it was against your fathers.

α.Sa1.12.16 Newutche yeuyeu neepó8k, kah yeu naum8k mohsag, ne woh asit Jehovah anaquohtag kuskesuk88ash.
E.Sa1.12.16: Now therefore stand and see this great thing, which the LORD will do before your eyes.

α.Sa1.12.17 Sunnummatta yeuyeu kesukok wheate kepenum8onk? pish n8wehkum Jehovah, kah pish ann8nau neempoh kah sokanon, onk woh k8wahteomw8, kah woh keñaumw8, kummatcheseongan8 missi, ne aseog ut anaquabit Jehovah, k8wehkomonaoont ketass8t.
E.Sa1.12.17: Is it not wheat harvest to day? I will call unto the LORD, and he shall send thunder and rain; that ye may perceive and see that your wickedness is great, which ye have done in the sight of the LORD, in asking you a king.

α.Sa1.12.18 Neit Samuel wehkomau Jehovah, kah Jehovah ann8nau neempoh kah sokenon, né kesukok, & wame missinninnúog mishe qusháog Jehovah kah Samuel.
E.Sa1.12.18: So Samuel called unto the LORD; and the LORD sent thunder and rain that day: and all the people greatly feared the LORD and Samuel.

α.Sa1.12.19 Kah wame missinninnúog unnaog Samueloh, peantamwa[n]sh kittinneúmog en Jehovahut kum-Manitt8mut, & woh mo nupp8mun, newutche nukk8chehteomun wame nummatcheseonganonash, yeu machuk, n8wehquetum[ó]nanônut ketass8t.
E.Sa1.12.19: And all the people said unto Samuel, Pray for thy servants unto the LORD thy God, that we die not: for we have added unto all our sins this evil, to ask us a king.

α.Sa1.12.20 Kah Samuel unnau missinninnúh, ahque wabesek, (yeu kutusseneau wame matcheseonk, qut ahque qushkek wutch asuhkauónat Jéhovah, qut wuttinneúmuhkók Jehovah nashpe mamusse kuttahhou.
E.Sa1.12.20: And Samuel said unto the people, Fear not: ye have done all this wickedness: yet turn not aside from following the LORD, but serve the LORD with all your heart;

α.Sa1.12.21 Kah ahque qushkek, newutche neit kutasukomw8 tahn8cheyeu8gish, nish matta wadchiyeu[-]ukish, asuh matta tomhuômunógish, newutche nish tahn8cheyeu8ash)
E.Sa1.12.21: And turn ye not aside: for then should ye go after vain things, which cannot profit nor deliver; for they are vain.

α.Sa1.12.22 Newutche Jehovah matta pish ahquanumau8 ummissinninneúmoh, wutche ummishe wesuonk, newutche wuttinne tapeneamun Jehovah, kenaau 8missinninneúmuneat.
E.Sa1.12.22: For the LORD will not forsake his people for his great name's sake: because it hath pleased the LORD to make you his people.

α.Sa1.12.23 Wonk papaume nen, nô8sukiitch, nummatchenéheônat Jehovah kútahque peantamwanshinneaôont, qut kukkuhk8tamauonúmw8 wanegik kah sampoi may.
E.Sa1.12.23: Moreover as for me, God forbid that I should sin against the LORD in ceasing to pray for you: but I will teach you the good and the right way:

α.Sa1.12.24 Webe qush8k Jehovah, kah wunnamúhkuteyeue wuttinneúmúhkok, nashpe mamússe kuttahhoú, newutche natwontam8k uttoh an mágagish kutusseaunshhukoú.
E.Sa1.12.24: Only fear the LORD, and serve him in truth with all your heart: for consider how great things he hath done for you.

α.Sa1.12.25 Qut ashpumme matcheseóg, pish kummahtú[s]simw8, kenaaú kah kukketass8tamomw8.
E.Sa1.12.25: But if ye shall still do wickedly, ye shall be consumed, both ye and your king.

α.Sa1.13.1 SAul nequt kodtumwáe nanawunum, kah mahche neesekodtumwae nanawunuk Israelut.
E.Sa1.13.1: Saul reigned one year; and when he had reigned two years over Israel,

α.Sa1.13.2 Saul pepenauau nishwudt muttannonganog kussuoh Israele wosketompoh neese muttannonganog kussuog weetomaog Sauloh ut Michmash, kah ut wadchuut Bethel, kah nequt muttannonganog kussuog weetomaog Jonathanoh, ut Gibea ut Benjamin, kah onkatoge missinninnuh moncheaheau nish$noh wosketompuh en wekit.
E.Sa1.13.2: Saul chose him three thousand men of Israel; whereof two thousand were with Saul in Michmash and in mount Bethel, and a thousand were with Jonathan in Gibeah of Benjamin: and the rest of the people he sent every man to his tent.

α.Sa1.13.3 Kah Jonathan togkomau Philistianseh wadchanuanitcheh, neg ut Geba, kah Philistiansog wunn8tamuneau, kah Saul puhpequohto monopuhpeg, pannuppe wame ohkeit, n8wau, Hebrewsog n8tamwehettich.
E.Sa1.13.3: And Jonathan smote the garrison of the Philistines that was in Geba, and the Philistines heard of it. And Saul blew the trumpet throughout all the land, saying, Let the Hebrews hear.

α.Sa1.13.4 Kah wame Israel n8tamwog, Saul togkomau wadchanuae, Philistiansoh kah Philistiánsog nehchanumaog Israéloh, kah missinninnuog moae wehkomoog asuhkaué Saul en Gilgal.
E.Sa1.13.4: And all Israel heard say that Saul had smitten a garrison of the Philistines, and that Israel also was had in abomination with the Philistines. And the people were called together after Saul to Gilgal.

α.Sa1.13.5 Kah Philistiansog miayeog ayeuuhkononun Israel, nishwinchage muttannonganogkodtash chariotsash, kah nequtta tahshe muttannonganog kussuog horsesoh na8mukqutcheg, kah missinninnuog onatuh nagunt kishke ketahhannit newutche muttaanwog, kah kuhkuhqueog, kah tuppuksinwog ut Michmash, wutcheksuiyéu wutch Bethaven.
E.Sa1.13.5: And the Philistines gathered themselves together to fight with Israel, thirty thousand chariots, and six thousand horsemen, and people as the sand which is on the sea shore in multitude: and they came up, and pitched in Michmash, eastward from Bethaven.

α.Sa1.13.6 Kah Israelle wosketompaóg nauahettit quequenauanumoog (newutche missinninnuog quequenauanumoog) neit Missinninnuog puttogqueog ut hassunnekittu, kah kuppahtu, kah qussukquanehtu, kah kogkussohkoagish, kah pasohtheganehtu.
E.Sa1.13.6: When the men of Israel saw that they were in a strait, (for the people were distressed,) then the people did hide themselves in caves, and in thickets, and in rocks, and in high places, and in pits.

α.Sa1.13.7 Kah nawhutch Hebrewsog qushkodteaog Jordan en ogkit Gad, kah Gilead, qut Saul ash appu ut Gilgal, kah wame missinninnuog nunnukshae wutasukauóuh.
E.Sa1.13.7: And some of the Hebrews went over Jordan to the land of Gad and Gilead. As for Saul, he was yet in Gilgal, and all the people followed him trembling.

α.Sa1.13.8 Kah na wuttit nesausuk tahshikquinne pahtussin, neane kuhk8wop Samuel: qut Samuel matta peyau8 Gilgal: kah missinninnuog nanwiyeuog wutch wuhhogkat.
E.Sa1.13.8: And he tarried seven days, according to the set time that Samuel had appointed: but Samuel came not to Gilgal; and the people were scattered from him.

α.Sa1.13.9 Kah Saul n8wau paudtiegk chikotae mag8ongash, kah wunohteáe mag8ongash, kah sephausu chikohtae mag8ongash.
E.Sa1.13.9: And Saul said, Bring hither a burnt offering to me, and peace offerings. And he offered the burnt offering.

α.Sa1.13.10 Kah n$nih, quenau mahche sephausit chikohtae mag8óngash, kusseh Samuel peyau kah Saul sohham wunnogskauonat, onk woh 8wonkumuh.
E.Sa1.13.10: And it came to pass, that as soon as he had made an end of offering the burnt offering, behold, Samuel came; and Saul went out to meet him, that he might salute him.

α.Sa1.13.11 Kah Samuel n8wau, toh kummahche ussen? kah Saul n8wau, newutche nunaum missinninnuog nanwiyeuog wutch nuhhogkat kah matta kuppeyoh neane kuhk8waop, kah Philistiansog miyaeog ut Michmásh.
E.Sa1.13.11: And Samuel said, What hast thou done? And Saul said, Because I saw that the people were scattered from me, and that thou camest not within the days appointed, and that the Philistines gathered themselves together at Michmash;

α.Sa1.13.12 Néwajeh n8waomp, Philistiansog pish nunnu[h]kukkungquog ut Gilgal, kah matta nutayim8 peantam8ongash en Jehovahut, newajeh chekeéneheog nuhhog, kah nussephaus chikohtae mag8onk.
E.Sa1.13.12: Therefore said I, The Philistines will come down now upon me to Gilgal, and I have not made supplication unto the LORD: I forced myself therefore, and offered a burnt offering.

α.Sa1.13.13 Kah Samuel unnau Sauloh, kummattammagwe ussem: matta kenanawehteo wuttann8team8onk Jehovah kummanitt8m, ne ána8nukquean: newutche yeuyeu Jehovah kodmenehketeau kutass8tamóonk ut Israelut micheme.
E.Sa1.13.13: And Samuel said to Saul, Thou hast done foolishly: thou hast not kept the commandment of the LORD thy God, which he commanded thee: for now would the LORD have established thy kingdom upon Israel for ever.

α.Sa1.13.14 Qut yeuyéu kutass8tamóonk mattá pish nagwutteohtáno: Jehovah natinnewhau wosketompuh, neaunag nehenwonche wuttah kah Jehovah wutann8nuh ummugquompainneat ut ummi[s]sinninneúmut, newutche matta kenanawehtea8h ne Jehovah anann8nukquean.
E.Sa1.13.14: But now thy kingdom shall not continue: the LORD hath sought him a man after his own heart, and the LORD hath commanded him to be captain over his people, because thou hast not kept that which the LORD commanded thee.

α.Sa1.13.15 Kah Samuel neepau, kah kuhkúhqueu wutch Gilgal en Gibeah ut Benjamin, kah Saul ogkemau mi[s]sinninnúh neh wetomukqutcheh, papaume nequtta tahshe pasuk88og wosketompaog.
E.Sa1.13.15: And Samuel arose, and gat him up from Gilgal unto Gibeah of Benjamin. And Saul numbered the people that were present with him, about six hundred men.

α.Sa1.13.16 Kah Saul kah Jonathan wunnaumonuh, kah mi[s]sinninnúog neh wetomukqutcheh appuog Gibeah ut Benjamin: qut Philistiansog tuppuksinwog ut Michmash.
E.Sa1.13.16: And Saul, and Jonathan his son, and the people that were present with them, abode in Gibeah of Benjamin: but the Philistines encamped in Michmash.

α.Sa1.13.17 Kah woskehuwaenuog sohhamwog wutch wuttuppuku[s]sinn8ongan8óut Philistiansog nishwe chippan8og, nequt chippan8og quinnuppeog en anshik may Ophrath en wutohkit Shual.
E.Sa1.13.17: And the spoilers came out of the camp of the Philistines in three companies: one company turned unto the way that leadeth to Ophrah, unto the land of Shual:

α.Sa1.13.18 Kah onkatog chippan8onk quinnuppeog en anshik may Bethhoron; kah onkatog chippan8onk quinnuppeog en su[s]sippoiyeue mayut ne anshik nogque Zeboimme 8nouhkoiyeuut; nogque touohkomuk.
E.Sa1.13.18: And another company turned the way to Bethhoron: and another company turned to the way of the border that looketh to the valley of Zeboim toward the wilderness.

α.Sa1.13.19 Kah wanne smith namehheóun ut pannuppe wame wutohtuóut Israel: newutche Philistiansog n8waog, ishkont Hebrewsog ayimóog togkodtegash, asuh qunnuhtukquash.
E.Sa1.13.19: Now there was no smith found throughout all the land of Israel: for the Philistines said, Lest the Hebrews make them swords or spears:

α.Sa1.13.20 Qut wame Israelitsog womsuog en Philistiansut, nishnoh wosketomp kehtadtauunat, wus-sharum, uk-coulterum wuttogkunk, kah um-mattockum.
E.Sa1.13.20: But all the Israelites went down to the Philistines, to sharpen every man his share, and his coulter, and his axe, and his mattock.

α.Sa1.13.21 Qut wadchanumwog filesash, wutch mattocksash, & wutch coultersash, & wutch forksash, kah wutch togkunkash, kah kehtadtauunat goadsash.
E.Sa1.13.21: Yet they had a file for the mattocks, and for the coulters, and for the forks, and for the axes, and to sharpen the goads.

α.Sa1.13.22 Nemehkuh nnih, ne kesukok ayeuwuttimuk, ná matta namehteauoun togkodteg asuh qunnuhtug, wunnutcheganit howae missinnin ne weechógqutcheh Saul kah Jonathan, qut ut Saulut kah ut Jonathanut neit namehteauun.
E.Sa1.13.22: So it came to pass in the day of battle, that there was neither sword nor spear found in the hand of any of the people that were with Saul and Jonathan: but with Saul and with Jonathan his son was there found.

α.Sa1.13.23 Kah wadchanuwae Philistiansog sohhamwog en Michmashe weepwoiyeuut.
E.Sa1.13.23: And the garrison of the Philistines went out to the passage of Michmash.

α.Sa1.14.1 KAh n$nih, kesukodtut, Jonathan wunnaumonuh Saul, unnau wuskenúh neh kounumunutcheh ukkenauwameonk, peyaush, kah qushkodteadtuh en Philistianseh wadchanuwaenuut, ne papiuhsukeh; qut matta wuttinnon 8shoh.
E.Sa1.14.1: Now it came to pass upon a day, that Jonathan the son of Saul said unto the young man that bare his armour, Come, and let us go over to the Philistines' garrison, that is on the other side. But he told not his father.

α.Sa1.14.2 Kah Saul appu aongkoue Gibeah, agwe pomegranúhtugqut ne ohtag ut Migron: kah missinninnúh neh wetomukqutcheh papaume nequtta tahshe pasuk88og.
E.Sa1.14.2: And Saul tarried in the uttermost part of Gibeah under a pomegranate tree which is in Migron: and the people that were with him were about six hundred men;

α.Sa1.14.3 Kah Ahiah wunnaumonuh Ahitup Ichabo[b] wematoh, wunnaumonuh Phinehas, wunnaumonuh Eli, wussephausuéneúmoh Jehovah ut Shiloh, agqunnumont Ephod: kah missinninnúog matta wahteau8og Jonathan monchei.
E.Sa1.14.3: And Ahiah, the son of Ahitub, Ichabod's brother, the son of Phinehas, the son of Eli, the LORD's priest in Shiloh, wearing an ephod. And the people knew not that Jonathan was gone.

α.Sa1.14.4 Kah nashaue mayash, nish Jonathan kod ôs8uhkogish en Philistianse wadchanuwaénuut na mo kussohkioiompsk wutch yoáe, kah kussohkoiompsk na wonk nogque, kah pasuk hettamun Bozez, kah onkatog hettamun Seneh.
E.Sa1.14.4: And between the passages, by which Jonathan sought to go over unto the Philistines' garrison, there was a sharp rock on the one side, and a sharp rock on the other side: and the name of the one was Bozez, and the name of the other Seneh.

α.Sa1.14.5 Naóágk pasuk wutcheksúayeu wutogquohteau piuhsuke Michmash: kah onkatog sowaniyeuwiyeu piuhsukeh Gibeah.
E.Sa1.14.5: The forefront of the one was situate northward over against Michmash, and the other southward over against Gibeah.

α.Sa1.14.6 Kah Jonathan unnau wuskenúh neh kóunumunutcheh kenauwameonk, peyaush, kah ontuh wadchanuwaenue yeug matquoshqusausegig: paguodche Jehovah kutanakausuw[a]nshikqun: newutche matta te[a]g wuttamhik Jehovah tomoheónat nashpe monaog[,] asuh ogguhsog.
E.Sa1.14.6: And Jonathan said to the young man that bare his armour, Come, and let us go over unto the garrison of these uncircumcised: it may be that the LORD will work for us: for there is no restraint to the LORD to save by many or by few.

α.Sa1.14.7 Kah neh kônumunutcheh ukkenauwameonk wuttukquoh, ussish wame ne kuttahhut: quinnuppekompaush, kusseh k8weetomsh neaunag kuttah.
E.Sa1.14.7: And his armourbearer said unto him, Do all that is in thine heart: turn thee; behold, I am with thee according to thy heart.

α.Sa1.14.8 Neit Jonathan n8wau, kusseh, kuppaumukauómu[n] yeug wosketompaog, kah kenaéhtauóunónog.
E.Sa1.14.8: Then said Jonathan, Behold, we will pass over unto these men, and we will discover ourselves unto them.

α.Sa1.14.9 Nag unnukqueog, ne appek, no pajeh kuppeyaonunnanonut, neit pish kutchequnikkompomun ut kutayeuonganunnônut, kah matta kukkuhkuhquehtauóun nónog.
E.Sa1.14.9: If they say thus unto us, Tarry until we come to you; then we will stand still in our place, and will not go up unto them.

α.Sa1.14.10 Qut nag unn8wahettit, kuhkuhquehtiinnean, neit woh kukkuhkuhquemun, newutche Jehovah upponuh kenutcheganónut, kah yeu pish kuhkinneasuonk wutch kenawun.
E.Sa1.14.10: But if they say thus, Come up unto us; then we will go up: for the LORD hath delivered them into our hand: and this shall be a sign unto us.

α.Sa1.14.11 Kah nag naneeswe naéog en wadchanuwaenue Philistiansut, kah Philistiansog n8waog, kusseh, Hebrewsog sohhamwog wutch wónogquehtu ne adt puttogquehetteup.
E.Sa1.14.11: And both of them discovered themselves unto the garrison of the Philistines: and the Philistines said, Behold, the Hebrews come forth out of the holes where they had hid themselves.

α.Sa1.14.12 Kah wadchanuwaenue wosketompaog namp8hamauwaog Jonathanoh, kah kôunumunutcheh ukkenauwameonk, & n8waog, kuhquehtiinnean, kah kenahtinnunnumun ne teag, kah Jonathan unnau kônumunutcheh ukkenauwameonk, kuhkuhquée asuhkah[,] newutche Jehovah ummagunuh en wunnutchegan8out Israel.
E.Sa1.14.12: And the men of the garrison answered Jonathan and his armourbearer, and said, Come up to us, and we will shew you a thing. And Jonathan said unto his armourbearer, Come up after me: for the LORD hath delivered them into the hand of Israel.

α.Sa1.14.13 Kah Jonathan kutóntauohto wunnutchegash kah wusseetash, kah kônumunutche ukkenauwameonk nahohtoeu: kah penushaog ut anaquabit Jonathan, kah kônumunutche ukkenauwameonk nahohtôeu nushehteaoh.
E.Sa1.14.13: And Jonathan climbed up upon his hands and upon his feet, and his armourbearer after him: and they fell before Jonathan; and his armourbearer slew after him.

α.Sa1.14.14 Kah negonne paguanittuonk ne Jonathan kah kônumunutche ukkenauwameonk ayimhettit, papaume neesneechagkodtog wosketompoh, an[ó]me neáhunukuk8k pohshe acre ohke, ne pasuk yoak8e oxinog woh anaskhamhettit.
E.Sa1.14.14: And that first slaughter, which Jonathan and his armourbearer made, was about twenty men, within as it were an half acre of land, which a yoke of oxen might plow.

α.Sa1.14.15 Kah na mo nunnukshaonk ut ayeuhteaénúut, ut ohteakonit, kah kenugke wame missinninnúut: wadchanuwaénûog, kah woskehuwaenúog, nag wonk nunnukshaog, kah ohke quequan; kah mishe nunnukshaonganú8.
E.Sa1.14.15: And there was trembling in the host, in the field, and among all the people: the garrison, and the spoilers, they also trembled, and the earth quaked: so it was a very great trembling.

α.Sa1.14.16 Kah wutaskuhwheteaeneumoh Saul ut Gibeah ut Benjamin, natauwompuog, kah kusseh mattanukeg sobasuog, kah nag moncheog kekeputtawhuttuog.
E.Sa1.14.16: And the watchmen of Saul in Gibeah of Benjamin looked; and, behold, the multitude melted away, and they went on beating down one another.

α.Sa1.14.17 Neit Saul unnau missinninnuh neh wetomukquetcheh, ogkem8k yeuyeu kah nók howan nogkonukqueog, kah agkemahettit, kusseh Jonathan kah konumunutcheh ukkénauwámeonk matta na wutappeineau.
E.Sa1.14.17: Then said Saul unto the people that were with him, Number now, and see who is gone from us. And when they had numbered, behold, Jonathan and his armourbearer were not there.

α.Sa1.14.18 Kah Saul unnau Ahiah, paudtoush wut-Arkum God, (newutche wut-Arkum God, 8weetomukquneau wunnaumonuh Israel, na ahquompak)
E.Sa1.14.18: And Saul said unto Ahiah, Bring hither the ark of God. For the ark of God was at that time with the children of Israel.

α.Sa1.14.19 Kah nnih, Saul ashpame keket8hkauont sephausuenuh, nishketunkquodt ne ut wutayeuwehteaongan8out Philistiansog nano mishont8wau: k[á]h Saul unnau sephausuenuh, qushkinsh kenutcheg.
E.Sa1.14.19: And it came to pass, while Saul talked unto the priest, that the noise that was in the host of the Philistines went on and increased: and Saul said unto the priest, Withdraw thine hand.

α.Sa1.14.20 Kah Saul kah wáme missinninnuh neh wehtomukqutcheh moeog, kah peyauog ayeuwuttinneát, kah kusseh nish$noh wosketomp wuttogkodteg ayeuuhkonau nees8hetticheh, mishe ónkquanumóonk.
E.Sa1.14.20: And Saul and all the people that were with him assembled themselves, and they came to the battle: and, behold, every man's sword was against his fellow, and there was a very great discomfiture.

α.Sa1.14.21 Kah wonk Hebrewsog neg weechayeumoncheg Philistiansog negonae ne ahquompak, nag weechoampanneg en tuppuksin8onganit wutch waeene, nag wonk quinnuppeog weech8hamonat Israelitsoh neg weetomoncheg Saul Kah Jonathan.
E.Sa1.14.21: Moreover the Hebrews that were with the Philistines before that time, which went up with them into the camp from the country round about, even they also turned to be with the Israelites that were with Saul and Jonathan.

α.Sa1.14.22 Kah wonk wame Isráelle wosketompaog, neg padtogquedcheg ut Ephraimme w[á]dchuut, n8tamwehettit wussemôog Philistiansog, nag wonk ummenuhke asuhkauouh en ayeuwuttinneat.
E.Sa1.14.22: Likewise all the men of Israel which had hid themselves in mount Ephraim, when they heard that the Philistines fled, even they also followed hard after them in the battle.

α.Sa1.14.23 Nemehkuh Jehovah wadchanau Israeloh ne kesukok, kah ayeuwuttuonk qushkodteomw8 en Bethaven.
E.Sa1.14.23: So the LORD saved Israel that day: and the battle passed over unto Bethaven.

α.Sa1.14.24 Kah wame Israelle wosketompaog quequenauanumóog ne kesukok, newutche S[a]ul chadchekeimau missinninnuh n8wau, mattanumunach wosketomp noh meetchuk ne teague meechum na pajeh wunnonk8ut, onk woh nutann8tau nummatwomog: newaj howae missinnin qutchehtamóog meechum.
E.Sa1.14.24: And the men of Israel were distressed that day: for Saul had adjured the people, saying, Cursed be the man that eateth any food until evening, that I may be avenged on mine enemies. So none of the people tasted any food.

α.Sa1.14.25 Kah wame ne ohkeit peyaog kuppahtu, kah na mo hony ohkekontu.
E.Sa1.14.25: And all they of the land came to a wood; and there was honey upon the ground.

α.Sa1.14.26 Kah missinninnu[o]g paahettit kuppahtu, kusseh hony padtippashin, qut wanne howan ponam8 wunnutcheg wutt8nut: newutche missinninnuog quehtamwog chadchekeyeuwaonk.
E.Sa1.14.26: And when the people were come into the wood, behold, the honey dropped; but no man put his hand to his mouth: for the people feared the oath.

α.Sa1.14.27 Qut Jonathan matta n8tam8 8shoh meechumuhkonuh missinninnuh nashpe chadchekeyeuwaonk, new[a]jeh summagunuk yoae méhtugk8m ne ohtag wunnutcheganit, kah ukquogkenumun ut honyCombut, kah ponam wunnutcheg wutt8nut, kah wuskesukquash pahkeneunkquottash.
E.Sa1.14.27: But Jonathan heard not when his father charged the people with the oath: wherefore he put forth the end of the rod that was in his hand, and dipped it in an honeycomb, and put his hand to his mouth; and his eyes were enlightened.

α.Sa1.14.28 Neit pasuk missinnin namp8ham kah n8wau, k8sh menuhke meechumuhkonop missinninn[ú]h nashpe chadchekeyeuwaonk, n8wop, matanumunach wosketomp noh meechuk ne teague meechum yeu kesukok, kah missinninnúog sauunnumwog.
E.Sa1.14.28: Then answered one of the people, and said, Thy father straitly charged the people with an oath, saying, Cursed be the man that eateth any food this day. And the people were faint.

α.Sa1.14.29 Neit Jonathan n8wau, n8sh wuttamehteau ohke: naum8k, k8wehquetumauunumw8, nuskesuk uttoh ane pahkeneunkquok, newutche nukqutchehtam ogguhse yeu hony.
E.Sa1.14.29: Then said Jonathan, My father hath troubled the land: see, I pray you, how mine eyes have been enlightened, because I tasted a little of this honey.

α.Sa1.14.30 Uttoh an m8cheke, tohneit nanouwe meechhettis missinninnúog yeu kesukok sequttaham8ongash wutch ummatwom8oh, nish namteauhetticheh? newutche yeuyeu sunnummatta woh anue missáno paguanituonk ut kenugke Philistiansut?
E.Sa1.14.30: How much more, if haply the people had eaten freely to day of the spoil of their enemies which they found? for had there not been now a much greater slaughter among the Philistines?

α.Sa1.14.31 Kah nag togkomáog Philistiansoh ne kesukok wutch Michmash wehque Aijalon, kah missinninnúog papaquanne sauunnumwog.
E.Sa1.14.31: And they smote the Philistines that day from Michmash to Aijalon: and the people were very faint.

α.Sa1.14.32 Kah missinninnúog waapipp8og ut sequttahham8onganit, kah neemunáog sheepsoh, kah oxinoh kah calfsoh, kah wunnushouh ut ohkekontu, kah missinninnúog ukkuksquae m8whouh.
E.Sa1.14.32: And the people flew upon the spoil, and took sheep, and oxen, and calves, and slew them on the ground: and the people did eat them with the blood.

α.Sa1.14.33 Neit unnaog Sauloh, n8waoh, missinninnúog matcheneheaog Jehovah, newutche obpadtamwog musqueheonk. Kah n8wau, kummatchesemw8: unnequanumi[e]k mishe qussuk yeu kesukok
E.Sa1.14.33: Then they told Saul, saying, Behold, the people sin against the LORD, in that they eat with the blood. And he said, Ye have transgressed: roll a great stone unto me this day.

α.Sa1.14.34 Kah Saul n8wau sepagek en missinninnúh, kah nag unnok, padtiegk nishnoh wosketomp wutoxinumoh: kah nishnoh wosketomp wutsheepsumoh, kah yeuut nush8k, kah meetsek, kah ahque matcheneheuk Jehovah oppadtamunat wusqueheonk. Kah wame missinninnúog pas8waog nishnoh wosketomp wutoxinumoh, ne nohkog, kah na wuttit nushoneau.
E.Sa1.14.34: And Saul said, Disperse yourselves among the people, and say unto them, Bring me hither every man his ox, and every man his sheep, and slay them here, and eat; and sin not against the LORD in eating with the blood. And all the people brought every man his ox with him that night, and slew them there.

α.Sa1.14.35 Kah Saul ayim altar en Jehovahut, ne mo negonne altar ne ayimauont Jehovah.
E.Sa1.14.35: And Saul built an altar unto the LORD: the same was the first altar that he built unto the LORD.

α.Sa1.14.36 Kah Saul n8wau, n8sittahwhe womsuónontuh Philistiansog nukkonáeu, & matcheheontuh nô pajeh mohtompanit, kah ahque usquehtahwhontuh wosketomp, kah n8waog ussish uttoh an tapeneaman, neit sephausuen n8wau, pas8tshadtuh yeuut en Godut.
E.Sa1.14.36: And Saul said, Let us go down after the Philistines by night, and spoil them until the morning light, and let us not leave a man of them. And they said, Do whatsoever seemeth good unto thee. Then said the priest, Let us draw near hither unto God.

α.Sa1.14.37 Kah Saul nat8tamauau Goduh, woh n8sittahwhe womseum Philistiansog? sun nag kummagununk en wunnutcheganit Israel? qut matta wunnamp8hamauuh ne kesukok.
E.Sa1.14.37: And Saul asked counsel of God, Shall I go down after the Philistines? wilt thou deliver them into the hand of Israel? But he answered him not that day.

α.Sa1.14.38 Kah Saul n8wau, pas8tshagk wame kenaau kehche missinninnúog: kah wahteau8k, kah naum8k uttiyeu matcheseonk ohtag yeu kesukok
E.Sa1.14.38: And Saul said, Draw ye near hither, all the chief of the people: and know and see wherein this sin hath been this day.

α.Sa1.14.39 Newutche neane Jehovah pomantog noh wadchanont Israeloh, tohkónogque Jonathan nunnaumon, pish wunnamuhkut nup. Qut wanne wosketompaun8 kenugke wame missinninnuut noh namp8hamauont.
E.Sa1.14.39: For, as the LORD liveth, which saveth Israel, though it be in Jonathan my son, he shall surely die. But there was not a man among all the people that answered him.

α.Sa1.14.40 Neit un[u]au wame Israeloh: yôsin8k, kah nen kah Jonathan nunnaumon ogkomáe, kah missinninnuog unnáog Sauloh, ussish uttoh àn tapeneaman.
E.Sa1.14.40: Then said he unto all Israel, Be ye on one side, and I and Jonathan my son will be on the other side. And the people said unto Saul, Do what seemeth good unto thee.

α.Sa1.14.41 Newaj unnont Saul Jehovahoh um-Manitt8moh Israel aninnumaiinnean sampwe tanohtôadtuonk. Kah Saul kah Jonathan neemunóog, qut missinninnuog pohquohhamwog.
E.Sa1.14.41: Therefore Saul said unto the LORD God of Israel, Give a perfect lot. And Saul and Jonathan were taken: but the people escaped.

α.Sa1.14.42 Kah Saul n8wau, tanohtoadtegk ut nashaue nen kah Jonathan nunnaumon, kah Jonathan némunau,
E.Sa1.14.42: And Saul said, Cast lots between me and Jonathan my son. And Jonathan was taken.

α.Sa1.14.43 Néit Saul unnau Jonathanoh, usseh toh asean, kah Jonathan wuttinnon kah n8wau qut webe nukqutchtamup honyemes nashpe uhquae sauobpunkquam ne ohtagkup nunnutcheganit, kah kusseh, mos nunnup.
E.Sa1.14.43: Then Saul said to Jonathan, Tell me what thou hast done. And Jonathan told him, and said, I did but taste a little honey with the end of the rod that was in mine hand, and, lo, I must die.

α.Sa1.14.44 Kah Saul namp8ham, God unnehitch k[â]h wonk m8cheke, newutche wunnamuhkut pish kenup, Jonathan.
E.Sa1.14.44: And Saul answered, God do so and more also: for thou shalt surely die, Jonathan.

α.Sa1.14.45 Kah missinninnúog unnaog Sauloh, sun woh Jonathan nup, noh yeu asit mishe wadchanittuonk ut Israel? God quhteihteaj: neane Jehovah pomantag, pasuk ummeesunk matta pish penushano en ohkeit: newutche weetanakauseumau Goduh yeu kesukok: nemehkuh missinninnuog pohquohwhunáog Jonathanoh, matta wunnupp8unat.
E.Sa1.14.45: And the people said unto Saul, Shall Jonathan die, who hath wrought this great salvation in Israel? God forbid: as the LORD liveth, there shall not one hair of his head fall to the ground; for he hath wrought with God this day. So the people rescued Jonathan, that he died not.

α.Sa1.14.46 Neit Saul kuhkuhqueu wutch n8sittahwhonat Philistiansog: kah Philistiansog auog nehenwonche wutayeuongan8out.
E.Sa1.14.46: Then Saul went up from following the Philistines: and the Philistines went to their own place.

α.Sa1.14.47 Nemehkuh Saul nemunum ass8tamoonk ut Israelut, kah ayeuuhkonau wame ummatwomoh waeénu, ayeuuhkónittue Moaboh, kah ayeuuhkonittue wunnaumonuh Ammonah, kah ayeuuhkonittue Edom, kah ayeuuhkonittue Zobahe ketass8tamwoh, & ay[a]uuhkonittue Philistiansoh, kah uttoh ane quinnuppeit, umm8m8sqheuh.
E.Sa1.14.47: So Saul took the kingdom over Israel, and fought against all his enemies on every side, against Moab, and against the children of Ammon, and against Edom, and against the kings of Zobah, and against the Philistines: and whithersoever he turned himself, he vexed them.

α.Sa1.14.48 Kah mohmounau ayeuhteoh & togkómau Amalekitsoh, & tomheau Israeloh wutch wunnutchegan8out nag mahmatchheoncheg.
E.Sa1.14.48: And he gathered an host, and smote the Amalekites, and delivered Israel out of the hands of them that spoiled them.

α.Sa1.14.49 Kah wunnaumonuh Saul Jonathan kah Joshua, kah Melchishua: kah 8wesuongan88ash nes8oh wuttaunoh, mohtommegit Merab, káh 8weesuonk peississit Michál.
E.Sa1.14.49: Now the sons of Saul were Jonathan, and Ishui, and Melchishua: and the names of his two daughters were these; the name of the firstborn Merab, and the name of the younger Michal:

α.Sa1.14.50 Kah 8wesuonk Saul ummittamwussoh A[b]inoam wuttaunoh Ahimaaz, kah 8weesuonk ummugquompuh ut wutayeuwehteomuh, Abner wunnaumónuh Ner, Saul 8shisoh.
E.Sa1.14.50: And the name of Saul's wife was Ahinoam, the daughter of Ahimaaz: and the name of the captain of his host was Abner, the son of Ner, Saul's uncle.

α.Sa1.14.51 Kah Kish wut8sh en Sauloh, kah Ner wut8sheu Abneroh wunnaumonuh Abiel/
E.Sa1.14.51: And Kish was the father of Saul; and Ner the father of Abner was the son of Abiel.

α.Sa1.14.52 Kah na mo menuhke ayeuwuttuo[u]k ayeuuhkone Philistiansog nisohtepomontog Saul, kah Saul nauoncheh ménuhkoshketompoh, asuh wutt8anatamwenu, wunnemunnumonuh.
E.Sa1.14.52: And there was sore war against the Philistines all the days of Saul: and when Saul saw any strong man, or any valiant man, he took him unto him.

α.Sa1.15.1 WOnk Samuel unnau Sauloh, Jehovah nutann8nuk kussesequnonat kukkehtass8tam8uneat ut ummissinninneumut, ut Israelut, newutche yeuyeu kukkeihtash wodtauatónkqussue wuttinn8wàongash Jehovah.
E.Sa1.15.1: Samuel also said unto Saul, The LORD sent me to anoint thee to be king over his people, over Israel: now therefore hearken thou unto the voice of the words of the LORD.

α.Sa1.15.2 Yeu wússin JEhovah ayeuhteaunit nummehquontam Amelech ne anheomp Israeloh, uttoh ane askuhwhonomp mayut, sohhog wutch Egypt.
E.Sa1.15.2: Thus saith the LORD of hosts, I remember that which Amalek did to Israel, how he laid wait for him in the way, when he came up from Egypt.

α.Sa1.15.3 Yeuyeu monchish togkom Amelech, kah papaquanne paguatoush wame ne ohtunk, kah ahque kushpeau, qut nush náneeswe wosketomp kah mittamwossis, mukkies kah n8nuk, oxinoh káh sheepsoh Camelsog kah ássesog.
E.Sa1.15.3: Now go and smite Amalek, and utterly destroy all that they have, and spare them not; but slay both man and woman, infant and suckling, ox and sheep, camel and ass.

α.Sa1.15.4 Káh Saul miyanau missinninnuh, kah wutogkomuh ut Telaim, neese pasuk8e muttannonganog kussuog ahkeishacheg, kah pioguqe muttannongánog kussuog Juda[e] wosketompaog.
E.Sa1.15.4: And Saul gathered the people together, and numbered them in Telaim, two hundred thousand footmen, and ten thousand men of Judah.

α.Sa1.15.5 Kah Saul peyau wutotanat Amelech kah askuhwheteaog ut 8nouhkoiyeuut.
E.Sa1.15.5: And Saul came to a city of Amalek, and laid wait in the valley.

α.Sa1.15.6 Kah Saul unnau Keneitsoh, monchek amaek, w8msék wutch kenugke Amalekitsut, ishkont n[a]g k8weeche paguanununnaoog, newutche k8womoause unnehheomwop wame wunnaumonuh Israel, kóhkuhquehettit wutch Egypt, némehkuh Kenitsog amaeog wutch kenugke Amalekitsut.
E.Sa1.15.6: And Saul said unto the Kenites, Go, depart, get you down from among the Amalekites, lest I destroy you with them: for ye shewed kindness to all the children of Israel, when they came up out of Egypt. So the Kenites departed from among the Amalekites.

α.Sa1.15.7 Kah Saul togkomau Amalekitsoh wutch Havilah nô pajeh kuppeyonat Shur ne piuhsuke Egypt.
E.Sa1.15.7: And Saul smote the Amalekites from Havilah until thou comest to Shur, that is over against Egypt.

α.Sa1.15.8 Keteae togqunau tohqunau Agagoh Amalekitse ketass8t, kah papaquanne paguanau wame missinninnuh en kenag togkodteg.
E.Sa1.15.8: And he took Agag the king of the Amalekites alive, and utterly destroyed all the people with the edge of the sword.

α.Sa1.15.9 Qut Saul kahs missinninnuog kushpaaog Agag kah waonegutcheg shepsog, kah oxinog ka[h] wushkoshimesoh, kah Lambsoh, kah w[a]me ne wanegik, káh matta papaquanne paguanouh: qut nish$noh teag nishkeneungquok, kah mó toh an tuppantog, ne papaquane paguatauuneau.
E.Sa1.15.9: But Saul and the people spared Agag, and the best of the sheep, and of the oxen, and of the fatlings, and the lambs, and all that was good, and would not utterly destroy them: but every thing that was vile and refuse, that they destroyed utterly.

α.Sa1.15.10 Neit wuttinn8waonk Jehovah peyaum8 ut Samuelut, n8wau.
E.Sa1.15.10: Then came the word of the LORD unto Samuel, saying,

α.Sa1.15.11 Nutaúskoiantam nukkehtass8tamweheonat Saul: newutche qushkeu wutch nutasukongqunat, kah matta ussu nutann8team8ongash, kah wunneuantamhikqun Samuel káh mauunitteauau Jehovah wompannu.
E.Sa1.15.11: It repenteth me that I have set up Saul to be king: for he is turned back from following me, and hath not performed my commandments. And it grieved Samuel; and he cried unto the LORD all night.

α.Sa1.15.12 Kah Samuel nompoae omohkit nogkushkauonat Saul, unnon Samuel, n8won Saul peyau Carmel, kah kusseh, wunohtau ayeuonk, kah quinnuppeu, kah w8msu en Gilgal.
E.Sa1.15.12: And when Samuel rose early to meet Saul in the morning, it was told Samuel, saying, Saul came to Carmel, and, behold, he set him up a place, and is gone about, and passed on, and gone down to Gilgal.

α.Sa1.15.13 Kah Samuel peyaonean Sauloh, kah Saul wuttinuh, wunanumukqush Jehovah, nummahche ussem wutann8team8onk Jehovah[-]
E.Sa1.15.13: And Samuel came to Saul: and Saul said unto him, Blessed be thou of the LORD: I have performed the commandment of the LORD.

α.Sa1.15.14 Kah Samuel n8wau, neit toh nauwuttam88 wunnishk8ongan8 shepsog ut néhtáuogut, kah oxinne wunnishk8aongan8 ne n8tam.
E.Sa1.15.14: And Samuel said, What meaneth then this bleating of the sheep in mine ears, and the lowing of the oxen which I hear?

α.Sa1.15.15 Kah Saul n8wau n8s8woog Amalekitsut: newutche missinninnuog wohquanumaog, wáannegunitcheh Shepsoh, kah oxinoh sephammauonat Jehovah kummánitt8m, kah ónkatogig nuppapaquane paguanomun.
E.Sa1.15.15: And Saul said, They have brought them from the Amalekites: for the people spared the best of the sheep and of the oxen, to sacrifice unto the LORD thy God; and the rest we have utterly destroyed.

α.Sa1.15.16 Neit Samuel unnau Sauloh: pahtsish kah kuttinunun ne Jehovah asit yeu nohkog kah wuttinuh ket8hkásh.
E.Sa1.15.16: Then Samuel said unto Saul, Stay, and I will tell thee what the LORD hath said to me this night. And he said unto him, Say on.

α.Sa1.15.17 Kah Samuel n8wau, peanumadt kuhhog, suñummatta kutayeuwutteop apuhkuk8uneat Israel? kah Jehovah kussesequnukup kehtass8tam8uneat ut Israel?
E.Sa1.15.17: And Samuel said, When thou wast little in thine own sight, wast thou not made the head of the tribes of Israel, and the LORD anointed thee king over Israel?

α.Sa1.15.18 Kah Jehovah kutann8nuk pomushaonganit, kah n8wop, monchish, kah papaquanne paguas matcheseaenuog Amalekitsog, kah ayeuhkaus n[ô] pajeh mohtuppaeenaoont.
E.Sa1.15.18: And the LORD sent thee on a journey, and said, Go and utterly destroy the sinners the Amalekites, and fight against them until they be consumed.

α.Sa1.15.19 Neit tohwhutch matta noswehtam8an 8wodtauatonkqussuonk Jehovah, qut k8wabe que[h]tam8 sequttahhamóonk, kah kummatchesem8 ut ánaquabit Lord.
E.Sa1.15.19: Wherefore then didst thou not obey the voice of the LORD, but didst fly upon the spoil, and didst evil in the sight of the LORD?

α.Sa1.15.20 Kah Saul unn[á]u Samuelóh, nux, nummahche n8swetam 8wadtauatonkqussuonk Jehovah, nutomp ne may Jehovah neanann8sit, kah nuppas8 Agag Amalekite ketass8t, kah nuppapaquañe paguan Amalek[i]tsog.
E.Sa1.15.20: And Saul said unto Samuel, Yea, I have obeyed the voice of the LORD, and have gone the way which the LORD sent me, and have brought Agag the king of Amalek, and have utterly destroyed the Amalekites.

α.Sa1.15.21 Qut missinninnuog nemunnumwog nawhutch sequttahhamóonk, shepsog kah oxinog, wâunégugish nish woh papaquanne machteómukish, sephamauónat Jehovah kum-manitt8m ut Gilgal.
E.Sa1.15.21: But the people took of the spoil, sheep and oxen, the chief of the things which should have been utterly destroyed, to sacrifice unto the LORD thy God in Gilgal.

α.Sa1.15.22 Kah Samuel n8wau, sun Jehovah weekontam chikohtae mag8ongash, kah sephausuongash, neane nosweetamuk 8wadtauatonkqussuonk Jehovah? kusseh, noswehtamóonk anué wunnegen onk ne sephausuonk, kah n8tamunat, onk ramse wees.
E.Sa1.15.22: And Samuel said, Hath the LORD as great delight in burnt offerings and sacrifices, as in obeying the voice of the LORD? Behold, to obey is better than sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of rams.

α.Sa1.15.23 Newutche ayeuuhkoneweséonk onatuh pauwae matcheséonk, kah cheketam8onk, onatuh mishe matcheséonk, kah nunneukontunkane waussumóonk; newutche kuppogketam wuttinnowáonk Jehovah, noh wonk kuppogkenuk, wutch keitass8tam8[ú]nneat.
E.Sa1.15.23: For rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and stubbornness is as iniquity and idolatry. Because thou hast rejected the word of the LORD, he hath also rejected thee from being king.

α.Sa1.15.24 Kah Saul unnau Samueloh, nummatchesem newutche nuppannesehtam wutann8team8onk Jehovah, kah kittinn8waongash, newutche nukqush missinninnú[u]og, kah n8swetam 8wadtautatonkqussuongan8
E.Sa1.15.24: And Saul said unto Samuel, I have sinned: for I have transgressed the commandment of the LORD, and thy words: because I feared the people, and obeyed their voice.

α.Sa1.15.25 Newutche yeuyeu k8wehquetumoush ahquontamah nummatcheseonk, kah wonk weeche qushkeyeumeh, onk woh n8wówussum Jehovah.
E.Sa1.15.25: Now therefore, I pray thee, pardon my sin, and turn again with me, that I may worship the LORD.

α.Sa1.15.26 Kah Samuel unnau Sauloh, matta k8weeche qushkeyeumun8h, newutche kuppogketam wuttinn8wáonk Jehovah, kah Jehovah kuppogkenuk wutch kukketass8tam8unneat ut Israelut.
E.Sa1.15.26: And Samuel said unto Saul, I will not return with thee: for thou hast rejected the word of the LORD, and the LORD hath rejected thee from being king over Israel.

α.Sa1.15.27 Kah Samuel quonuppekompauit ummonchenat, tohqunnumwoh uhquae ummónak, kah tannogsheau.
E.Sa1.15.27: And as Samuel turned about to go away, he laid hold upon the skirt of his mantle, and it rent.

α.Sa1.15.28 Kah Samuel wuttinuh Lord tannogkinnum Israelle ketass8tam8onk wutch kuhhogkat, [eyu] kesukok, kah wuttinnumauoh ketatteamungoh noh aneukongquean.
E.Sa1.15.28: And Samuel said unto him, The LORD hath rent the kingdom of Israel from thee this day, and hath given it to a neighbour of thine, that is better than thou.

α.Sa1.15.29 Kah wonk ummenuhkesuongan8 Israel matta pann8wómun8h, asuh aiuskoianatam8mun8h: newutche noh matta wosketomp woh wutaiuskoiánatamunat.
E.Sa1.15.29: And also the Strength of Israel will not lie nor repent: for he is not a man, that he should repent.

α.Sa1.15.30 Neit n8wau, nummatchesem, qut quehtianumeh yeuyeu k8wehquetumoush, ut anaquabhettit wuteldersum8uh nummissinninnúmog, kah ut anaquabit Israel, & wonk weeche qushkeómuh, onk n8wowussum Jehovah kum-Manitt8m.
E.Sa1.15.30: Then he said, I have sinned: yet honour me now, I pray thee, before the elders of my people, and before Israel, and turn again with me, that I may worship the LORD thy God.

α.Sa1.15.31 Neit Samuel wonk wutasukaue qushkeyeumau Sauloh, kah Saul wowussumau Jehovah.
E.Sa1.15.31: So Samuel turned again after Saul; and Saul worshipped the LORD.

α.Sa1.15.32 Neit Samuel n8wau, yeu paudtiegk Agag Amalekitse ketass8t: kah Agag wohquanumwe uppeyaonuh, kah Agag n8wau, wunnamuhkut wesogkonne nupp8onk paumusheaum8.
E.Sa1.15.32: Then said Samuel, Bring ye hither to me Agag the king of the Amalekites. And Agag came unto him delicately. And Agag said, Surely the bitterness of death is past.

α.Sa1.15.33 Kah Samuel n8wau, neane kuttogkodteg mittamwossissog matta 8neechanéinneaóont, netatuppe pish kokas wuttin mat wunneechanéin ut kenugke mittamwossisut. Kah Samuel sukquehtahwhau Agagoh anaquabit Jehovah ut Gilgal.
E.Sa1.15.33: And Samuel said, As the sword hath made women childless, so shall thy mother be childless among women. And Samuel hewed Agag in pieces before the LORD in Gilgal.

α.Sa1.15.34 Neit Samuel au Ramah, kah Saul au weekit, ut uk-Gibeahut Saul.
E.Sa1.15.34: Then Samuel went to Ramah; and Saul went up to his house to Gibeah of Saul.

α.Sa1.15.35 Kah Samuel matta wonk peyoou wunnauónat Sauloh, nô pajeh wunnuppunat, qut onch Samuel mauémau Sauloh, kah Jehovah aiuskoianam ukkehtass8tamuhkonat Sauloh ut Israelut.
E.Sa1.15.35: And Samuel came no more to see Saul until the day of his death: nevertheless Samuel mourned for Saul: and the LORD repented that he had made Saul king over Israel.

α.Sa1.16.1 KAh Jehovah unnau Samueloh, toh kuttitt8che mauem Saul, pogkenog wutch wunnánauunónat Israeloh? numwâb[á]n kutaskon pummee, kah monchish, kutann8nsh en Jesseut up-Bethlemit: newutche nukquagwoshwehtamom ketass8t, ut kenugke wunnaumonat.
E.Sa1.16.1: And the LORD said unto Samuel, How long wilt thou mourn for Saul, seeing I have rejected him from reigning over Israel? fill thine horn with oil, and go, I will send thee to Jesse the Bethlehemite: for I have provided me a king among his sons.

α.Sa1.16.2 Kah Samuel n8wau, uttoh woh nuttin na nauon? Saul n8tog woh nunnushik, kah Jehovah n8wau, neemun cowashinem, kah n8wash nunnonche sephamau Jehovah.
E.Sa1.16.2: And Samuel said, How can I go? if Saul hear it, he will kill me. And the LORD said, Take an heifer with thee, and say, I am come to sacrifice to the LORD.

α.Sa1.16.3 Kah wehkom Jesse en sephausuonganit, kah kukkuhk8tomoush toh woh asean: kah pish kussissequnnumah noh mashamauun.
E.Sa1.16.3: And call Jesse to the sacrifice, and I will shew thee what thou shalt do: and thou shalt anoint unto me him whom I name unto thee.

α.Sa1.16.4 Kah Samuel wutussen ne Jehovah an8wadt, kah peyau Bethlehem, kah otanae eldersog nunnukshaog paont, kah n8waog, k8nohteáe peyam?
E.Sa1.16.4: And Samuel did that which the LORD spake, and came to Bethlehem. And the elders of the town trembled at his coming, and said, Comest thou peaceably?

α.Sa1.16.5 Kah n8wau wunohteae, nunonche sephamau Jehovah, wunneetupánatamheuk kuhhogkaóog, kah weeche peyomegk ut sephausuonganit, kah wuneetupanatamwáheau Jesseoh, kah wuñaumonuh, kah náh 8wehkomuh en sephausuonganit.
E.Sa1.16.5: And he said, Peaceably: I am come to sacrifice unto the LORD: sanctify yourselves, and come with me to the sacrifice. And he sanctified Jesse and his sons, and called them to the sacrifice.

α.Sa1.16.6 Kah nnih, paáhettit monunneauau Eliáboh, kah n8wau, wunnamuhkut sasequnoncheh Jehovah anaquabeh appu.
E.Sa1.16.6: And it came to pass, when they were come, that he looked on Eliab, and said, Surely the LORD's anointed is before him.

α.Sa1.16.7 Qut Jehovah unnau Samueloh, ahque monunneash wuttinnussuonk, asuh wussohkonkqussuonk, newutche matta nuttapeneauoh, newutche nunnaum matta neane wosketomp ne nag*, newutche wosketomp kenompattam woskeche unnussuonk, qut Jehovah monunneam metah.
E.Sa1.16.7: But the LORD said unto Samuel, Look not on his countenance, or on the height of his stature; because I have refused him: for the LORD seeth not as man seeth; for man looketh on the outward appearance, but the LORD looketh on the heart.

α.Sa1.16.8 Neit Jesse wehkomau Abinadab, kah uppaumusháheuh anaquabit Samuel, kah n8wau, matta Jehovah yeu uppepenauuh.
E.Sa1.16.8: Then Jesse called Abinadab, and made him pass before Samuel. And he said, Neither hath the LORD chosen this.

α.Sa1.16.9 Neit Jesse paumushaheau Shammah, kah n8wau, matta Jehovah yeuh uppepena[ù]uh.
E.Sa1.16.9: Then Jesse made Shammah to pass by. And he said, Neither hath the LORD chosen this.

α.Sa1.16.10 Wonk Jesse nesausuk tahsuoh wunnaumonuh paumusháheau anaquabit Samuel, kha Samu[e]l unnau Jessehoh, Jehovah matta yeuh uppepenauuh.
E.Sa1.16.10: Again, Jesse made seven of his sons to pass before Samuel. And Samuel said unto Jesse, The LORD hath not chosen these.

α.Sa1.16.11 Kah Samuel unnau Jessehoh, yeu wutteasineau keneechanog? kah n8wau, peissit majishyeu8, kah kusseh, nanawéheau shepsoh. Kah Samuel unnau Jessehoh, ann8teamsh neemskauunach, newutche matta kinnummattappeumun nô pajeh yeu peyonat.
E.Sa1.16.11: And Samuel said unto Jesse, Are here all thy children? And he said, There remaineth yet the youngest, and, behold, he keepeth the sheep. And Samuel said unto Jesse, Send and fetch him: for we will not sit down till he come hither.

α.Sa1.16.12 Kah ann8team8, kah uppethúun8: kah noh msquannegquan, kah wonk wunnekenash wuskesukquash, kah wunnampamukqussu, & Jehovah n8wau, neepaush sesequn, newutche n$noh.
E.Sa1.16.12: And he sent, and brought him in. Now he was ruddy, and withal of a beautiful countenance, and goodly to look to. And the LORD said, Arise, anoint him: for this is he.

α.Sa1.16.13 Neit Samuel nemunum pumme ne ohtag askonut, kah wussesequnuh, ut nashauwe wematut: kah wunnushauanitteumoh Jehovah nuhkuhkauau Davidoh wutch ne kesukok kah in onkaue: neit Samuel neepau, kah au Ramah.
E.Sa1.16.13: Then Samuel took the horn of oil, and anointed him in the midst of his brethren: and the Spirit of the LORD came upon David from that day forward. So Samuel rose up, and went to Ramah.

α.Sa1.16.14 Qut wunnashauanitt8moh Jehovah[-] amaéhtauau Sauloh, kah matche nashauonguh wutch Jehovahut umm8m8sqheuh.
E.Sa1.16.14: But the Spirit of the LORD departed from Saul, and an evil spirit from the LORD troubled him.

α.Sa1.16.15 Káh wuttinneumoh Saul unnuk, kusseh yeuyeu, matche nashauonk wutch Jehovah ut k8tamehik.
E.Sa1.16.15: And Saul's servants said unto him, Behold now, an evil spirit from God troubleth thee.

α.Sa1.16.16 Nussontimom ann8nonch wuttinneumoh neg anaquabean, natinnewhonat wosket[e]mp, noh nohtumpehpequohtunk Harp, kah pish n$nih, matche nashauonk wutch Godut nuhkuhkongquean, noh pish puhpequohtou harp kah pish kukketeam.
E.Sa1.16.16: Let our lord now command thy servants, which are before thee, to seek out a man, who is a cunning player on an harp: and it shall come to pass, when the evil spirit from God is upon thee, that he shall play with his hand, and thou shalt be well.

α.Sa1.16.17 Kah Saul unnau wuttinneumoh, quagwashwehtámiegk wosketómp waunuppehpequadt, kah paudtieg.
E.Sa1.16.17: And Saul said unto his servants, Provide me now a man that can play well, and bring him to me.

α.Sa1.16.18 Neit pasuk8 wuttinneumoh namp8hamunk, kah n8wau kusseh, nunnau wunnaumonuh Jesseh, up-Bethléhemit, noh nohtompuhpequodt, kah mishe menuhkoshketomp, kah ayeuteaen, kah waantamwehteauwaenin, kah tápenéunkqussu kah Jehovah weetomau.
E.Sa1.16.18: Then answered one of the servants, and said, Behold, I have seen a son of Jesse the Bethlehemite, that is cunning in playing, and a mighty valiant man, and a man of war, and prudent in matters, and a comely person, and the LORD is with him.

α.Sa1.16.19 Newajeh Saul ann8nont ann8naenuh en Jesse$ut, kah n8wau, negonshhuash David kenaumon en nuhhogkat noh weetomont Shepsoh.
E.Sa1.16.19: Wherefore Saul sent messengers unto Jesse, and said, Send me David thy son, which is with the sheep.

α.Sa1.16.20 Kah Jesse neemunau, assoh nayeutam petukqunnegash, kah wisquie wine, kah goatsemes, kah wunnegonshhuonash en Saulut nashpe David wunnaumonuh.
E.Sa1.16.20: And Jesse took an ass laden with bread, and a bottle of wine, and a kid, and sent them by David his son unto Saul.

α.Sa1.16.21 Kah David peyaonau Sauloh, kah neepau ánaquabenit, kah ummishe womonuh kah kenunnumwoh ukkenauwameongash.
E.Sa1.16.21: And David came to Saul, and stood before him: and he loved him greatly; and he became his armourbearer.

α.Sa1.16.22 Kah Saul ann8team8 én Jesse n8wau k8wehquetumoush David neepauitch anaquabeh, newutche namehteau tapeneaadtuonk ut ánaquabeh.
E.Sa1.16.22: And Saul sent to Jesse, saying, Let David, I pray thee, stand before me; for he hath found favour in my sight.

α.Sa1.16.23 Kah n$nih, matche nashauonk wutch Gódut nohkuhkauont Sauloh, David neemunum Harp, káh puhpequau nashpe wunnutchegash; neit Saul tapheau, kah keteau, kah matchenashauonk wutamaehtauoh.
E.Sa1.16.23: And it came to pass, when the evil spirit from God was upon Saul, that David took an harp, and played with his hand: so Saul was refreshed, and was well, and the evil spirit departed from him.

α.Sa1.17.1 KAh Philistiansog miyaeog ukkenauwaméongan8ash ayeuwuttinneat, kah miyaeog ut Shochoh, ne wadchiig Judah kah tuppuksinwog nashaue Shochoh kah Azekah ut Ephézdammim.
E.Sa1.17.1: Now the Philistines gathered together their armies to battle, and were gathered together at Shochoh, which belongeth to Judah, and pitched between Shochoh and Azekah, in Ephesdammim.

α.Sa1.17.2 Kah Saul kah Israelle wosketompaog, miyaeog, kah tuppuksinwog kishke 8nouhkoiyeuut Elah, kah wunohtôog ayéuwuttuonk ayeuuhkonittue Philistansog.
E.Sa1.17.2: And Saul and the men of Israel were gathered together, and pitched by the valley of Elah, and set the battle in array against the Philistines.

α.Sa1.17.3 Kah Philistiansog neepóog wadchuut yoae, kah Israel neepóog wadchuut ogkomae, kah na mo 8nouhkoi nashaue.
E.Sa1.17.3: And the Philistines stood on a mountain on the one side, and Israel stood on a mountain on the other side: and there was a valley between them.

α.Sa1.17.4 Kah na 8ch sohhamun mishasketomp wutch wuttuppukkissinnoongan8out Philistiansog, ussowesu Goliah wutch Gath noh mo nequtta táhshishquanae sohkunkqussit, kah nequtomskinausu.
E.Sa1.17.4: And there went out a champion out of the camp of the Philistines, named Goliath, of Gath, whose height was six cubits and a span.

α.Sa1.17.5 Kah ohto muppukkukque Brasse ut uppuhkukqut, kah hogk8 mouhshagque hogk8, kah neantuhkequog hogk8onk napanna tahshe muttannunkanogkodte Brasse Shekelsash.
E.Sa1.17.5: And he had an helmet of brass upon his head, and he was armed with a coat of mail; and the weight of the coat was five thousand shekels of brass.

α.Sa1.17.6 Kah brasse metasash ohtaash wuhkontut, kah brasse muttukkit ahhohtag ahtau wuttugkit.
E.Sa1.17.6: And he had greaves of brass upon his legs, and a target of brass between his shoulders.

α.Sa1.17.7 Kah ukqunnúhtugque anwohou, onatuh m8nakinnéhteaénin upbeamut, kah an kenag ukqunontug, unnuttuhkéquan nequtta tahshe pasuk8e moúhshogque sheklesash; kah pasuk8 negonuhkonk kenunnumwoh ogqunneg.
E.Sa1.17.7: And the staff of his spear was like a weaver's beam; and his spear's head weighed six hundred shekels of iron: and one bearing a shield went before him.

α.Sa1.17.8 Kah neepau, kah mishont8wau en ukkenauwameonganit Israel, kah wuttinuh, tohwutch peyôog, wunohtauunat ayeuwuttúonk? sunnummatta nen Philistine, kah kenaau wuttinneumuh Saul? pepenok wosketomp, káh w8mussue peyaausitch.
E.Sa1.17.8: And he stood and cried unto the armies of Israel, and said unto them, Why are ye come out to set your battle in array? am not I a Philistine, and ye servants to Saul? choose you a man for you, and let him come down to me.

α.Sa1.17.9 Tapenuk nutáyeuuhkonukqunat kah nushit, neit pish neenawun kittinneum8ôog: qut sohkauog neit pish kenaau nuttinneumunonog, kah k8tinninneumuhkiimun.
E.Sa1.17.9: If he be able to fight with me, and to kill me, then will we be your servants: but if I prevail against him, and kill him, then shall ye be our servants, and serve us.

α.Sa1.17.10 Kah Philistian n8wau, nummishonóntam Israelle kenauwameongash yeush kesukok, aninnumiek wosketomp onk woh nuttayeuwuttinnean.
E.Sa1.17.10: And the Philistine said, I defy the armies of Israel this day; give me a man, that we may fight together.

α.Sa1.17.11 Saul kah wame Israel n8tamóhettit yeush ukkutt8wongash Philistan, chepshaog kah mishe wabesuog.
E.Sa1.17.11: When Saul and all Israel heard those words of the Philistine, they were dismayed, and greatly afraid.

α.Sa1.17.12 Onk David wunnaumonuh noh wut-Ephrathite wutch Bethlem-judah, noh ás8wésit Jesse, kah shwosuk tahs88oh wunnaumonuh: kah wosketomp ogquanumukqussu kechisut, pomontog Saul.
E.Sa1.17.12: Now David was the son of that Ephrathite of Bethlehemjudah, whose name was Jesse; and he had eight sons: and the man went among men for an old man in the days of Saul.

α.Sa1.17.13 Kah nishnoh mohtommegheoncheh Jesse moncheog kah asuhkauáog Sauloh, en áyeuwuttinneat: & 8wesuongan88ash shuoh wunnaumonuh neg aoncheg ayeuwuttinneat, Eliab mohtommegit, kah nahohtoeu Abinnadab, kah nashuit Shammah.
E.Sa1.17.13: And the three eldest sons of Jesse went and followed Saul to the battle: and the names of his three sons that went to the battle were Eliab the firstborn, and next unto him Abinadab, and the third Shammah.

α.Sa1.17.14 Kah David peississu, kah nishuog mohtommegitcheg asuhkauáog Sauloh.
E.Sa1.17.14: And David was the youngest: and the three eldest followed Saul.

α.Sa1.17.15 Qut David monchu, kah qushkeu wutch Saulut, assamonat 8shoh wutsheepsumoh ut Bethlehem.
E.Sa1.17.15: But David went and returned from Saul to feed his father's sheep at Bethlehem.

α.Sa1.17.16 Kah Philistian pas8tshau mohtompanáe kah wunonkquáe, & neepauwéheau wuhhogkuh yauunchadtikqunne.
E.Sa1.17.16: And the Philistine drew near morning and evening, and presented himself forty days.

α.Sa1.17.17 Kah Jesse unnau Davidoh wunnaumonuh, nemunush yeuyeu wutch kematog, ephahhe yeush appuminneónash, kah yeush piogquodtash petukqunnegash, kah ussisaush tuppuksinn8wonganit kematut.
E.Sa1.17.17: And Jesse said unto David his son, Take now for thy brethren an ephah of this parched corn, and these ten loaves, and run to the camp of thy brethren;

α.Sa1.17.18 Kah kenush yeush piogquodtash cheesash, en muttannongane ummummugquompom8out, kah monunneau kematog uttoh ánihettit, kah attumunush ukkinohtôsuongan8.
E.Sa1.17.18: And carry these ten cheeses unto the captain of their thousand, and look how thy brethren fare, and take their pledge.

α.Sa1.17.19 Kah Saul, kah nag, kah wame Israelle wosketompaog, appuog Elahhe 8nouhkoiyeuut, ayeuuhkononat Philistansoh.
E.Sa1.17.19: Now Saul, and they, and all the men of Israel, were in the valley of Elah, fighting with the Philistines.

α.Sa1.17.20 Kah David nompoáe neepau, kah nukkonau shepsoh noh nanauwéheont, kah neemunum, kah au ne Jesse anann8nont, kah peyau tuppuksinnowonganit, nean ayeuteaog sohhomwehettit ayuhkonat, kah mishont8waog ut ayeuwuttinneat,
E.Sa1.17.20: And David rose up early in the morning, and left the sheep with a keeper, and took, and went, as Jesse had commanded him; and he came to the trench, as the host was going forth to the fight, and shouted for the battle.

α.Sa1.17.21 Newutche Israel & Philistiansog mahche wunohtoog ayeuwuttúonk, papapiuhsuke kenauwameongash.
E.Sa1.17.21: For Israel and the Philistines had put the battle in array, army against army.

α.Sa1.17.22 Kah David ponum ne kôunuk ut wunnutchegan8out noh nanaumeechimadt kah ussishau kenauwameonganit, kah wonkumau wematuh.
E.Sa1.17.22: And David left his carriage in the hand of the keeper of the carriage, and ran into the army, and came and saluted his brethren.

α.Sa1.17.23 Kah keket8hkauont, kusseh mishasketomp kuhkuhqueu (noh Philistian wutch Gath, ussowesu Goliah) wutch ukkenauwameonk Philistiansog, kah wussiñeash nish nan kutt8wongash: kah David n8tam.
E.Sa1.17.23: And as he talked with them, behold, there came up the champion, the Philistine of Gath, Goliath by name, out of the armies of the Philistines, and spake according to the same words: and David heard them.

α.Sa1.17.24 Kah wame Israele wosketompaog naushettit 8semoteaóuh, kah m8cheke wabesuog:
E.Sa1.17.24: And all the men of Israel, when they saw the man, fled from him, and were sore afraid.

α.Sa1.17.25 Kah Israele wosketompaog n8waog, kenâau yeuoh wosketomp noh kohkukquit? wunnamuhkut kuhkuhqueu ummishananumónat Israel, kah wosketomp noh nashont, ketass8t pish wuttinnumauoh mishe weenauwetuonk, kah pish wuttinnumauoh wuttaunoh, kah 8shoh week pish nanauweyeu8 ut Israel.
E.Sa1.17.25: And the men of Israel said, Have ye seen this man that is come up?  surely to defy Israel is he come up: and it shall be, that the man who killeth him, the king will enrich him with great riches, and will give him his daughter, and make his father's house free in Israel.

α.Sa1.17.26 Kah David ken8nau wosketompuh neh na apinitcheh, n8wau, toh pish unnéheau wosketomp, noh nashont Philistian, kah noh amaunuk yeu kekontuonk wutch Israél? newutche howan yeuoh mat quoshqusausue Philistian, noh woh misha[n]antog ukkenauwameongash pomantamóe Manit?
E.Sa1.17.26: And David spake to the men that stood by him, saying, What shall be done to the man that killeth this Philistine, and taketh away the reproach from Israel? for who is this uncircumcised Philistine, that he should defy the armies of the living God?

α.Sa1.17.27 Kah missinninnúog yeu wuttin namp8hamauóneau n8waog, ne pish unneheau wosketomp noh nashont.
E.Sa1.17.27: And the people answered him after this manner, saying, So shall it be done to the man that killeth him.

α.Sa1.17.28 Eliab mohtommeginitcheh wematoh, n8tam keket8hkauont wosketompuh, kah Eliab ummusquanittam8onk ayeuuhkonittue nashquneau en David, kah n8wau, tohwutch yeu peyoan? kah howan kenukkodtumau yeuh ogguhsuog shepsog ut touohkomukqut? n8wahteoh kuppehtuanumôonk, kah qunuhqui kuttah, newutche k8w8mus, naumunat ayeuwuttuonk.
E.Sa1.17.28: And Eliab his eldest brother heard when he spake unto the men; and Eliab's anger was kindled against David, and he said, Why camest thou down hither? and with whom hast thou left those few sheep in the wilderness? I know thy pride, and the naughtiness of thine heart; for thou art come down that thou mightest see the battle.

α.Sa1.17.29 Kah David n8wau, toh yeuyeu nutussem? sunnummatta teaguas wutch?
E.Sa1.17.29: And David said, What have I now done? Is there not a cause?

α.Sa1.17.30 Kah quin[u]uppekompau wutche nahog en onkátoge, kah ne wonk wussin, kah wonk missinninnuog wunnamp8hamauoh neane negonne.
E.Sa1.17.30: And he turned from him toward another, and spake after the same manner: and the people answered him again after the former manner.

α.Sa1.17.31 Kah n8tamwehettit kutt8wongash nish David an8wacheh, wussinneaóash ut anaquabit Saul, kah wunnegont8ôn[u]h.
E.Sa1.17.31: And when the words were heard which David spake, they rehearsed them before Saul: and he sent for him.

α.Sa1.17.32 Kah David unnau Sauloh, ahque howan wuttah chepshonch newutche noh, kittinneum nén mos nummonchem, kah nutayeuuhkon Philistine.
E.Sa1.17.32: And David said to Saul, Let no man's heart fail because of him; thy servant will go and fight with this Philistine.

α.Sa1.17.33 Kah Saul unnau Davidoh, matta kuttapenum8 ayeuuhkonónat Philistiane, newutche ken wuskenes, kah noh ayeuteaen wutch wuskenuunneat.
E.Sa1.17.33: And Saul said to David, Thou art not able to go against this Philistine to fight with him: for thou art but a youth, and he a man of war from his youth.

α.Sa1.17.34 Kah David unnau Sauloh, kittinneum nanawéheau 8shoh wutshepsumoh, kah na uppeyon qunnónou, kah masq, kah neemunau lamboh wutch flockut.
E.Sa1.17.34: And David said unto Saul, Thy servant kept his father's sheep, and there came a lion, and a bear, and took a lamb out of the flock:

α.Sa1.17.35 Kah nutasukau, kah nuttogkom, kah nuppogquohwhun wutch wutt8nut, kah ayeuuhkausit nutannun 8weeshitt8nit, kah nuttogkom, kah nunnush.
E.Sa1.17.35: And I went out after him, and smote him, and delivered it out of his mouth: and when he arose against me, I caught him by his beard, and smote him, and slew him.

α.Sa1.17.36 Kittinneum naneeswe nushau qunnonouoh kah masquoh, kah yeuoh mat quoshqusausue Philistiane pish onatuh88 pasuk8h nah, newutche mishanantog ukkenauwameongash pomantamwe God.
E.Sa1.17.36: Thy servant slew both the lion and the bear: and this uncircumcised Philistine shall be as one of them, seeing he hath defied the armies of the living God.

α.Sa1.17.37 Kah wonk David n8wau, Jehovah noh tomhik8 wutch qunnonou wunnutcheganat, kah wutch wunnutcheg masq noh mos nuttomhik wutch wunnutcheg masq noh mos nuttomhik wutch wunnutcheganit yeuoh Philistian. Kah Saul unnau Davidoh monchish, kah Jehovah wetomukqush
E.Sa1.17.37: David said moreover, The LORD that delivered me out of the paw of the lion, and out of the paw of the bear, he will deliver me out of the hand of this Philistine. And Saul said unto David, Go, and the LORD be with thee.

α.Sa1.17.38 Kah Saul kenauwameheuh Davidoh ukkenauwameongash kah ponam, brasse muhpuhkukqut ahhohtag ut uppuhkukqut, kah wonk wuthogqueuh m8uhshogqhogk8.
E.Sa1.17.38: And Saul armed David with his armour, and he put an helmet of brass upon his head; also he armed him with a coat of mail.

α.Sa1.17.39 Kah David wunnohtou wuttogkodteg woskeche ukkenauwameonganit, kah quogquadche monchu, newutché asquam ukqutchteauun, kah David unnau Sauloh, matta woh yeush nashpe nummoncheinash? newutche asquam nukqutchteauunash, kah David wutamaunumunash.
E.Sa1.17.39: And David girded his sword upon his armour, and he assayed to go; for he had not proved it. And David said unto Saul, I cannot go with these; for I have not proved them. And David put them off him.

α.Sa1.17.40 Kah nemunum wutanwohhou ut wunnutcheganit, kah pepenam napanna tahshin[á]sh m8se qussukquanesash wutch sepuissut kah ponamunásh nanaushepsae petunganit, kah wuss8wompagun[e]heg ut wunnutcheganit, kah pas8sukauau Philistine.
E.Sa1.17.40: And he took his staff in his hand, and chose him five smooth stones out of the brook, and put them in a shepherd's bag which he had, even in a scrip; and his sling was in his hand: and he drew near to the Philistine.

α.Sa1.17.41 Kah Philistine kitchittoushau, kah pas8sukauau Davidoh, kah wosketomp noh kounuk, ogqunneg wunnegonukauoh.
E.Sa1.17.41: And the Philistine came on and drew near unto David; and the man that bare the shield went before him.

α.Sa1.17.42 Kah Philistine n8tauwompit, kah Davidoh ummishananumuh, newutche wuskenesu, [p]ah musquanequau, kah wunnetu.
E.Sa1.17.42: And when the Philistine looked about, and saw David, he disdained him: for he was but a youth, and ruddy, and of a fair countenance.

α.Sa1.17.43 Kah Philistine unnau Davidoh, su[nn]en nutanum8 waj peyaausean n[á]shpe anwohh8unash: Kah Philistine matanumau Davidoh nashpe ummánitt8muh.
E.Sa1.17.43: And the Philistine said unto David, Am I a dog, that thou comest to me with staves? And the Philistine cursed David by his gods.

α.Sa1.17.44 Kah Philistine unnau Davidoh, peyaauseh, kah nutassam k8weyaus mamatchekesukque puppinshasog, kah ohteakonne puppinashimwog.
E.Sa1.17.44: And the Philistine said to David, Come to me, and I will give thy flesh unto the fowls of the air, and to the beasts of the field.

α.Sa1.17.45 Neit David unnau Philistinoh, kuppeyaauseh nashpe togkodteg, kah qunnuhtug, kah ogqunneg, qut nen kenashpe peyaau[n]sh 8wesuonk Jehovah ayeuhteaanit, ummánitt[8]m8uh Isráelle kenauwameongash nish mishanantamonish.
E.Sa1.17.45: Then said David to the Philistine, Thou comest to me with a sword, and with a spear, and with a shield: but I come to thee in the name of the LORD of hosts, the God of the armies of Israel, whom thou hast defied.

α.Sa1.17.46 Yeu kesukok Jehovah mag8 kuhhog ut nunnutcheganit, kah nen kuttogkomsh, kah kenemunnumaush kuppuhkuk, kah nutassam wuhhogkauh Philistianse kenauwameonk, yeu kesukok, mamatchekesukque puppinshasut kah ohteuhkone puppinashimwog, [ò]nk woh wame ohke wahteoh, na Godeu8 ut Israel.
E.Sa1.17.46: This day will the LORD deliver thee into mine hand; and I will smite thee, and take thine head from thee; and I will give the carcases of the host of the Philistines this day unto the fowls of the air, and to the wild beasts of the earth; that all the earth may know that there is a God in Israel.

α.Sa1.17.47 Kah wame mukkineunk pish wahteou matta nashpe tomhuwoou togkodteg, kah qunnuhtug (newutche áyeuwuttuonk Jehovah wuttaihe) kah noh pish magou kuhhogkaoásh en nunnutcheg anunnonut.
E.Sa1.17.47: And all this assembly shall know that the LORD saveth not with sword and spear: for the battle is the LORD's, and he will give you into our hands.

α.Sa1.17.48 Kah n$nih Philistine neepauit, kah paont, kah pas8tshádt wunnogskauonat Davidoh, David kenupshau kah ussishau nogque kenauwameonganit wunnogskauonat Philistianoh.
E.Sa1.17.48: And it came to pass, when the Philistine arose, and came, and drew nigh to meet David, that David hastened, and ran toward the army to meet the Philistine.

α.Sa1.17.49 Kah David ponam wunnutcheg uppetunkanit kah ne 8tnumun qussuk, kah wuss8wompagki[ni]ahhamun, kah wutannutahwhoh Philistianoh wuskodtukqut, kah qussuk qutausheau en wuskodtukqut, kah penushadtam wuskesuk en ohkekontu.
E.Sa1.17.49: And David put his hand in his bag, and took thence a stone, and slang it, and smote the Philistine in his forehead, that the stone sunk into his forehead; and he fell upon his face to the earth.

α.Sa1.17.50 Nemehkuh David sohkauau Philistiansoh nashpe wuss8wompagunehhég, kah nashpe qussuk kah togkomau Philistianoh kah wunnushoh qut matta ohtano togkodteg wunnutcheganit David.
E.Sa1.17.50: So David prevailed over the Philistine with a sling and with a stone, and smote the Philistine, and slew him; but there was no sword in the hand of David.

α.Sa1.17.51 Newajeh David quogqueit, kah quesukkompau Philistine, kah wunnemunumau wuttogkodteg kah ukkodtinnumun wutch pechehquogkunkanit, kah wunnushoh, kah wuttummussummau uppuhkuk ne$nashpe, kah Philistiansog nauahettit um̃ishasketompom8oh nupp8i, wussem8og.
E.Sa1.17.51: Therefore David ran, and stood upon the Philistine, and took his sword, and drew it out of the sheath thereof, and slew him, and cut off his head therewith. And when the Philistines saw their champion was dead, they fled.

α.Sa1.17.52 Kah Israelle, kah Judae wosketompaog nepoog, kah misshont8waog, kah n8suttahwhaog Philistiansoh, nô pajeh peyonat 8nouhkoiyeuut, kah en Ekronne squontamut: kah n8chumwehtahwháog Philistiansoh penushaog ut mayut āshik Shaaraim wehque G[á]thm kah wehque Ekron.
E.Sa1.17.52: And the men of Israel and of Judah arose, and shouted, and pursued the Philistines, until thou come to the valley, and to the gates of Ekron. And the wounded of the Philistines fell down by the way to Shaaraim, even unto Gath, and unto Ekron.

α.Sa1.17.53 Kah wunnaumonuh Israel qushkeuh wutch n8suttahwhonat Philistiansog, kah sequttahhamwog wek8oash.
E.Sa1.17.53: And the children of Israel returned from chasing after the Philistines, and they spoiled their tents.

α.Sa1.17.54 Kah David nemunum uppuhkuk Philistine, k[a]h uppaudtauun Jerusalem, qut ukkesauwameonk upponamauoh wekit.
E.Sa1.17.54: And David took the head of the Philistine, and brought it to Jerusalem; but he put his armour in his tent.

α.Sa1.17.55 Kah Saul nag* David ay[e]uuhkonittue sohweht[a]uau Philistianoh, unnau Abneroh ummugquompuh ut wutayeuwehteomut, Abnér, howan yeuh wuskenuh wu[u]naumonuh; kah Abner n8wau, pomantog kukketeahogkoú, woi ketass8t mat n8wauwoh.
E.Sa1.17.55: And when Saul saw David go forth against the Philistine, he said unto Abner, the captain of the host, Abner, whose son is this youth? And Abner said, As thy soul liveth, O king, I cannot tell.

α.Sa1.17.56 Kat ketass8t n8wau, nat8tomwehteash howan yeuh wuskenuh wunnaumonuh.
E.Sa1.17.56: And the king said, Enquire thou whose son the stripling is.

α.Sa1.17.57 Kah David quoshkit wutch wunnushonat Philistine, Abener wunnemunuh, kah uppas8oh anaquabit Saul, nashpe Philistine uppuhkuk wunnutcheganit.
E.Sa1.17.57: And as David returned from the slaughter of the Philistine, Abner took him, and brought him before Saul with the head of the Philistine in his hand.

α.Sa1.17.58 Kah Saul wuttinuh, howan ken wuskénes, wunnaumonuh? kah David namp8ham, nen wunnaumonuh kitt[t]nneum Jesse up-Bethlemit.
E.Sa1.17.58: And Saul said to him, Whose son art thou, thou young man? And David answered, I am the son of thy servant Jesse the Bethlehemite.

α.Sa1.18.1 KAH n$nih, mahche ken8nont Sauloh, Jon[à]than ukketeahogkounoh mosogqueuh ukketeahogkounit David, kah Jonathan wuttinn8womonuh neane nehenwonche ukketeahogkounit.
E.Sa1.18.1: And it came to pass, when he had made an end of speaking unto Saul, that the soul of Jonathan was knit with the soul of David, and Jonathan loved him as his own soul.

α.Sa1.18.2 Kah Saul wunnemunuh ne kesukok, kah matta wonk wuttinanumoh monchenat 8shoh wekit.
E.Sa1.18.2: And Saul took him that day, and would let him go no more home to his father's house.

α.Sa1.18.3 Neit Jonathan kah David wunn8waog, newutche wuttinn8womonuh neane nehenwonché ukketeahogkounoh.
E.Sa1.18.3: Then Jonathan and David made a covenant, because he loved him as his own soul.

α.Sa1.18.4 Kah Jonathan pohshku uppetwoshqushaonk, kah wuttinnumauun Davidoh, kah wuthogk8unash, kah wonk wuttogkodteg kah wutohtompeh, kah upputtukquobpus.
E.Sa1.18.4: And Jonathan stripped himself of the robe that was upon him, and gave it to David, and his garments, even to his sword, and to his bow, and to his girdle.

α.Sa1.18.5 Kah David sohham en uttoh anann8nont Saul, káh waantamwe ussu, kah wunnanawunnumwaheuh ayeuhteaenuut, kah tapeneauau ut anaquabhettit wame missinninnuog, kah wonk anaquabhettit Saul wuttinnéumoh.
E.Sa1.18.5: And David went out whithersoever Saul sent him, and behaved himself wisely: and Saul set him over the men of war, and he was accepted in the sight of all the people, and also in the sight of Saul's servants.

α.Sa1.18.6 Kah n$nih, quashkehettit, David quashkeit wutch paguanonut Philistiansog, mittumwussissog sohhamwog wutch wame otanaout Israel, ket8hámòog pummukoog, nogkushkauonat ketass8t Saule nashpe tabre[l]sash, kah nashpe wekontamoonk, kah nashpe pequaongane auwohteaongash.
E.Sa1.18.6: And it came to pass as they came, when David was returned from the slaughter of the Philistine, that the women came out of all cities of Israel, singing and dancing, to meet king Saul, with tabrets, with joy, and with instruments of musick.

α.Sa1.18.7 Kah mittamwussissog namp8hamóadtuog papequahettit, kah n8waog, Saul nushau muttannonganog kussuog, kah David piogque muttannonganog kussuog.
E.Sa1.18.7: And the women answered one another as they played, and said, Saul hath slain his thousands, and David his ten thousands.

α.Sa1.18.8 Kah Saul mishe musquantam, káh nen8waonk umm8skumukqun, kah n8wau, missohhamauáog Davidoh piogque muttannonganog kussuog, kah nen nummishamunkquog muttannunganog kussuog, kah teagwas wonk woh ohtóou webe keetass8tamóonk?
E.Sa1.18.8: And Saul was very wroth, and the saying displeased him; and he said, They have ascribed unto David ten thousands, and to me they have ascribed but thousands: and what can he have more but the kingdom?

α.Sa1.18.9 Kah Saul kuhkinneásu Davidoh wutch ne kesukok kah en ongkoue.
E.Sa1.18.9: And Saul eyed David from that day and forward.

α.Sa1.18.10 Kah n$nih mohtompog, matche nashauonk wutch Godut nuhkuhkauau Sauloh, kah quoshodtum ut nôekommuk: kah David puhpequau nashpe wunnutcheg, neane negonne: kah na mo qunuhtuk ut wunnutcheganit Saul.
E.Sa1.18.10: And it came to pass on the morrow, that the evil spirit from God came upon Saul, and he prophesied in the midst of the house: and David played with his hand, as at other times: and there was a javelin in Saul's hand.

α.Sa1.18.11 Kah Sául tádteau qunuhtuk[,] newutche n8wau, ne$nashpe nuttogkom David en supponkkomukqut: kah David neesit amaushau wutch anaquabenit. 
E.Sa1.18.11: And Saul cast the javelin; for he said, I will smite David even to the wall with it. And David avoided out of his presence twice.

α.Sa1.18.12 Kah Saul wabesuonea[u] Davidoh, newutche Jehovah 8weetomuh, kah amai wutch Saul$ut.
E.Sa1.18.12: And Saul was afraid of David, because the LORD was with him, and was departed from Saul.

α.Sa1.18.13 Newajeh Saul, ontahshont Davidoh wutch wuhhogkat, kah ummummugquompaheuh ut nequt muttannonganog kussuut, kah sohham, kah petutteau anaquabhettit missinninnuog.
E.Sa1.18.13: Therefore Saul removed him from him, and made him his captain over a thousand; and he went out and came in before the people.

α.Sa1.18.14 Kah David waantamweussu en wame ummayit, kah Jéhovah weetomuh,
E.Sa1.18.14: And David behaved himself wisely in all his ways; and the LORD was with him.

α.Sa1.18.15 Newajeh Saul nauont waantamweussu ukqushuh.
E.Sa1.18.15: Wherefore when Saul saw that he behaved himself very wisely, he was afraid of him.

α.Sa1.18.16 Qut wame Israel kah Judah wómonaog Davidoh newutch sohham kah petutteau ut anaquabhettit.
E.Sa1.18.16: But all Israel and Judah loved David, because he went out and came in before them.

α.Sa1.18.17 Kah S[á]ul unnau Davidoh, kusseh mohtómmegit nuttaunes, kuttinnumauunun k8mittamwussissinneat: qut webe wutt8anatamweyeuush wutche néen, kah ayeuhteaásh wutayeuwehteaongash Jehovah, newutche Saul n8wau, ahque nunnutch[e]g nuhkuhkongqutch: qut wunnutchegan8 Philstiansog nuhkuhkongqutch.
E.Sa1.18.17: And Saul said to David, Behold my elder daughter Merab, her will I give thee to wife: only be thou valiant for me, and fight the LORD's battles. For Saul said, Let not mine hand be upon him, but let the hand of the Philistines be upon him.

α.Sa1.18.18 Kah David unn[a]u Sauloh, howan nen? kah teaguas nuppomantamóonk, asuh n8sh wutteashiyeu8onk ut Israel, onk woh nen 8sinumonat ketass8t?
E.Sa1.18.18: And David said unto Saul, Who am I? and what is my life, or my father's family in Israel, that I should be son in law to the king?

α.Sa1.18.19 Qut n$nih, ne ahquompak, Merab wuttaunoh Saul wuh anumauut David aninnumauonuh Adriel um-Meholothit 8mittamwussissinneat.
E.Sa1.18.19: But it came to pass at the time when Merab Saul's daughter should have been given to David, that she was given unto Adriel the Meholathite to wife.

α.Sa1.18.20 Kah Michal wuttaunoh Saul womonau Davidoh, kah wuttinnoneau Sauloh, kah ne 8nantamhukqun.
E.Sa1.18.20: And Michal Saul's daughter loved David: and they told Saul, and the thing pleased him.

α.Sa1.18.21 Kah Saul n8wau, nuttinnumauónuh onk woh uppehannu8oh ut wuhhogkat, kah wunnutchegan8 Philistiansog woh ayeuuhkonuk, newajeh Saul unnont Davidoh, yeu kesukok pish ken waseenumukqueh pasuk n[e]g nees8utcheg.
E.Sa1.18.21: And Saul said, I will give him her, that she may be a snare to him, and that the hand of the Philistines may be against him. Wherefore Saul said to David, Thou shalt this day be my son in law in the one of the twain.

α.Sa1.18.22 Kah Saul ann8nau wuttinneumoh, keme keket8kunk David, kah n8wak, kusseh, ketass8t kuttapeneunk, kah wame wuttinneumoh k8womonuk: newutche yeuyeu wussénum ketass8t,
E.Sa1.18.22: And Saul commanded his servants, saying, Commune with David secretly, and say, Behold, the king hath delight in thee, and all his servants love thee: now therefore be the king's son in law.

α.Sa1.18.23 Kah wuttinneumoh Saul wussinneaóash yeush kutt8wongash ut wehtauogkut David: kah David n8wau, sun kutogquontamuneau peasik wussenumónat ketass8t, nen nummatcheit, kah nuppeanumukqus.
E.Sa1.18.23: And Saul's servants spake those words in the ears of David. And David said, Seemeth it to you a light thing to be a king's son in law, seeing that I am a poor man, and lightly esteemed?

α.Sa1.18.24 Kah wuttinneumoh Saul wuttukqun, n8waog, yeu wussin David.
E.Sa1.18.24: And the servants of Saul told him, saying, On this manner spake David.

α.Sa1.18.25 Kah Saul n8wau, yeu pish kuttinnonneau David, ketass8t matta kodtantam8 wusseentuompeash, qut nequt pasuk8e Philistianse uhquaiyeuash, ann8tauónat ketass8t ummatwomoh. Qut Saul unnantam ukkeepshoáhheónat Davidoh nashpe wunnutchegan8 Philistiansog.
E.Sa1.18.25: And Saul said, Thus shall ye say to David, The king desireth not any dowry, but an hundred foreskins of the Philistines, to be avenged of the king's enemies. But Saul thought to make David fall by the hand of the Philistines.

α.Sa1.18.26 Kah wuttinneumunneunk unnahettit Davidoh yeush kutt8wongash, 8nantamohukqun David, 8sénumónat ketass8tamwoh kah kesukodtash asquam numwohtanoash.
E.Sa1.18.26: And when his servants told David these words, it pleased David well to be the king's son in law: and the days were not expired.

α.Sa1.18.27 Newajeh David neepauit, nagum, kah wuttinneumoh, kah nushaog Philistiansoh neese pasuk88oh wosketompoh, kah D[á]vid pas8au 8quaiyeu woduhquabeyeuash, kah wuttinnumauonaoash ketass8tamwoh kohchuhkeyeu8ash, onk woh ketass8tamwoh wessenumonat, kah Saul wuttinumauuh Michaloh wuttaunoh 8mittamwossissinneat.
E.Sa1.18.27: Wherefore David arose and went, he and his men, and slew of the Philistines two hundred men; and David brought their foreskins, and they gave them in full tale to the king, that he might be the king's son in law. And Saul gave him Michal his daughter to wife.

α.Sa1.18.28 Kah Saul nam kah wahteo Jehovah wetomau Davidoh, kah Michal Saul wuttaunoh 8womonuh.
E.Sa1.18.28: And Saul saw and knew that the LORD was with David, and that Michal Saul's daughter loved him.

α.Sa1.18.29 Kah Saul nano m8cheke wabesuôneau Davidoh, kah Saul nagwutteau matwomu Davidoh.
E.Sa1.18.29: And Saul was yet the more afraid of David; and Saul became David's enemy continually.

α.Sa1.18.30 Neit Philistianse sontimóog sohhamwog: kah nnih mahche sohhamwehettit, David anue waantamwe ussu, onk wame wuttinneumoh Saul, newajeh 8wesuonk wutt8ânumukquodt.
E.Sa1.18.30: Then the princes of the Philistines went forth: and it came to pass, after they went forth, that David behaved himself more wisely than all the servants of Saul; so that his name was much set by.

α.Sa1.19.1 KAh Saul ken8nau Jonathanoh wunnaumonuh, kah wame wuttinneumoh, woh wu[nn]ushonaóont Davidoh.
E.Sa1.19.1: And Saul spake to Jonathan his son, and to all his servants, that they should kill David.

α.Sa1.19.2 Qut Jonathan wunnaumonuh Saul m[8]cheke womonau Davidoh, kah Jonathan wuttinnon Davidoh, n8wau, Saul n8sh kukkod nushúk, newutche k8wehquetumoush nunnukqussish n[ô] pajeh mohtompanit, kah apsh [a]ssompamukquodtut, kah puttogquish.
E.Sa1.19.2: But Jonathan Saul's son delighted much in David: and Jonathan told David, saying, Saul my father seeketh to kill thee: now therefore, I pray thee, take heed to thyself until the morning, and abide in a secret place, and hide thyself:

α.Sa1.19.3 Kah nen pish nussohham, kah pish nukkehchekompau n8shit ohteakonit, uttoh apean, kah pish nukkeket8kau n8sh papaume ken, kah uttoh an naum, ne kittinunun.
E.Sa1.19.3: And I will go out and stand beside my father in the field where thou art, and I will commune with my father of thee; and what I see, that I will tell thee.

α.Sa1.19.4 Kah Jonathan wunneken8nau Davidoh, en Saulut 8shoh, kah wuttinuh, ketass8t [á]hque matchenéheonch wuttinneumoh Davidoh; newutche matta kummatchenéhik8, kah newutche kuttinhukk8ongash ahche wunnegenash.
E.Sa1.19.4: And Jonathan spake good of David unto Saul his father, and said unto him, Let not the king sin against his servant, against David; because he hath not sinned against thee, and because his works have been to thee-ward very good:

α.Sa1.19.5 Newutche pondam uppomantam[ô]onk wunnutcheganit, kah nushau Philistianoh, kah Lord ussu mishe wadchanuáonk wutch wame Israel, kenaumunah, kah k8wekontamup, kah tohwutch matchenehteauan mat matcheseae musqueheonk, nushonat David, mo teag wutch.
E.Sa1.19.5: For he did put his life in his hand, and slew the Philistine, and the LORD wrought a great salvation for all Israel: thou sawest it, and didst rejoice: wherefore then wilt thou sin against innocent blood, to slay David without a cause?

α.Sa1.19.6 Kah Saul n8tam 8wadtauatonkqussuonk Jonathan, kah Saul chadchekeyeuah, newane Jehovah pomantog, matta pish nushau.
E.Sa1.19.6: And Saul hearkened unto the voice of Jonathan: and Saul sware, As the LORD liveth, he shall not be slain.

α.Sa1.19.7 Kah Jonathan wehkomau Davidoh, kah Jonathan wuttinonash wame yeush, kah Jonathan pas8oh Davidoh Saulút, kah appú anaquabit neáne negonne.
E.Sa1.19.7: And Jonathan called David, and Jonathan shewed him all those things. And Jonathan brought David to Saul, and he was in his presence, as in times past.

α.Sa1.19.8 Kah na mo wonk ayeuwuttúonk kah David sohham, kah ayeuúhkonau Philistiansoh, kah uppagwanuh nashpe mishe paguanittuonk, kah nag wussemoteaoh.
E.Sa1.19.8: And there was war again: and David went out, and fought with the Philistines, and slew them with a great slaughter; and they fled from him.

α.Sa1.19.9 Kah matche nashauonk wutch Jehovahut núhkuhkunk Saul, apit wekit, qunnuhtug wunnútcheganit: kah David púhpequaú nashpe wunnútcheg.
E.Sa1.19.9: And the evil spirit from the LORD was upon Saul, as he sat in his house with his javelin in his hand: and David played with his hand.

α.Sa1.19.10 Kah Saul kodogquonkquttohwa[u] Davidoh en sussipponkomuk nashpe ukqunnúhtuk: qut amaúshaú wutch Saul anaqúabit, kah padtuhkuh[n]teau qunuhtug sussipponkomuk: kah David wusseem8 kah pohquohham ne nohkog.
E.Sa1.19.10: And Saul sought to smite David even to the wall with the javelin: but he slipped away out of Saul's presence, and he smote the javelin into the wall: and David fled, and escaped that night.

α.Sa1.19.11 Saul wonk ann8nau ann8naénúh en wekit askuhwhonat, kah wunnushonat mohtompog: kah Michal ummittamwussoh David wuttinnon, n8wau, matta pohquohwhuttau8an kuppomantamóonk yeu nohkog, saup pish kenushit.
E.Sa1.19.11: Saul also sent messengers unto David's house, to watch him, and to slay him in the morning: and Michal David's wife told him, saying, If thou save not thy life to night, to morrow thou shalt be slain.

α.Sa1.19.12 Neit Michal n8kompanau Davidoh papashpe kenogkenéganit, kah monchu, kah wusseem8, kah pohquohham.
E.Sa1.19.12: So Michal let David down through a window: and he went, and fled, and escaped.

α.Sa1.19.13 Kah Michal nemunau nunneukontunkoh, kah upponuh appinneat, kah goatse weshakenae ahpuhquohsum8, wutappuhqussumun, kah wutunkhumun monak.
E.Sa1.19.13: And Michal took an image, and laid it in the bed, and put a pillow of goats' hair for his bolster, and covered it with a cloth.

α.Sa1.19.14 Kah Saul annonot ann8naenúh tohqun[ó]nat David, n8wau, mahchenai.
E.Sa1.19.14: And when Saul sent messengers to take David, she said, He is sick.

α.Sa1.19.15 Kah Saul wonk ann8nau ann8naenúh, nau[ó]nat David: n8wau, padtiegk nashpe appin, onk woh nunnush.
E.Sa1.19.15: And Saul sent the messengers again to see David, saying, Bring him up to me in the bed, that I may slay him.

α.Sa1.19.16 Kah ann8naenúog petuteahettit, kusseh, nunneukontunk appinneat, kah goatse weshagkane appoh[q]uasum8 wutappohquossunnun.
E.Sa1.19.16: And when the messengers were come in, behold, there was an image in the bed, with a pillow of goats' hair for his bolster.

α.Sa1.19.17 Kah Saul unnau Michaloh, tohwhaj yeu$in as8kuhkomean, kah moncheáheat nummatwom, kah nont pohquohhamwi, kah Michal namp8hamauau Sauloh, nuttinuk, moncheáhe, tohwaj woh nushin?
E.Sa1.19.17: And Saul said unto Michal, Why hast thou deceived me so, and sent away mine enemy, that he is escaped? And Michal answered Saul, He said unto me, Let me go; why should I kill thee?

α.Sa1.19.18 Neit David wusseem8, kah pohquohham, kah peyaonau Samueloh ut Ramah, kah wuttinnon wame ne Saul anheont, kah nagum kah Samuel moncheog kah ayeuog ut Naioth.
E.Sa1.19.18: So David fled, and escaped, and came to Samuel to Ramah, and told him all that Saul had done to him. And he and Samuel went and dwelt in Naioth.

α.Sa1.19.19 Kah unnon Saul n8won, kusseh David appu Naioth, ut Ramah.
E.Sa1.19.19: And it was told Saul, saying, Behold, David is at Naioth in Ramah.

α.Sa1.19.20 Kah Saul ann8nau ann8naenúh tohqunnónat David: kah nauáhettit chippan8e quoshodtumwaenuog quoshodtumwéhettit, kah Samuel nepau wunnanauunnónat, wunnashauanitt8moh God nuhkuhkauau wutann8naéneúmoh Saul, kah nag wonk quoshodtumwog.
E.Sa1.19.20: And Saul sent messengers to take David: and when they saw the company of the prophets prophesying, and Samuel standing as appointed over them, the Spirit of God was upon the messengers of Saul, and they also prophesied.

α.Sa1.19.21 Kah ánut Saul, ann8nau onkatogeh ann8naenúh, kah nag wonk quoshodtumwog, kah Saul wonk ann8nau ann8naenúh nishwudt, kah nag wonk quoshodtumwog.
E.Sa1.19.21: And when it was told Saul, he sent other messengers, and they prophesied likewise. And Saul sent messengers again the third time, and they prophesied also.

α.Sa1.19.22 Neit nagum wonk au Ramah, kah peyau mishe wuttahhamonganit ut Seche[u], kah nat8tomwehteau kah n8wau, uttoh wutapineau Samuel kah David? kah pasuk n8wau, kusseh appuog ut Naioth ut Ramah.
E.Sa1.19.22: Then went he also to Ramah, and came to a great well that is in Sechu: and he asked and said, Where are Samuel and David? And one said, Behold, they be at Naioth in Ramah.

α.Sa1.19.23 Kah au Naioth ut Ramah, kah wunnashauanitt8moh neh wonk wu[t]appehtauoh, kah kutchittôushau, kah quoshodtum n[ô] pajeh [u]ppeyonat Naioth ut Ramah.
E.Sa1.19.23: And he went thither to Naioth in Ramah: and the Spirit of God was upon him also, and he went on, and prophesied, until he came to Naioth in Ramah.

α.Sa1.19.24 Kah wonk amaunum wuthogk8unash, kah quoshodtum ut anaquabit Samuel, netatuppe, kah posksin wómpanne, newajeh nag n8wahettit, sun wonk Saul kenugshau quoshodtumwaénú?
E.Sa1.19.24: And he stripped off his clothes also, and prophesied before Samuel in like manner, and lay down naked all that day and all that night. Wherefore they say, Is Saul also among the prophets?

α.Sa1.20.1 KAh David wussemo wutch Naioth ut Ramah, kah peyau kah n8wau anaquabit Jonathan, toh nummahche ussem? teaguas nummatcheseonk? kah teaguas nuppanne usséonk anaquabit k8sh, newaj kodnushikqueh?
E.Sa1.20.1: And David fled from Naioth in Ramah, and came and said before Jonathan, What have I done? what is mine iniquity? and what is my sin before thy father, that he seeketh my life?

α.Sa1.20.2 Kah wuttinuh, nô8sukitch, matta pish kenupp8h, kusseh, n8sh matta toh ussu mohsag asuh peasik, qut woh nohtinukqun, kah tohwutch n8sh yeu ahtahtiit? matta nnano.
E.Sa1.20.2: And he said unto him, God forbid; thou shalt not die: behold, my father will do nothing either great or small, but that he will shew it me: and why should my father hide this thing from me? it is not so.

α.Sa1.20.3 Kah David wonk chadchekeyeuwau, kah n8wau, k8sh wunnamuhkut wahteunk nunnamteoh tapeneáadtuonk ut kuskesukqut, kah n8wau Jonathan yeu wahteunkitch, ishkont neuantam: qut wunnamuhkut neane pomantog Jehovah, kah neane pomantog kukketeahogkou, w[é]be nequttannehtuonganú8 nashaue nen kah nupp8onk.
E.Sa1.20.3: And David sware moreover, and said, Thy father certainly knoweth that I have found grace in thine eyes; and he saith, Let not Jonathan know this, lest he be grieved: but truly as the LORD liveth, and as thy soul liveth, there is but a step between me and death.

α.Sa1.20.4 Neit Jonathan unnau Davidoh uttoh an kodtantog kukketeahogkou kutusseanshinun.
E.Sa1.20.4: Then said Jonathan unto David, Whatsoever thy soul desireth, I will even do it for thee.

α.Sa1.20.5 Kah David unnau Jonathanoh, kusseh, saup wuske nepauzsoou, kah mata woh nuppanshôun n8weetapemonat ketass8t meetsinneat, qut moncheti onk woh nupputtogquem ut ohteakonit, pajeh nishikquinogkodtut, wanonk88k.
E.Sa1.20.5: And David said unto Jonathan, Behold, to morrow is the new moon, and I should not fail to sit with the king at meat: but let me go, that I may hide myself in the field unto the third day at even.

α.Sa1.20.6 K8sh nat8mukquean, neit n8wash, David nummenuhke weqhquetumunkup, onk woh usishau Bethlem wutotanat, newutche n[á]ut k[ó]kodtumwae sephausuonk wutch wame wutteateashiyeuongan8.
E.Sa1.20.6: If thy father at all miss me, then say, David earnestly asked leave of me that he might run to Bethlehem his city: for there is a yearly sacrifice there for all the family.

α.Sa1.20.7 Neit n8wadt, ne wunnegen: kittinneum pish wunohteau: qut ahche musquantog, neit wunnamuhkut, pakodtantam machuk.
E.Sa1.20.7: If he say thus, It is well; thy servant shall have peace: but if he be very wroth, then be sure that evil is determined by him.

α.Sa1.20.8 Newaj pish womoausue unnehead kittinneum, newutche kuppas8 kittinneum 8n8waonganit Jehovah weeche ken: qut matcheseonk apehtunkquean, nusheh kén: newutche tohwutch woh pas8wéan k8shut?
E.Sa1.20.8: Therefore thou shalt deal kindly with thy servant; for thou hast brought thy servant into a covenant of the LORD with thee: notwithstanding, if there be in me iniquity, slay me thyself; for why shouldest thou bring me to thy father?

α.Sa1.20.9 Kah Jonathan n8wau nô8sukongqush, newutche wunnamuhkut wahteauon, machuk pakodtantamun ut n8shut kukque[h]tunkqunat, neit sun woh mat kittinnunn8un?
E.Sa1.20.9: And Jonathan said, Far be it from thee: for if I knew certainly that evil were determined by my father to come upon thee, then would not I tell it thee?

α.Sa1.20.10 Neit David unn[a]u Jonathanoh, howan woh nuttugqun? asuh toh woh nnih, k8sh m8sque namp8hamungquean?
E.Sa1.20.10: Then said David to Jonathan, Who shall tell me? or what if thy father answer thee roughly?

α.Sa1.20.11 Kah Jonathan unnau Davidoh, peyaush kah sohhamuttuh e n ohteakonit. Kah nag neeswe sohhamwog en ohteakonit.
E.Sa1.20.11: And Jonathan said unto David, Come, and let us go out into the field. And they went out both of them into the field.

α.Sa1.20.12 Kah Jonathan unnau Davidoh, woi Jehovah um-Manitt8moh Israel, qutcheheog n8sh, saup uttoh utt8che, asuh nishikquinokok, kah kusseh wanegik unnogqueyeu8k Davidut, kah neit matta nego[n]t8wao[n] en kuhhogkat, kah nahtinnon8un,
E.Sa1.20.12: And Jonathan said unto David, O LORD God of Israel, when I have sounded my father about to morrow any time, or the third day, and, behold, if there be good toward David, and I then send not unto thee, and shew it thee;

α.Sa1.20.13 Jehovah ne unneheon[c]h Jonathan, kah m8cheke: qut n8sh kodtantog k[ú]mmatchen[é]hikqunat, neit pish [k]enahtinú[n]un, kah pish kummoncheáhesh, onk woh k8nohteae monchem, kah Jehovah wetomukqush neáhen wetomomp n8shoh.
E.Sa1.20.13: The LORD do so and much more to Jonathan: but if it please my father to do thee evil, then I will shew it thee, and send thee away, that thou mayest go in peace: and the LORD be with thee, as he hath been with my father.

α.Sa1.20.14 Kah matta webe pomantaman, pish kenahtineh 8womoausuonk Jehovah, onk woh mat nunnupp8,
E.Sa1.20.14: And thou shalt not only while yet I live shew me the kindness of the LORD, that I die not:

α.Sa1.20.15 Qut matta kuttummetahham8 k8womoausuonk wutch nekit micheme: matta, mahche Jehovah tummetahwhont ummatwomoh David nishnoh pasuk wutchwosketohkit.
E.Sa1.20.15: But also thou shalt not cut off thy kindness from my house for ever: no, not when the LORD hath cut off the enemies of David every one from the face of the earth.

α.Sa1.20.16 Nemuhkuh Jonathan ayik wunn8waonk ut weekit David, n8wau Jehovah wutchitteamwutch ut wunnutchegan8óut ummatwomoh David.
E.Sa1.20.16: So Jonathan made a covenant with the house of David, saying, Let the LORD even require it at the hand of David's enemies.

α.Sa1.20.17 Kah Jonathan wonk chadchekeyeuáheau Davidoh, newutche 8womonuh, newutche wuttinn8womonuh nean8womonont nehenwonche ukketeahogkôunoh.
E.Sa1.20.17: And Jonathan caused David to swear again, because he loved him: for he loved him as he loved his own soul.

α.Sa1.20.18 Neit Jonathan unnau Davidoh, saup wuske nepauz, kah pish kenat8mit, newutche kutappuunk pish mahchi.
E.Sa1.20.18: Then Jonathan said to David, To morrow is the new moon: and thou shalt be missed, because thy seat will be empty.

α.Sa1.20.19 Kah nishikquinohteaan, néit pish teanuk k8womus, kah pish kuppeam ayeuonganit uttohad puttogqueop, n$nihyeuonk pas8ohtag, kah pish kutap kishke qussuk Ezel.
E.Sa1.20.19: And when thou hast stayed three days, then thou shalt go down quickly, and come to the place where thou didst hide thyself when the business was in hand, and shalt remain by the stone Ezel.

α.Sa1.20.20 Kah pish nuppim shwinash kóunkquodtash ne kishke, onatuh pám8tam kuhkinneat8.
E.Sa1.20.20: And I will shoot three arrows on the side thereof, as though I shot at a mark.

α.Sa1.20.21 Kah kusseh, pish nutann8n wuskenin, nussim, monchishish natinnehash kouhquódtash, pahke unnog wusken kusseh kounkquodtash wuttuhsh ohtaash, nash nemunush, neit peyaush ken, newutche ne wunohteaonk kutahtauun, kah matta woskehittuonk, pomantog Jehovah.
E.Sa1.20.21: And, behold, I will send a lad, saying, Go, find out the arrows. If I expressly say unto the lad, Behold, the arrows are on this side of thee, take them; then come thou: for there is peace to thee, and no hurt; as the LORD liveth.

α.Sa1.20.22 Qut yeu unnog wuskenin, kusseh kounkquodtash ongkoue ohtaash, neit monchish, newutche Jehovah kummoncheahik.
E.Sa1.20.22: But if I say thus unto the young man, Behold, the arrows are beyond thee; go thy way: for the LORD hath sent thee away.

α.Sa1.20.23 Kah papaume ne ken kah nen an8waogkup, kusseh Jehovah nasha[û]e appu ken kah nen micheme.
E.Sa1.20.23: And as touching the matter which thou and I have spoken of, behold, the LORD be between thee and me for ever.

α.Sa1.20.24 Neit David puttogqueu ut ohteakonit kah wuske nepauzsaag, ketass8t nummatappu meetsinneat.
E.Sa1.20.24: So David hid himself in the field: and when the new moon was come, the king sat him down to eat meat.

α.Sa1.20.25 Kah ketass8t appu wutappuonganit neane negonae, appuonganit kishke sussuppongakomuk, kah Jonathan neepau kah Abner kishkappu Saul$ut, kah David wutappuonk m[o]hchi.
E.Sa1.20.25: And the king sat upon his seat, as at other times, even upon a seat by the wall: and Jonathan arose, and Abner sat by Saul's side, and David's place was empty.

α.Sa1.20.26 Qut Saul matta toh eyeu ne kesukok, newutche unnantam, ne teag wuttamhuk, matta pahkesu wunnamuhkut matta pahkesu.
E.Sa1.20.26: Nevertheless Saul spake not any thing that day: for he thought, Something hath befallen him, he is not clean; surely he is not clean.

α.Sa1.20.27 Kah n$nih nompuhkeek nahohtoeu kesukók nepaaz, David wutappuonk mohchi, kah Saul unnau Jonathanoh wunnaumonuh, tohwutch matta peyunk wunnaumonuh Jessé meetsinneát: matta wunnonk8, asuh yeu késukók?
E.Sa1.20.27: And it came to pass on the morrow, which was the second day of the month, that David's place was empty: and Saul said unto Jonathan his son, Wherefore cometh not the son of Jesse to meat, neither yesterday, nor to day?

α.Sa1.20.28 Kah Jonathan namp8hamauau Sauloh David nummenuhke wehquetummukkup onát Bethlem.
E.Sa1.20.28: And Jonathan answered Saul, David earnestly asked leave of me to go to Bethlehem:

α.Sa1.20.29 Kah n8wop, k8wehquetummaush nohnushadti, newutche nutteashiyeuonganun sephausuog, kah neemat n8wehkomukup: kah yeuyéu namehteauon tapeneadtuonk ut kuskesukqut, amaeti, k8wehquétumoush, kah nauonti nematog: newaj matta peyonk ketass8t wuttableumut.
E.Sa1.20.29: And he said, Let me go, I pray thee; for our family hath a sacrifice in the city; and my brother, he hath commanded me to be there: and now, if I have found favour in thine eyes, let me get away, I pray thee, and see my brethren. Therefore he cometh not unto the king's table.

α.Sa1.20.30 Neit Saul ummusquanittam8onk ayeuuhkonittue nashqunnaemo Jonathanut, kah wuttinuh ken wunnaumonuh woonkenin cheketamwaen, sunnúmmatta n8wahteou, kuppepenau wunnaumonuh Jesse ut nehenwonche kuppaguanuonganit, kah ut uppaguanuonganit kokas upposkissuonganit.
E.Sa1.20.30: Then Saul's anger was kindled against Jonathan, and he said unto him, Thou son of the perverse rebellious woman, do not I know that thou hast chosen the son of Jesse to thine own confusion, and unto the confusion of thy mother's nakedness?

α.Sa1.20.31 Newutche nisohkepomantog wunnaumonúh Jésse, matta pish kummenuhkesu, asuh kukkehtass8tamóonk, newutche yeuyeu ann8teamsh, kah neemskomiinneach, newutche pish wunnamuhkut nup.
E.Sa1.20.31: For as long as the son of Jesse liveth upon the ground, thou shalt not be established, nor thy kingdom. Wherefore now send and fetch him unto me, for he shall surely die.

α.Sa1.20.32 Kah Jonathan namp8hamauau Sauloh 8shoh, kah wuttinuh, tohwutch noh woh n8shit? toh ussu?
E.Sa1.20.32: And Jonathan answered Saul his father, and said unto him, Wherefore shall he be slain? what hath he done?

α.Sa1.20.33 Kah saúle wuttogkomuh ukqunnuhtug wuttogkommonat, newaj J[ô]nathan wahteunk 8shoh uppogkodtantamunat nushonat David.
E.Sa1.20.33: And Saul cast a javelin at him to smite him: whereby Jonathan knew that it was determined of his father to slay David.

α.Sa1.20.34 Neit Jonathan neepau wutch Tableut ut uhque musquanittamunat, kah matta meetsu nahohtoeu kesukok nô nepauz, newútché neuwantam wutch Dávidoh; newutche 8shoh akodjhik.
E.Sa1.20.34: So Jonathan arose from the table in fierce anger, and did eat no meat the second day of the month: for he was grieved for David, because his father had done him shame.

α.Sa1.20.35 Kah n$nih mohtompog, Jonathan sohham en ohteuhkonit, ne adt8che keihtimomukup David kah wuskenes 8weechauoh.
E.Sa1.20.35: And it came to pass in the morning, that Jonathan went out into the field at the time appointed with David, and a little lad with him.

α.Sa1.20.36 Kah unnau wuskeneumoh, quogquish natinnehash kouhquodtash nish pameonish, kah quagquit wusken, wutaneuhwhoh kôuhquodt.
E.Sa1.20.36: And he said unto his lad, Run, find out now the arrows which I shoot. And as the lad ran, he shot an arrow beyond him.

α.Sa1.20.37 Kah wusken paont ne pagshik kouhquodt ne pamit, Jonathan mishont8wae ken8nau wuskenuh, n8wau sunnummatta kôuhqúodt ongkoue ohtano.
E.Sa1.20.37: And when the lad was come to the place of the arrow which Jonathan had shot, Jonathan cried after the lad, and said, Is not the arrow beyond thee?

α.Sa1.20.38 Kah Jonathan mishont8wae ken8nau w[ù]skenuh, kenupshaush, quogquish, chequnapehkon, kah 8skeneumoh Jonathan mukkinnum kóuhqu[o]dtash. kah péyaonau wussontimomoh.
E.Sa1.20.38: And Jonathan cried after the lad, Make speed, haste, stay not. And Jonathan's lad gathered up the arrows, and came to his master.

α.Sa1.20.39 Qut wusken mat teag wahteaou: webé Jonathan kah David wahteauog ne teag.
E.Sa1.20.39: But the lad knew not any thing: only Jonathan and David knew the matter.

α.Sa1.20.40 Kah Jonathan aninnumauau wutauwohteaongash wuskenúh, kah wuttinuh, monchish, uss8wutaush keitotanat.
E.Sa1.20.40: And Jonathan gave his artillery unto his lad, and said unto him, Go, carry them to the city.

α.Sa1.20.41 Kah wusken quenau monchit, Davi neepau wutch sowaniyeu, kah penushádtam wuskesuk en ohkekontu, kah nishwudt nàuwáeu, kah nag chipwutt8nápwuttúog, kah mauwetuog, nô pajeh David anúkauont.
E.Sa1.20.41: And as soon as the lad was gone, David arose out of a place toward the south, and fell on his face to the ground, and bowed himself three times: and they kissed one another, and wept one with another, until David exceeded.

α.Sa1.20.42 Kah Jonathan unnau Davidoh wunohteáe monchish, newutche naneeswe kenawun chadchekeyeuwáog ut 8wesuonganit Jehovah, kussimun, Jehovah nashaue apitch ke[n] kah nen, kah nashaue n8skannemunit, kah k8skannemunit micheme; kah neepau kah monchu, kah Jonathan au otanat.
E.Sa1.20.42: And Jonathan said to David, Go in peace, forasmuch as we have sworn both of us in the name of the LORD, saying, The LORD be between me and thee, and between my seed and thy seed for ever. And he arose and departed: and Jonathan went into the city.

α.Sa1.21.1 NEit David peyau Nob, en Ahimelekut sephausuen, kah Ahimelek wabesu, wunnohskauónat Davidoh, kah wuttinuh tohwutch nussiyean, kah matta howan k8weechóg8?
E.Sa1.21.1: Then came David to Nob to Ahimelech the priest: and Ahimelech was afraid at the meeting of David, and said unto him, Why art thou alone, and no man with thee?

α.Sa1.21.2 Kah David unnau Ahimelechoh sephausuenin, ketass8t nutann8nuk ne teaguas, kah nuttinnuk, howan wahteungitch ne teaguas, papaume ne ann8nun, kah to[h] [á]nann8nun: kah nukkeitim wuttinneumunneunk ne ut kah ne ut ayeuonganit. 
E.Sa1.21.2: And David said unto Ahimelech the priest, The king hath commanded me a business, and hath said unto me, Let no man know any thing of the business whereabout I send thee, and what I have commanded thee: and I have appointed my servants to such and such a place.

α.Sa1.21.3 Newutche teaguas ne agwe kenutcheganit? aninnumah napanna tahshinash petukqunnegash ut nunnutcheganit, asuh teaguas ne nah adt namehteomuk.
E.Sa1.21.3: Now therefore what is under thine hand? give me five loaves of bread in mine hand, or what there is present.

α.Sa1.21.4 Kah sephausuen namp8hamauau Davidoh, ne matta nanwe petukquneganinn8 agwe nunnutcheganit, qut ne wunneetupanatamwe petukqunnunk, nunkompaog k[e]hchithónáhettit mittamwussissoh ne webe.
E.Sa1.21.4: And the priest answered David, and said, There is no common bread under mine hand, but there is hallowed bread; if the young men have kept themselves at least from women.

α.Sa1.21.5 Kah David namp8hamauau sephausuénúh, káh wuttinuh, wunnamuhkut mittamwussissog nukkeihchittôhônômun nishikquinne nadteuh sohhamon, kah 8wishquaóash wuskenúog wunneetupanatamweyeu8ash kah petukqunnunk onatuh nanwee, nux tôkonogque yeu kesukok wunneetupanatamwáhteauun ut wishqut.
E.Sa1.21.5: And David answered the priest, and said unto him, Of a truth women have been kept from us about these three days, since I came out, and the vessels of the young men are holy, and the bread is in a manner common, yea, though it were sanctified this day in the vessel.

α.Sa1.21.6 Neit sephausuen wuttinnumauoh ne waneetupanatamwáhteomuk, newutche na matta petukqunneganinn8, qut nahtitteáe petukqunnunk, ne neemunnumuk wutch anaquabit Jehovah, nompatauunat kussopittae petukqunnunk, ne kesukok amaunumuk.
E.Sa1.21.6: So the priest gave him hallowed bread: for there was no bread there but the shewbread, that was taken from before the LORD, to put hot bread in the day when it was taken away.

α.Sa1.21.7 Kah na mo howae wosketomp ne kesukok wutch wuttinneumut Saul, na$ut wadchanun anaquabit Jehovah, kah ussowesu Doeg wut-Edomit, negonneyeuit nanaunukeg wutheardsum Saul.
E.Sa1.21.7: Now a certain man of the servants of Saul was there that day, detained before the LORD; and his name was Doeg, an Edomite, the chiefest of the herdmen that belonged to Saul.

α.Sa1.21.8 Kah David unnau Ahimelechoh, káh sunnummatta yeu ohtano agwe kenutcheganit, qunúhtug asuh togkodteg? newutche matta nuppaudtauoh nuttogkodteg, asuh nutauwohteaongash, newutch ketass8t wuttinniyeuonk kenuppeyeu8.
E.Sa1.21.8: And David said unto Ahimelech, And is there not here under thine hand spear or sword? for I have neither brought my sword nor my weapons with me, because the king's business required haste.

α.Sa1.21.9 Kah sephausuen n8wau; wuttogkodteg Goliah Philistian, noh nashop ut 8nouhkoiyeuut Elah, kusseh yeuut weesquabesu monakinit, ongkoue ephodut: ne neemunnuman, ne nemunish, newutche matta onkatog yeu ohtáno. Kah David n8wau, matta ongkatuk neyaneyeuun8, aninnumah.
E.Sa1.21.9: And the priest said, The sword of Goliath the Philistine, whom thou slewest in the valley of Elah, behold, it is here wrapped in a cloth behind the ephod: if thou wilt take that, take it: for there is no other save that here. And David said, There is none like that; give it me.

α.Sa1.21.10 Kah David neepau, kah wusseemo ne kesukok, wutche ukqusháonk Sauloh, kah au Achish ketass8t ut Gath.
E.Sa1.21.10: And David arose and fled that day for fear of Saul, and went to Achish the king of Gath.

α.Sa1.21.11 Kah wuttinneumoh Achish wuttinóuh, sunnummatta yeuoh David ketass8t ut ohkit? sunnummatta ket8hamóadtuwussohhanneg papaume noh, paumukáhettit, n8waoh, Saul nushau nequt muttannonganogkussuoh, kah David piogque muttannonganogkussuoh?
E.Sa1.21.11: And the servants of Achish said unto him, Is not this David the king of the land? did they not sing one to another of him in dances, saying, Saul hath slain his thousands, and David his ten thousands?

α.Sa1.21.12 Kah David ponam yeush kutt8wongash wuttahhut: kah m8cheke wabesuónau Achishoh ketass8t ut Gath.
E.Sa1.21.12: And David laid up these words in his heart, and was sore afraid of Achish the king of Gath.

α.Sa1.21.13 Kah os8wunnum wutusseonk ut anaquabenit, kah ogqueussu kágkeámuk, kah kogkòhkinum squontamme kuppuhhoúunash kah wuss8kq poggishin 8weeshitt8nit.
E.Sa1.21.13: And he changed his behaviour before them, and feigned himself mad in their hands, and scrabbled on the doors of the gate, and let his spittle fall down upon his beard.

α.Sa1.21.14 Neit Achish unnau wuttinnumoh, kusseh, kenaâu wosketomp kohkéau: tohwutch paudtiéóg?
E.Sa1.21.14: Then said Achish unto his servants, Lo, ye see the man is mad: wherefore then have ye brought him to me?

α.Sa1.21.15 Sun nukquenahik kogkeáog waj pas8óg yeuoh ukkogkeaeussenat ut anaquabeh? sun woh yeuoh petutteau nekit?
E.Sa1.21.15: Have I need of mad men, that ye have brought this fellow to play the mad man in my presence? shall this fellow come into my house?

α.Sa1.22.1 NEwajeh David na wutch amait, kah spuhwau hassunnekit Adullam: kah wematoh: kah wame 8shoh wek n8tamunit ná en w8msuog én wuhhogkat.
E.Sa1.22.1: David therefore departed thence, and escaped to the cave Adullam: and when his brethren and all his father's house heard it, they went down thither to him.

α.Sa1.22.2 Kah nish$noh pasuk noh tashkitchahwhut, kah nish$noh pasuk noh n8nummontuhquohwhut, kah nish$noh pasuk weesogkitteahont, nag ummiyaehtauouh, kah noh nag ummummugquompom8oh: kah nawuttit weétomoneau papaume yauut pasuk88og wosketompoog.
E.Sa1.22.2: And every one that was in distress, and every one that was in debt, and every one that was discontented, gathered themselves unto him; and he became a captain over them: and there were with him about four hundred men.

α.Sa1.22.3 Kah David ná 8mun en mizpe ut Moab, kah unnau Moabe ketass8toh: n8sh kah n8kas k8wehquetumoush sohhamohettit kah weet8muk8k, nô pajeh n8wahteauunat ut$toh God aseanshikqueh.
E.Sa1.22.3: And David went thence to Mizpeh of Moab: and he said unto the king of Moab, Let my father and my mother, I pray thee, come forth, and be with you, till I know what God will do for me.

α.Sa1.22.4 Kah nah uppas8oh anaquabit Moabae ketass8t, kah nag 8weetomouh nisahke David apit hassunnekit.
E.Sa1.22.4: And he brought them before the king of Moab: and they dwelt with him all the while that David was in the hold.

α.Sa1.22.5 Kah quoshodtumwaen Gad unnau Davidoh, ahque apsh hassunnekit, amáish, kah monchish en Judáe ohkit: neit David ámái, kay peyáu Haréthe touohkomukqut.
E.Sa1.22.5: And the prophet Gad said unto David, Abide not in the hold; depart, and get thee into the land of Judah. Then David departed, and came into the forest of Hareth.

α.Sa1.22.6 Saul n8taog David wahikqussu, kah n[e]g weetomoncheg, (kah Saul appu ut Gibeah agwe mehtugqut, ut Ramah, ukqunnuhtug, ohtag wunnutcheganit, kah wame wuttinneumoh ukquinnuppekompauwehtunkquoh)
E.Sa1.22.6: When Saul heard that David was discovered, and the men that were with him, (now Saul abode in Gibeah under a tree in Ramah, having his spear in his hand, and all his servants were standing about him;)

α.Sa1.22.7 Neit Saul unnau wuttinneumoh neh quanuppekompauwehtunkqutcheh, n8tiek yeuyeu, kenaau Benjamitsog, sun woh wunnaumonuh Jesse kittinnumunkou nish$noh pasuk kenaau ohteuhkonash, kah weenominneohtekonash, sun woh kenanáwunumahik8 muttannungoh, kah pasuk88oh.
E.Sa1.22.7: Then Saul said unto his servants that stood about him, Hear now, ye Benjamites; will the son of Jesse give every one of you fields and vineyards, and make you all captains of thousands, and captains of hundreds;

α.Sa1.22.8 Newaj kenaau wame ayeuhkónittue wunn8waanseog, & matta howan nanahtiñuk8 nuñaumon 8n8wó[n]aóut wuñaumonuh Jesse, & wañé howan kenaáu nuñeuánumuk8, asuh nunnahtinuk8 nunnaumon ayeuuhkonittue wogkouunau nuttinneumoh, nutaskuhhukqunat, neane yeu kesukok.
E.Sa1.22.8: That all of you have conspired against me, and there is none that sheweth me that my son hath made a league with the son of Jesse, and there is none of you that is sorry for me, or sheweth unto me that my son hath stirred up my servant against me, to lie in wait, as at this day?

α.Sa1.22.9 Neit Doeg wut$Edomit námp8ham (noh nanawunont wuttinneumoh Saule) k[á]h n8wau, nunnauomp wunnaumonuh Jesse, paont Nob, ut Ahimelechut wunnaumonuh Ahitub.
E.Sa1.22.9: Then answered Doeg the Edomite, which was set over the servants of Saul, and said, I saw the son of Jesse coming to Nob, to Ahimelech the son of Ahitub.

α.Sa1.22.10 Kah wunnat8tomwehteaunshuh Jehovah, kah wuttinnumau meetsuonk, kah wuttinnumauoh Goliah Philistiane wuttogkodteg.
E.Sa1.22.10: And he enquired of the LORD for him, and gave him victuals, and gave him the sword of Goliath the Philistine.

α.Sa1.22.11 Neit ketass8t ann8team8 wehkomónat Ahimelech sephausuen wunnaumonuh Ahitub, kah wame 8shoh wek, sephausuenúog neg ut Nob: kah nag wame peyaog ketass8tamwut.
E.Sa1.22.11: Then the king sent to call Ahimelech the priest, the son of Ahitub, and all his father's house, the priests that were in Nob: and they came all of them to the king.

α.Sa1.22.12 Kah Saul n8wau, n8tash yeuyeu, ken wunnaumonuh Ahitub: kah namp8ham, nen yeu nussontimom.
E.Sa1.22.12: And Saul said, Hear now, thou son of Ahitub. And he answered, Here I am, my lord.

α.Sa1.22.13 Kah Saul wuttinuh, tohwutch ayeuuhkonittue wunn8aúseóg, ken kah wunnaumonuh Jesse, newutche kittinnumau petukqunneg kah togkodteg, kah kenat8tamwehteaunsh en Godut, onk woh nutayeuuhkonittue waabehtunk, neane yeu kesukok.
E.Sa1.22.13: And Saul said unto him, Why have ye conspired against me, thou and the son of Jesse, in that thou hast given him bread, and a sword, and hast enquired of God for him, that he should rise against me, to lie in wait, as at this day?

α.Sa1.22.14 Neit Ahimelech namp8hamauau ketass8tamwoh kah n8wau, kah howan pabuhtanumukqussit kenugke wame kittinneumit neane David, noh ketass8t wasenumukqutcheh, noh áont ann8nadcheh, kah noh quttiánumukqussu ut kekit?
E.Sa1.22.14: Then Ahimelech answered the king, and said, And who is so faithful among all thy servants as David, which is the king's son in law, and goeth at thy bidding, and is honourable in thine house?

α.Sa1.22.15 Sun neit nen n8che nat8tamwehte[à]unshóus? na8sukiitch, ketass8t wutchimunkitch ne teaguas wuttinneumoh, kah w[à]me n8sh wek: newutche kittinneum mat te[à]g wahteauou papaume wame yeu, peasik asuh mohsag.
E.Sa1.22.15: Did I then begin to enquire of God for him? be it far from me: let not the king impute any thing unto his servant, nor to all the house of my father: for thy servant knew nothing of all this, less or more.

α.Sa1.22.16 Kah ketass8t n8wau, pish wunnaumuhkut kenup Ahimelech ken kah wame k8sh wek.
E.Sa1.22.16: And the king said, Thou shalt surely die, Ahimelech, thou, and all thy father's house.

α.Sa1.22.17 Kah ketass8t unnau akkeishanutcheh neh quanupikkompauwehtunkqutcheh, quinnuppek kah nush8k wussephausueneumoh Jehovah, ne wunnutcheg wonk weechayeumuk David, kah newutche wahteauog wásemwut, kah matta nahtinuk8unuh. Qut wuttinneumoh ketass8t, matta summagannum8og wunnutchegan8, que[n]tauónat wussephausuéneumoh Lord.
E.Sa1.22.17: And the king said unto the footmen that stood about him, Turn, and slay the priests of the LORD: because their hand also is with David, and because they knew when he fled, and did not shew it to me. But the servants of the king would not put forth their hand to fall upon the priests of the LORD.

α.Sa1.22.18 K[á]h ketass8t unna[u] Doegoh, quinnupish kah quentau sephausuenúog, kah Doeg wut-Edomit quinnuppu, kah quentauau sephausuénúh, kah nushau ne kesukok shwosuk tahshinchagkussuoh, kah napanna tahsuoh wosketompoh, neg ágqutcheg hashabponákinne Ephod.
E.Sa1.22.18: And the king said to Doeg, Turn thou, and fall upon the priests. And Doeg the Edomite turned, and he fell upon the priests, and slew on that day fourscore and five persons that did wear a linen ephod.

α.Sa1.22.19 Kah Nob ukkeitotanean sephausuenúog, wuttogkodtamun nashpe án kenag togkodteg, naneeswe wosketompaog kah mittamwossissog peissesog kah n8nukeg, kah oxinog kah assesog, kah shepsog, nashpe an kenag togkodteg.
E.Sa1.22.19: And Nob, the city of the priests, smote he with the edge of the sword, both men and women, children and sucklings, and oxen, and asses, and sheep, with the edge of the sword.

α.Sa1.22.20 Kah pasuk8 wunnaumonuh Ahimelek, wunnaumonuh Ahitub, ussowesu Abiather, tóm, kah asuhkauwae spuhh8au Davidut.
E.Sa1.22.20: And one of the sons of Ahimelech the son of Ahitub, named Abiathar, escaped, and fled after David.

α.Sa1.22.21 Kah Abiathar unnau Davidoh, Saul nushau wussephausueneumoh Jehovah.
E.Sa1.22.21: And Abiathar shewed David that Saul had slain the LORD's priests.

α.Sa1.22.22 Kah David unnau Abiatharoh n8wahteoh ne kesukok, Doeg wut-Edomit noh apit noh woh wunnamuhkut wuttinon Saul[ò]h, nuttinteauun waj nuppehettit wame neg k8sh wekit.
E.Sa1.22.22: And David said unto Abiathar, I knew it that day, when Doeg the Edomite was there, that he would surely tell Saul: I have occasioned the death of all the persons of thy father's house.

α.Sa1.22.23 Weetomeh, ahque wabesish: newutche noh natinneohhog nuppomantamóonk, natinneham kuppomantamoonk: qut weeche nen pish kenánaw[k]
E.Sa1.22.23: Abide thou with me, fear not: for he that seeketh my life seeketh thy life: but with me thou shalt be in safeguard.

α.Sa1.23.1 
E.Sa1.23.1: Then they told David, saying, Behold, the Philistines fight against Keilah, and they rob the threshingfloors.

α.Sa1.23.2 
E.Sa1.23.2: Therefore David enquired of the LORD, saying, Shall I go and smite these Philistines? And the LORD said unto David, Go, and smite the Philistines, and save Keilah.

α.Sa1.23.3 
E.Sa1.23.3: And David's men said unto him, Behold, we be afraid here in Judah: how much more then if we come to Keilah against the armies of the Philistines?

α.Sa1.23.4 
E.Sa1.23.4: Then David enquired of the LORD yet again. And the LORD answered him and said, Arise, go down to Keilah; for I will deliver the Philistines into thine hand.

α.Sa1.23.5 
E.Sa1.23.5: So David and his men went to Keilah, and fought with the Philistines, and brought away their cattle, and smote them with a great slaughter. So David saved the inhabitants of Keilah.

α.Sa1.23.6 
E.Sa1.23.6: And it came to pass, when Abiathar the son of Ahimelech fled to David to Keilah, that he came down with an ephod in his hand.

α.Sa1.23.7 
E.Sa1.23.7: And it was told Saul that David was come to Keilah. And Saul said, God hath delivered him into mine hand; for he is shut in, by entering into a town that hath gates and bars.

α.Sa1.23.8 
E.Sa1.23.8: And Saul called all the people together to war, to go down to Keilah, to besiege David and his men.

α.Sa1.23.9 
E.Sa1.23.9: And David knew that Saul secretly practised mischief against him; and he said to Abiathar the priest, Bring hither the ephod.

α.Sa1.23.10 
E.Sa1.23.10: Then said David, O LORD God of Israel, thy servant hath certainly heard that Saul seeketh to come to Keilah, to destroy the city for my sake.

α.Sa1.23.11 
E.Sa1.23.11: Will the men of Keilah deliver me up into his hand? will Saul come down, as thy servant hath heard? O LORD God of Israel, I beseech thee, tell thy servant. And the LORD said, He will come down.

α.Sa1.23.12 
E.Sa1.23.12: Then said David, Will the men of Keilah deliver me and my men into the hand of Saul? And the LORD said, They will deliver thee up.

α.Sa1.23.13 
E.Sa1.23.13: Then David and his men, which were about six hundred, arose and departed out of Keilah, and went whithersoever they could go. And it was told Saul that David was escaped from Keilah; and he forbare to go forth.

α.Sa1.23.14 
E.Sa1.23.14: And David abode in the wilderness in strong holds, and remained in a mountain in the wilderness of Ziph. And Saul sought him every day, but God delivered him not into his hand.

α.Sa1.23.15 
E.Sa1.23.15: And David saw that Saul was come out to seek his life: and David was in the wilderness of Ziph in a wood.

α.Sa1.23.16 
E.Sa1.23.16: And Jonathan Saul's son arose, and went to David into the wood, and strengthened his hand in God.

α.Sa1.23.17 
E.Sa1.23.17: And he said unto him, Fear not: for the hand of Saul my father shall not find thee; and thou shalt be king over Israel, and I shall be next unto thee; and that also Saul my father knoweth.

α.Sa1.23.18 
E.Sa1.23.18: And they two made a covenant before the LORD: and David abode in the wood, and Jonathan went to his house.

α.Sa1.23.19 
E.Sa1.23.19: Then came up the Ziphites to Saul to Gibeah, saying, Doth not David hide himself with us in strong holds in the wood, in the hill of Hachilah, which is on the south of Jeshimon?

α.Sa1.23.20 
E.Sa1.23.20: Now therefore, O king, come down according to all the desire of thy soul to come down; and our part shall be to deliver him into the king's hand.

α.Sa1.23.21 
E.Sa1.23.21: And Saul said, Blessed be ye of the LORD; for ye have compassion on me.

α.Sa1.23.22 
E.Sa1.23.22: Go, I pray you, prepare yet, and know and see his place where his haunt is, and who hath seen him there: for it is told me that he dealeth very subtilly.

α.Sa1.23.23 
E.Sa1.23.23: See therefore, and take knowledge of all the lurking places where he hideth himself, and come ye again to me with the certainty, and I will go with you: and it shall come to pass, if he be in the land, that I will search him out throughout all the thousands of Judah.

α.Sa1.23.24 
E.Sa1.23.24: And they arose, and went to Ziph before Saul: but David and his men were in the wilderness of Maon, in the plain on the south of Jeshimon.

α.Sa1.23.25 
E.Sa1.23.25: Saul also and his men went to seek him. And they told David; wherefore he came down into a rock, and abode in the wilderness of Maon. And when Saul heard that, he pursued after David in the wilderness of Maon.

α.Sa1.23.26 
E.Sa1.23.26: And Saul went on this side of the mountain, and David and his men on that side of the mountain: and David made haste to get away for fear of Saul; for Saul and his men compassed David and his men round about to take them.

α.Sa1.23.27 
E.Sa1.23.27: But there came a messenger unto Saul, saying, Haste thee, and come; for the Philistines have invaded the land.

α.Sa1.23.28 
E.Sa1.23.28: Wherefore Saul returned from pursuing after David, and went against the Philistines: therefore they called that place Selahammahlekoth.

α.Sa1.23.29 
E.Sa1.23.29: And David went up from thence, and dwelt in strong holds at Engedi.

α.Sa1.24.1 
E.Sa1.24.1: And it came to pass, when Saul was returned from following the Philistines, that it was told him, saying, Behold, David is in the wilderness of Engedi.

α.Sa1.24.2 
E.Sa1.24.2: Then Saul took three thousand chosen men out of all Israel, and went to seek David and his men upon the rocks of the wild goats.

α.Sa1.24.3 
E.Sa1.24.3: And he came to the sheepcotes by the way, where was a cave; and Saul went in to cover his feet: and David and his men remained in the sides of the cave.

α.Sa1.24.4 
E.Sa1.24.4: And the men of David said unto him, Behold the day of which the LORD said unto thee, Behold, I will deliver thine enemy into thine hand, that thou mayest do to him as it shall seem good unto thee. Then David arose, and cut off the skirt of Saul's robe privily.

α.Sa1.24.5 
E.Sa1.24.5: And it came to pass afterward, that David's heart smote him, because he had cut off Saul's skirt.

α.Sa1.24.6 
E.Sa1.24.6: And he said unto his men, The LORD forbid that I should do this thing unto my master, the LORD's anointed, to stretch forth mine hand against him, seeing he is the anointed of the LORD.

α.Sa1.24.7 
E.Sa1.24.7: So David stayed his servants with these words, and suffered them not to rise against Saul. But Saul rose up out of the cave, and went on his way.

α.Sa1.24.8 
E.Sa1.24.8: David also arose afterward, and went out of the cave, and cried after Saul, saying, My lord the king. And when Saul looked behind him, David stooped with his face to the earth, and bowed himself.

α.Sa1.24.9 
E.Sa1.24.9: And David said to Saul, Wherefore hearest thou men's words, saying, Behold, David seeketh thy hurt?

α.Sa1.24.10 
E.Sa1.24.10: Behold, this day thine eyes have seen how that the LORD had delivered thee to day into mine hand in the cave: and some bade me kill thee: but mine eye spared thee; and I said, I will not put forth mine hand against my lord; for he is the LORD's anointed.

α.Sa1.24.11 
E.Sa1.24.11: Moreover, my father, see, yea, see the skirt of thy robe in my hand: for in that I cut off the skirt of thy robe, and killed thee not, know thou and see that there is neither evil nor transgression in mine hand, and I have not sinned against thee; yet thou huntest my soul to take it.

α.Sa1.24.12 
E.Sa1.24.12: The LORD judge between me and thee, and the LORD avenge me of thee: but mine hand shall not be upon thee.

α.Sa1.24.13 
E.Sa1.24.13: As saith the proverb of the ancients, Wickedness proceedeth from the wicked: but mine hand shall not be upon thee.

α.Sa1.24.14: Howane ketass8t Israel n8sukauesoh[-]wéhtauont? howan n8swetahwhadt? nupp8e anum? asuh papekq?
E.Sa1.24.14: After whom is the king of Israel come out? after whom dost thou pursue? after a dead dog, after a flea.

α.Sa1.24.15 
E.Sa1.24.15: The LORD therefore be judge, and judge between me and thee, and see, and plead my cause, and deliver me out of thine hand.

α.Sa1.24.16 
E.Sa1.24.16: And it came to pass, when David had made an end of speaking these words unto Saul, that Saul said, Is this thy voice, my son David? And Saul lifted up his voice, and wept.

α.Sa1.24.17 
E.Sa1.24.17: And he said to David, Thou art more righteous than I: for thou hast rewarded me good, whereas I have rewarded thee evil.

α.Sa1.24.18 
E.Sa1.24.18: And thou hast shewed this day how that thou hast dealt well with me: forasmuch as when the LORD had delivered me into thine hand, thou killedst me not.

α.Sa1.24.19 
E.Sa1.24.19: For if a man find his enemy, will he let him go well away? wherefore the LORD reward thee good for that thou hast done unto me this day.

α.Sa1.24.20 
E.Sa1.24.20: And now, behold, I know well that thou shalt surely be king, and that the kingdom of Israel shall be established in thine hand.

α.Sa1.24.21 
E.Sa1.24.21: Swear now therefore unto me by the LORD, that thou wilt not cut off my seed after me, and that thou wilt not destroy my name out of my father's house.

α.Sa1.24.22 
E.Sa1.24.22: And David sware unto Saul. And Saul went home; but David and his men gat them up unto the hold.

α.Sa1.25.1 
E.Sa1.25.1: And Samuel died; and all the Israelites were gathered together, and lamented him, and buried him in his house at Ramah. And David arose, and went down to the wilderness of Paran.

α.Sa1.25.2 
E.Sa1.25.2: And there was a man in Maon, whose possessions were in Carmel; and the man was very great, and he had three thousand sheep, and a thousand goats: and he was shearing his sheep in Carmel.

α.Sa1.25.3 
E.Sa1.25.3: Now the name of the man was Nabal; and the name of his wife Abigail: and she was a woman of good understanding, and of a beautiful countenance: but the man was churlish and evil in his doings; and he was of the house of Caleb.

α.Sa1.25.4 
E.Sa1.25.4: And David heard in the wilderness that Nabal did shear his sheep.

α.Sa1.25.5 
E.Sa1.25.5: And David sent out ten young men, and David said unto the young men, Get you up to Carmel, and go to Nabal, and greet him in my name:

α.Sa1.25.6 
E.Sa1.25.6: And thus shall ye say to him that liveth in prosperity, Peace be both to thee, and peace be to thine house, and peace be unto all that thou hast.

α.Sa1.25.7 
E.Sa1.25.7: And now I have heard that thou hast shearers: now thy shepherds which were with us, we hurt them not, neither was there ought missing unto them, all the while they were in Carmel.

α.Sa1.25.8 
E.Sa1.25.8: Ask thy young men, and they will shew thee. Wherefore let the young men find favour in thine eyes: for we come in a good day: give, I pray thee, whatsoever cometh to thine hand unto thy servants, and to thy son David.

α.Sa1.25.9 
E.Sa1.25.9: And when David's young men came, they spake to Nabal according to all those words in the name of David, and ceased.

α.Sa1.25.10 
E.Sa1.25.10: And Nabal answered David's servants, and said, Who is David? and who is the son of Jesse? there be many servants now a days that break away every man from his master.

α.Sa1.25.11 
E.Sa1.25.11: Shall I then take my bread, and my water, and my flesh that I have killed for my shearers, and give it unto men, whom I know not whence they be?

α.Sa1.25.12 
E.Sa1.25.12: So David's young men turned their way, and went again, and came and told him all those sayings.

α.Sa1.25.13 
E.Sa1.25.13: And David said unto his men, Gird ye on every man his sword. And they girded on every man his sword; and David also girded on his sword: and there went up after David about four hundred men; and two hundred abode by the stuff.

α.Sa1.25.14 
E.Sa1.25.14: But one of the young men told Abigail, Nabal's wife, saying, Behold, David sent messengers out of the wilderness to salute our master; and he railed on them.

α.Sa1.25.15 
E.Sa1.25.15: But the men were very good unto us, and we were not hurt, neither missed we any thing, as long as we were conversant with them, when we were in the fields:

α.Sa1.25.16 
E.Sa1.25.16: They were a wall unto us both by night and day, all the while we were with them keeping the sheep.

α.Sa1.25.17 
E.Sa1.25.17: Now therefore know and consider what thou wilt do; for evil is determined against our master, and against all his household: for he is such a son of Belial, that a man cannot speak to him.

α.Sa1.25.18 
E.Sa1.25.18: Then Abigail made haste, and took two hundred loaves, and two bottles of wine, and five sheep ready dressed, and five measures of parched corn, and an hundred clusters of raisins, and two hundred cakes of figs, and laid them on asses.

α.Sa1.25.19 
E.Sa1.25.19: And she said unto her servants, Go on before me; behold, I come after you. But she told not her husband Nabal.

α.Sa1.25.20 
E.Sa1.25.20: And it was so, as she rode on the ass, that she came down by the covert on the hill, and, behold, David and his men came down against her; and she met them.

α.Sa1.25.21 
E.Sa1.25.21: Now David had said, Surely in vain have I kept all that this fellow hath in the wilderness, so that nothing was missed of all that pertained unto him: and he hath requited me evil for good.

α.Sa1.25.22 
E.Sa1.25.22: So and more also do God unto the enemies of David, if I leave of all that pertain to him by the morning light any that pisseth against the wall.

α.Sa1.25.23 
E.Sa1.25.23: And when Abigail saw David, she hasted, and lighted off the ass, and fell before David on her face, and bowed herself to the ground,

α.Sa1.25.24 
E.Sa1.25.24: And fell at his feet, and said, Upon me, my lord, upon me let this iniquity be: and let thine handmaid, I pray thee, speak in thine audience, and hear the words of thine handmaid.

α.Sa1.25.25 
E.Sa1.25.25: Let not my lord, I pray thee, regard this man of Belial, even Nabal: for as his name is, so is he; Nabal is his name, and folly is with him: but I thine handmaid saw not the young men of my lord, whom thou didst send.

α.Sa1.25.26 
E.Sa1.25.26: Now therefore, my lord, as the LORD liveth, and as thy soul liveth, seeing the LORD hath withholden thee from coming to shed blood, and from avenging thyself with thine own hand, now let thine enemies, and they that seek evil to my lord, be as Nabal.

α.Sa1.25.27 
E.Sa1.25.27: And now this blessing which thine handmaid hath brought unto my lord, let it even be given unto the young men that follow my lord.

α.Sa1.25.28 
E.Sa1.25.28: I pray thee, forgive the trespass of thine handmaid: for the LORD will certainly make my lord a sure house; because my lord fighteth the battles of the LORD, and evil hath not been found in thee all thy days.

α.Sa1.25.29 
E.Sa1.25.29: Yet a man is risen to pursue thee, and to seek thy soul: but the soul of my lord shall be bound in the bundle of life with the LORD thy God; and the souls of thine enemies, them shall he sling out, as out of the middle of a sling.

α.Sa1.25.30 
E.Sa1.25.30: And it shall come to pass, when the LORD shall have done to my lord according to all the good that he hath spoken concerning thee, and shall have appointed thee ruler over Israel;

α.Sa1.25.31 
E.Sa1.25.31: That this shall be no grief unto thee, nor offence of heart unto my lord, either that thou hast shed blood causeless, or that my lord hath avenged himself: but when the LORD shall have dealt well with my lord, then remember thine handmaid.

α.Sa1.25.32 
E.Sa1.25.32: And David said to Abigail, Blessed be the LORD God of Israel, which sent thee this day to meet me:

α.Sa1.25.33 
E.Sa1.25.33: And blessed be thy advice, and blessed be thou, which hast kept me this day from coming to shed blood, and from avenging myself with mine own hand.

α.Sa1.25.34 
E.Sa1.25.34: For in very deed, as the LORD God of Israel liveth, which hath kept me back from hurting thee, except thou hadst hasted and come to meet me, surely there had not been left unto Nabal by the morning light any that pisseth against the wall.

α.Sa1.25.35 
E.Sa1.25.35: So David received of her hand that which she had brought him, and said unto her, Go up in peace to thine house; see, I have hearkened to thy voice, and have accepted thy person.

α.Sa1.25.36 
E.Sa1.25.36: And Abigail came to Nabal; and, behold, he held a feast in his house, like the feast of a king; and Nabal's heart was merry within him, for he was very drunken: wherefore she told him nothing, less or more, until the morning light.

α.Sa1.25.37 
E.Sa1.25.37: But it came to pass in the morning, when the wine was gone out of Nabal, and his wife had told him these things, that his heart died within him, and he became as a stone.

α.Sa1.25.38 
E.Sa1.25.38: And it came to pass about ten days after, that the LORD smote Nabal, that he died.

α.Sa1.25.39 
E.Sa1.25.39: And when David heard that Nabal was dead, he said, Blessed be the LORD, that hath pleaded the cause of my reproach from the hand of Nabal, and hath kept his servant from evil: for the LORD hath returned the wickedness of Nabal upon his own head. And David sent and communed with Abigail, to take her to him to wife.

α.Sa1.25.40 
E.Sa1.25.40: And when the servants of David were come to Abigail to Carmel, they spake unto her, saying, David sent us unto thee, to take thee to him to wife.

α.Sa1.25.41 
E.Sa1.25.41: And she arose, and bowed herself on her face to the earth, and said, Behold, let thine handmaid be a servant to wash the feet of the servants of my lord.

α.Sa1.25.42 
E.Sa1.25.42: And Abigail hasted, and arose and rode upon an ass, with five damsels of hers that went after her; and she went after the messengers of David, and became his wife.

α.Sa1.25.43 
E.Sa1.25.43: David also took Ahinoam of Jezreel; and they were also both of them his wives.

α.Sa1.25.44 
E.Sa1.25.44: But Saul had given Michal his daughter, David's wife, to Phalti the son of Laish, which was of Gallim.

α.Sa1.26.1 
E.Sa1.26.1: And the Ziphites came unto Saul to Gibeah, saying, Doth not David hide himself in the hill of Hachilah, which is before Jeshimon?

α.Sa1.26.2 
E.Sa1.26.2: Then Saul arose, and went down to the wilderness of Ziph, having three thousand chosen men of Israel with him, to seek David in the wilderness of Ziph.

α.Sa1.26.3 
E.Sa1.26.3: And Saul pitched in the hill of Hachilah, which is before Jeshimon, by the way. But David abode in the wilderness, and he saw that Saul came after him into the wilderness.

α.Sa1.26.4 
E.Sa1.26.4: David therefore sent out spies, and understood that Saul was come in very deed.

α.Sa1.26.5 
E.Sa1.26.5: And David arose, and came to the place where Saul had pitched: and David beheld the place where Saul lay, and Abner the son of Ner, the captain of his host: and Saul lay in the trench, and the people pitched round about him.

α.Sa1.26.6 
E.Sa1.26.6: Then answered David and said to Ahimelech the Hittite, and to Abishai the son of Zeruiah, brother to Joab, saying, Who will go down with me to Saul to the camp? And Abishai said, I will go down with thee.

α.Sa1.26.7 
E.Sa1.26.7: So David and Abishai came to the people by night: and, behold, Saul lay sleeping within the trench, and his spear stuck in the ground at his bolster: but Abner and the people lay round about him.

α.Sa1.26.8 
E.Sa1.26.8: Then said Abishai to David, God hath delivered thine enemy into thine hand this day: now therefore let me smite him, I pray thee, with the spear even to the earth at once, and I will not smite him the second time.

α.Sa1.26.9 
E.Sa1.26.9: And David said to Abishai, Destroy him not: for who can stretch forth his hand against the LORD's anointed, and be guiltless?

α.Sa1.26.10 
E.Sa1.26.10: David said furthermore, As the LORD liveth, the LORD shall smite him; or his day shall come to die; or he shall descend into battle, and perish.

α.Sa1.26.11 
E.Sa1.26.11: The LORD forbid that I should stretch forth mine hand against the LORD's anointed: but, I pray thee, take thou now the spear that is at his bolster, and the cruse of water, and let us go.

α.Sa1.26.12 
E.Sa1.26.12: So David took the spear and the cruse of water from Saul's bolster; and they gat them away, and no man saw it, nor knew it, neither awaked: for they were all asleep; because a deep sleep from the LORD was fallen upon them.

α.Sa1.26.13 
E.Sa1.26.13: Then David went over to the other side, and stood on the top of an hill afar off; a great space being between them:

α.Sa1.26.14 
E.Sa1.26.14: And David cried to the people, and to Abner the son of Ner, saying, Answerest thou not, Abner? Then Abner answered and said, Who art thou that criest to the king?

α.Sa1.26.15 
E.Sa1.26.15: And David said to Abner, Art not thou a valiant man? and who is like to thee in Israel? wherefore then hast thou not kept thy lord the king? for there came one of the people in to destroy the king thy lord.

α.Sa1.26.16 
E.Sa1.26.16: This thing is not good that thou hast done. As the LORD liveth, ye are worthy to die, because ye have not kept your master, the LORD's anointed. And now see where the king's spear is, and the cruse of water that was at his bolster.

α.Sa1.26.17 
E.Sa1.26.17: And Saul knew David's voice, and said, Is this thy voice, my son David? And David said, It is my voice, my lord, O king.

α.Sa1.26.18 
E.Sa1.26.18: And he said, Wherefore doth my lord thus pursue after his servant?  for what have I done? or what evil is in mine hand?

α.Sa1.26.19 
E.Sa1.26.19: Now therefore, I pray thee, let my lord the king hear the words of his servant. If the LORD have stirred thee up against me, let him accept an offering: but if they be the children of men, cursed be they before the LORD; for they have driven me out this day from abiding in the inheritance of the LORD, saying, Go, serve other gods.

α.Sa1.26.20: Newutche yeuyeu, ahque n8sqheonk penushonch en ohkekontu ut anaquabit Jehovah: newutche Israelle ketass8t sohham natinnewhonat papekq, onatuh howan ayeuont pohpohkussu wadchuuhkontu.
E.Sa1.26.20: Now therefore, let not my blood fall to the earth before the face of the LORD: for the king of Israel is come out to seek a flea, as when one doth hunt a partridge in the mountains.

α.Sa1.26.21 
E.Sa1.26.21: Then said Saul, I have sinned: return, my son David: for I will no more do thee harm, because my soul was precious in thine eyes this day: behold, I have played the fool, and have erred exceedingly.

α.Sa1.26.22 
E.Sa1.26.22: And David answered and said, Behold the king's spear! and let one of the young men come over and fetch it.

α.Sa1.26.23 
E.Sa1.26.23: The LORD render to every man his righteousness and his faithfulness; for the LORD delivered thee into my hand to day, but I would not stretch forth mine hand against the LORD's anointed.

α.Sa1.26.24 
E.Sa1.26.24: And, behold, as thy life was much set by this day in mine eyes, so let my life be much set by in the eyes of the LORD, and let him deliver me out of all tribulation.

α.Sa1.26.25 
E.Sa1.26.25: Then Saul said to David, Blessed be thou, my son David: thou shalt both do great things, and also shalt still prevail. So David went on his way, and Saul returned to his place.

α.Sa1.27.1 
E.Sa1.27.1: And David said in his heart, I shall now perish one day by the hand of Saul: there is nothing better for me than that I should speedily escape into the land of the Philistines; and Saul shall despair of me, to seek me any more in any coast of Israel: so shall I escape out of his hand.

α.Sa1.27.2 
E.Sa1.27.2: And David arose, and he passed over with the six hundred men that were with him unto Achish, the son of Maoch, king of Gath.

α.Sa1.27.3 
E.Sa1.27.3: And David dwelt with Achish at Gath, he and his men, every man with his household, even David with his two wives, Ahinoam the Jezreelitess, and Abigail the Carmelitess, Nabal's wife.

α.Sa1.27.4 
E.Sa1.27.4: And it was told Saul that David was fled to Gath: and he sought no more again for him.

α.Sa1.27.5 
E.Sa1.27.5: And David said unto Achish, If I have now found grace in thine eyes, let them give me a place in some town in the country, that I may dwell there: for why should thy servant dwell in the royal city with thee?

α.Sa1.27.6 
E.Sa1.27.6: Then Achish gave him Ziklag that day: wherefore Ziklag pertaineth unto the kings of Judah unto this day.

α.Sa1.27.7 
E.Sa1.27.7: And the time that David dwelt in the country of the Philistines was a full year and four months.

α.Sa1.27.8 
E.Sa1.27.8: And David and his men went up, and invaded the Geshurites, and the Gezrites, and the Amalekites: for those nations were of old the inhabitants of the land, as thou goest to Shur, even unto the land of Egypt.

α.Sa1.27.9 
E.Sa1.27.9: And David smote the land, and left neither man nor woman alive, and took away the sheep, and the oxen, and the asses, and the camels, and the apparel, and returned, and came to Achish.

α.Sa1.27.10 
E.Sa1.27.10: And Achish said, Whither have ye made a road to day? And David said, Against the south of Judah, and against the south of the Jerahmeelites, and against the south of the Kenites.

α.Sa1.27.11 
E.Sa1.27.11: And David saved neither man nor woman alive, to bring tidings to Gath, saying, Lest they should tell on us, saying, So did David, and so will be his manner all the while he dwelleth in the country of the Philistines.

α.Sa1.27.12 
E.Sa1.27.12: And Achish believed David, saying, He hath made his people Israel utterly to abhor him; therefore he shall be my servant for ever.

α.Sa1.28.1 
E.Sa1.28.1: And it came to pass in those days, that the Philistines gathered their armies together for warfare, to fight with Israel. And Achish said unto David, Know thou assuredly, that thou shalt go out with me to battle, thou and thy men.

α.Sa1.28.2 
E.Sa1.28.2: And David said to Achish, Surely thou shalt know what thy servant can do. And Achish said to David, Therefore will I make thee keeper of mine head for ever.

α.Sa1.28.3 
E.Sa1.28.3: Now Samuel was dead, and all Israel had lamented him, and buried him in Ramah, even in his own city. And Saul had put away those that had familiar spirits, and the wizards, out of the land.

α.Sa1.28.4 
E.Sa1.28.4: And the Philistines gathered themselves together, and came and pitched in Shunem: and Saul gathered all Israel together, and they pitched in Gilboa.

α.Sa1.28.5 
E.Sa1.28.5: And when Saul saw the host of the Philistines, he was afraid, and his heart greatly trembled.

α.Sa1.28.6 
E.Sa1.28.6: And when Saul enquired of the LORD, the LORD answered him not, neither by dreams, nor by Urim, nor by prophets.

α.Sa1.28.7 
E.Sa1.28.7: Then said Saul unto his servants, Seek me a woman that hath a familiar spirit, that I may go to her, and enquire of her. And his servants said to him, Behold, there is a woman that hath a familiar spirit at Endor.

α.Sa1.28.8 
E.Sa1.28.8: And Saul disguised himself, and put on other raiment, and he went, and two men with him, and they came to the woman by night: and he said, I pray thee, divine unto me by the familiar spirit, and bring me him up, whom I shall name unto thee.

α.Sa1.28.9 
E.Sa1.28.9: And the woman said unto him, Behold, thou knowest what Saul hath done, how he hath cut off those that have familiar spirits, and the wizards, out of the land: wherefore then layest thou a snare for my life, to cause me to die?

α.Sa1.28.10 
E.Sa1.28.10: And Saul sware to her by the LORD, saying, As the LORD liveth, there shall no punishment happen to thee for this thing.

α.Sa1.28.11 
E.Sa1.28.11: Then said the woman, Whom shall I bring up unto thee? And he said, Bring me up Samuel.

α.Sa1.28.12 
E.Sa1.28.12: And when the woman saw Samuel, she cried with a loud voice: and the woman spake to Saul, saying, Why hast thou deceived me? for thou art Saul.

α.Sa1.28.13 
E.Sa1.28.13: And the king said unto her, Be not afraid: for what sawest thou? And the woman said unto Saul, I saw gods ascending out of the earth.

α.Sa1.28.14 
E.Sa1.28.14: And he said unto her, What form is he of? And she said, An old man cometh up; and he is covered with a mantle. And Saul perceived that it was Samuel, and he stooped with his face to the ground, and bowed himself.

α.Sa1.28.15 
E.Sa1.28.15: And Samuel said to Saul, Why hast thou disquieted me, to bring me up? And Saul answered, I am sore distressed; for the Philistines make war against me, and God is departed from me, and answereth me no more, neither by prophets, nor by dreams: therefore I have called thee, that thou mayest make known unto me what I shall do.

α.Sa1.28.16 
E.Sa1.28.16: Then said Samuel, Wherefore then dost thou ask of me, seeing the LORD is departed from thee, and is become thine enemy?

α.Sa1.28.17 
E.Sa1.28.17: And the LORD hath done to him, as he spake by me: for the LORD hath rent the kingdom out of thine hand, and given it to thy neighbour, even to David:

α.Sa1.28.18 
E.Sa1.28.18: Because thou obeyedst not the voice of the LORD, nor executedst his fierce wrath upon Amalek, therefore hath the LORD done this thing unto thee this day.

α.Sa1.28.19 
E.Sa1.28.19: Moreover the LORD will also deliver Israel with thee into the hand of the Philistines: and to morrow shalt thou and thy sons be with me: the LORD also shall deliver the host of Israel into the hand of the Philistines.

α.Sa1.28.20 
E.Sa1.28.20: Then Saul fell straightway all along on the earth, and was sore afraid, because of the words of Samuel: and there was no strength in him; for he had eaten no bread all the day, nor all the night.

α.Sa1.28.21 
E.Sa1.28.21: And the woman came unto Saul, and saw that he was sore troubled, and said unto him, Behold, thine handmaid hath obeyed thy voice, and I have put my life in my hand, and have hearkened unto thy words which thou spakest unto me.

α.Sa1.28.22 
E.Sa1.28.22: Now therefore, I pray thee, hearken thou also unto the voice of thine handmaid, and let me set a morsel of bread before thee; and eat, that thou mayest have strength, when thou goest on thy way.

α.Sa1.28.23 
E.Sa1.28.23: But he refused, and said, I will not eat. But his servants, together with the woman, compelled him; and he hearkened unto their voice. So he arose from the earth, and sat upon the bed.

α.Sa1.28.24 
E.Sa1.28.24: And the woman had a fat calf in the house; and she hasted, and killed it, and took flour, and kneaded it, and did bake unleavened bread thereof:

α.Sa1.28.25 
E.Sa1.28.25: And she brought it before Saul, and before his servants; and they did eat. Then they rose up, and went away that night.

α.Sa1.29.1 
E.Sa1.29.1: Now the Philistines gathered together all their armies to Aphek: and the Israelites pitched by a fountain which is in Jezreel.

α.Sa1.29.2 
E.Sa1.29.2: And the lords of the Philistines passed on by hundreds, and by thousands: but David and his men passed on in the rereward with Achish.

α.Sa1.29.3 
E.Sa1.29.3: Then said the princes of the Philistines, What do these Hebrews here?  And Achish said unto the princes of the Philistines, Is not this David, the servant of Saul the king of Israel, which hath been with me these days, or these years, and I have found no fault in him since he fell unto me unto this day?

α.Sa1.29.4 
E.Sa1.29.4: And the princes of the Philistines were wroth with him; and the princes of the Philistines said unto him, Make this fellow return, that he may go again to his place which thou hast appointed him, and let him not go down with us to battle, lest in the battle he be an adversary to us: for wherewith should he reconcile himself unto his master? should it not be with the heads of these men?

α.Sa1.29.5 
E.Sa1.29.5: Is not this David, of whom they sang one to another in dances, saying, Saul slew his thousands, and David his ten thousands?

α.Sa1.29.6 
E.Sa1.29.6: Then Achish called David, and said unto him, Surely, as the LORD liveth, thou hast been upright, and thy going out and thy coming in with me in the host is good in my sight: for I have not found evil in thee since the day of thy coming unto me unto this day: nevertheless the lords favour thee not.

α.Sa1.29.7 
E.Sa1.29.7: Wherefore now return, and go in peace, that thou displease not the lords of the Philistines.

α.Sa1.29.8 
E.Sa1.29.8: And David said unto Achish, But what have I done? and what hast thou found in thy servant so long as I have been with thee unto this day, that I may not go fight against the enemies of my lord the king?

α.Sa1.29.9 
E.Sa1.29.9: And Achish answered and said to David, I know that thou art good in my sight, as an angel of God: notwithstanding the princes of the Philistines have said, He shall not go up with us to the battle.

α.Sa1.29.10 
E.Sa1.29.10: Wherefore now rise up early in the morning with thy master's servants that are come with thee: and as soon as ye be up early in the morning, and have light, depart.

α.Sa1.29.11 
E.Sa1.29.11: So David and his men rose up early to depart in the morning, to return into the land of the Philistines. And the Philistines went up to Jezreel.

α.Sa1.30.1 
E.Sa1.30.1: And it came to pass, when David and his men were come to Ziklag on the third day, that the Amalekites had invaded the south, and Ziklag, and smitten Ziklag, and burned it with fire;

α.Sa1.30.2 
E.Sa1.30.2: And had taken the women captives, that were therein: they slew not any, either great or small, but carried them away, and went on their way.

α.Sa1.30.3 
E.Sa1.30.3: So David and his men came to the city, and, behold, it was burned with fire; and their wives, and their sons, and their daughters, were taken captives.

α.Sa1.30.4 
E.Sa1.30.4: Then David and the people that were with him lifted up their voice and wept, until they had no more power to weep.

α.Sa1.30.5 
E.Sa1.30.5: And David's two wives were taken captives, Ahinoam the Jezreelitess, and Abigail the wife of Nabal the Carmelite.

α.Sa1.30.6 
E.Sa1.30.6: And David was greatly distressed; for the people spake of stoning him, because the soul of all the people was grieved, every man for his sons and for his daughters: but David encouraged himself in the LORD his God.

α.Sa1.30.7 
E.Sa1.30.7: And David said to Abiathar the priest, Ahimelech's son, I pray thee, bring me hither the ephod. And Abiathar brought thither the ephod to David.

α.Sa1.30.8 
E.Sa1.30.8: And David enquired at the LORD, saying, Shall I pursue after this troop? shall I overtake them? And he answered him, Pursue: for thou shalt surely overtake them, and without fail recover all.

α.Sa1.30.9 
E.Sa1.30.9: So David went, he and the six hundred men that were with him, and came to the brook Besor, where those that were left behind stayed.

α.Sa1.30.10 
E.Sa1.30.10: But David pursued, he and four hundred men: for two hundred abode behind, which were so faint that they could not go over the brook Besor.

α.Sa1.30.11 
E.Sa1.30.11: And they found an Egyptian in the field, and brought him to David, and gave him bread, and he did eat; and they made him drink water;

α.Sa1.30.12 
E.Sa1.30.12: And they gave him a piece of a cake of figs, and two clusters of raisins: and when he had eaten, his spirit came again to him: for he had eaten no bread, nor drunk any water, three days and three nights.

α.Sa1.30.13 
E.Sa1.30.13: And David said unto him, To whom belongest thou? and whence art thou? And he said, I am a young man of Egypt, servant to an Amalekite; and my master left me, because three days agone I fell sick.

α.Sa1.30.14 
E.Sa1.30.14: We made an invasion upon the south of the Cherethites, and upon the coast which belongeth to Judah, and upon the south of Caleb; and we burned Ziklag with fire.

α.Sa1.30.15 
E.Sa1.30.15: And David said to him, Canst thou bring me down to this company? And he said, Swear unto me by God, that thou wilt neither kill me, nor deliver me into the hands of my master, and I will bring thee down to this company.

α.Sa1.30.16 
E.Sa1.30.16: And when he had brought him down, behold, they were spread abroad upon all the earth, eating and drinking, and dancing, because of all the great spoil that they had taken out of the land of the Philistines, and out of the land of Judah.

α.Sa1.30.17 
E.Sa1.30.17: And David smote them from the twilight even unto the evening of the next day: and there escaped not a man of them, save four hundred young men, which rode upon camels, and fled.

α.Sa1.30.18 
E.Sa1.30.18: And David recovered all that the Amalekites had carried away: and David rescued his two wives.

α.Sa1.30.19 
E.Sa1.30.19: And there was nothing lacking to them, neither small nor great, neither sons nor daughters, neither spoil, nor any thing that they had taken to them: David recovered all.

α.Sa1.30.20 
E.Sa1.30.20: And David took all the flocks and the herds, which they drave before those other cattle, and said, This is David's spoil.

α.Sa1.30.21 
E.Sa1.30.21: And David came to the two hundred men, which were so faint that they could not follow David, whom they had made also to abide at the brook Besor: and they went forth to meet David, and to meet the people that were with him: and when David came near to the people, he saluted them.

α.Sa1.30.22 
E.Sa1.30.22: Then answered all the wicked men and men of Belial, of those that went with David, and said, Because they went not with us, we will not give them ought of the spoil that we have recovered, save to every man his wife and his children, that they may lead them away, and depart.

α.Sa1.30.23 
E.Sa1.30.23: Then said David, Ye shall not do so, my brethren, with that which the LORD hath given us, who hath preserved us, and delivered the company that came against us into our hand.

α.Sa1.30.24 
E.Sa1.30.24: For who will hearken unto you in this matter? but as his part is that goeth down to the battle, so shall his part be that tarrieth by the stuff: they shall part alike.

α.Sa1.30.25 
E.Sa1.30.25: And it was so from that day forward, that he made it a statute and an ordinance for Israel unto this day.

α.Sa1.30.26 
E.Sa1.30.26: And when David came to Ziklag, he sent of the spoil unto the elders of Judah, even to his friends, saying, Behold a present for you of the spoil of the enemies of the LORD;

α.Sa1.30.27 
E.Sa1.30.27: To them which were in Bethel, and to them which were in south Ramoth, and to them which were in Jattir,

α.Sa1.30.28 
E.Sa1.30.28: And to them which were in Aroer, and to them which were in Siphmoth, and to them which were in Eshtemoa,

α.Sa1.30.29 
E.Sa1.30.29: And to them which were in Rachal, and to them which were in the cities of the Jerahmeelites, and to them which were in the cities of the Kenites,

α.Sa1.30.30 
E.Sa1.30.30: And to them which were in Hormah, and to them which were in Chorashan, and to them which were in Athach,

α.Sa1.30.31 
E.Sa1.30.31: And to them which were in Hebron, and to all the places where David himself and his men were wont to haunt.

α.Sa1.31.1 
E.Sa1.31.1: Now the Philistines fought against Israel: and the men of Israel fled from before the Philistines, and fell down slain in mount Gilboa.

α.Sa1.31.2 
E.Sa1.31.2: And the Philistines followed hard upon Saul and upon his sons; and the Philistines slew Jonathan, and Abinadab, and Melchishua, Saul's sons.

α.Sa1.31.3 
E.Sa1.31.3: And the battle went sore against Saul, and the archers hit him; and he was sore wounded of the archers.

α.Sa1.31.4 
E.Sa1.31.4: Then said Saul unto his armourbearer, Draw thy sword, and thrust me through therewith; lest these uncircumcised come and thrust me through, and abuse me. But his armourbearer would not; for he was sore afraid. Therefore Saul took a sword, and fell upon it.

α.Sa1.31.5 
E.Sa1.31.5: And when his armourbearer saw that Saul was dead, he fell likewise upon his sword, and died with him.

α.Sa1.31.6 
E.Sa1.31.6: So Saul died, and his three sons, and his armourbearer, and all his men, that same day together.

α.Sa1.31.7 
E.Sa1.31.7: And when the men of Israel that were on the other side of the valley, and they that were on the other side Jordan, saw that the men of Israel fled, and that Saul and his sons were dead, they forsook the cities, and fled; and the Philistines came and dwelt in them.

α.Sa1.31.8 
E.Sa1.31.8: And it came to pass on the morrow, when the Philistines came to strip the slain, that they found Saul and his three sons fallen in mount Gilboa.

α.Sa1.31.9 
E.Sa1.31.9: And they cut off his head, and stripped off his armour, and sent into the land of the Philistines round about, to publish it in the house of their idols, and among the people.

α.Sa1.31.10 
E.Sa1.31.10: And they put his armour in the house of Ashtaroth: and they fastened his body to the wall of Bethshan.

α.Sa1.31.11 
E.Sa1.31.11: And when the inhabitants of Jabeshgilead heard of that which the Philistines had done to Saul;

α.Sa1.31.12 
E.Sa1.31.12: All the valiant men arose, and went all night, and took the body of Saul and the bodies of his sons from the wall of Bethshan, and came to Jabesh, and burnt them there.

α.Sa1.31.13 
E.Sa1.31.13: And they took their bones, and buried them under a tree at Jabesh, and fasted seven days.