
α.1.1 KAh Solomon wunnaumonuh David menehkheau ut wutass8tam8onganit, & Jehovahoh um-Manitt8moh wetomuk, kah úmmuttáe mishéheuh.
E.1.1 And Solomon the son of David was strengthened in his kingdom, and the LORD his God was with him, and magnified him exceedingly.

α.1.2 Neit Solomon ken8nau wame Israeloh, muttannongane kah pasuk8e mugquompuh, kah wussittumwaénúh, kah nish$noh nanawunnuaénin ut wame Israel, keiche wut8shinneunk.
E.1.2 Then Solomon spake unto all Israel, to the captains of thousands and of hundreds, and to the judges, and to every governor in all Israel, the chief of the fathers.

α.1.3 Neit Solomon kah wame weeche mukkinneunk, auog qunuhqui ayeuonganit ut Gibeon, newutche na ohtop, wut-tabernaklum God, ne Moses wuttinneuhmoh Jehovah, ayikup ut touohkomukqut.
E.1.3 So Solomon, and all the congregation with him, went to the high place that was at Gibeon; for there was the tabernacle of the congregation of God, which Moses the servant of the LORD had made in the wilderness.

α.1.4 Qut wut-Arkum God, David uppaudtauun wutch Kirjath-jearim, ut ayeuonganit ne David quagquoshwehtamwontog: newutche, 8wekukkontamun ut Jerusalem.
E.1.4 But the ark of God had David brought up from Kirjathjearim to the place which David had prepared for it: for he had pitched a tent for it at Jerusalem.

α.1.5 Kah wonk brasse Altar, ne Bezaleel wunnaumonuh Uri, wunnaumonuh Hur kesteunkup, upponumun anaquohtag wuttabernakleum Jehovah: k[a]h Solomon kah mukkinneonk, wunnat8tomwehteatinneau.
E.1.5 Moreover the brasen altar, that Bezaleel the son of Uri, the son of Hur, had made, he put before the tabernacle of the LORD: and Solomon and the congregation sought unto it.

α.1.6 Kah Solomon na wuttin kuhkuhque[n], en brasse Altarut anaquabit Lord, ne ohtag ut mukkinneáe kommukqut, kah na wutut magun nequt muttannonganog kodtash chikohtae mag8ongash.
E.1.6 And Solomon went up thither to the brasen altar before the LORD, which was at the tabernacle of the congregation, and offered a thousand burnt offerings upon it.

α.1.7 Ne nohkog God naéhtauau Solomonoh, kah wuttinuh, wehquetumah, teaguas woh anumauun.
E.1.7 In that night did God appear unto Solomon, and said unto him, Ask what I shall give thee.

α.1.8 Kah Solomon unnau Godoh, kummishe monanum David n8sh, kah kenompass8tamwáhhin:
E.1.8 And Solomon said unto God, Thou hast shewed great mercy unto David my father, and hast made me to reign in his stead.

α.1.9 Yeuyeu woi Jehovah Manit, kukquoshomáonk n8sh David menehketeauunach: newutche kukketass8tamwáheh ut missinninnuut onatuh puppissiyeuut wutch mataánukeg.
E.1.9 Now, O LORD God, let thy promise unto David my father be established: for thou hast made me king over a people like the dust of the earth in multitude.

α.1.10 Eyeu waantamwahheh, kah wahteauwáheh, onk woh nussohham, kah woh nuppetutteam, ut anaquabhettit yeug missinninnûog, newutche howan wâussumont yeu kummissinninneumoh mataánunutche?
E.1.10 Give me now wisdom and knowledge, that I may go out and come in before this people: for who can judge this thy people, that is so great?

α.1.11 Kah God unnau Solomonoh, newutche yeu ohteau kuttahhut, kah matta k8wehquetum8h wenauwetuonk, ohtóonk, asuh quttianittuonk, asuh uppomantam8ongan8 kummatwomog, asuh matta k8wehquetum8 sepepomantamóonk, qut k8wehquetum waantamóonk kah wahteóonk, onk woh k8sum nummissinninneumog, neg adt ketass8tamuhkónun.
E.1.11 And God said to Solomon, Because this was in thine heart, and thou hast not asked riches, wealth, or honour, nor the life of thine enemies, neither yet hast asked long life; but hast asked wisdom and knowledge for thyself, that thou mayest judge my people, over whom I have made thee king:

α.1.12 Waantamóonk kah wahteauonk kittinnumontean, kah kuttinnumoush wenauwetuonk, kah ohtóonk, kah quttianittuonk, ne matta howae ketass8t ahtó8k negonuhkunkquean, asuh matta pish asukungquean ne weyane ohto8un.
E.1.12 Wisdom and knowledge is granted unto thee; and I will give thee riches, and wealth, and honour, such as none of the kings have had that have been before thee, neither shall there any after thee have the like.

α.1.13 Neit Solomon 8m qunuhqui ayeuonganit ne ut Gibeon en Jerusalem, wutch anaquohtag mukkinneáe kommuk, kah ketass8tam88 ut Israel.
E.1.13 Then Solomon came from his journey to the high place that was at Gibeon to Jerusalem, from before the tabernacle of the congregation, and reigned over Israel.

α.1.14 Kah Solomon mukkinnum chariotsash, kah horsesoh na8mukqutcheg: kah ohtau nequt muttannonganogkodtash, kah yaue pasuk88[a]sh chariotsash, kah nabo neese muttannonganogkussuog horsesoh na8mukqutcheg, neh pononcheh ut chariotse keitotanehtu kah weeche ketass8t ut Jerusalem.
E.1.14 And Solomon gathered chariots and horsemen: and he had a thousand and four hundred chariots, and twelve thousand horsemen, which he placed in the chariot cities, and with the king at Jerusalem.

α.1.15 Kah ketass8t silver kah gold onatuhteau qussukquanash ut Jerusalem, kah Cedaruhtugquash 8natuhheyeu8ash 8nouhkoiyeue Sycamoruhtukqut wutche muttaáneuk.
E.1.15 And the king made silver and gold at Jerusalem as plenteous as stones, and cedar trees made he as the sycomore trees that are in the vale for abundance.

α.1.16 Kah Solomon wutauau horsesoh wutch Egypt, kah hashabpe tuttuppinuh, ketass8t wutanaqushaeneumoh attumunaog hashabpe tuttuppinuh neanôadtinit.
E.1.16 And Solomon had horses brought out of Egypt, and linen yarn: the king's merchants received the linen yarn at a price.

α.1.17 Kah nemskomwog, kah sohh8wuttóog wutch Egypt Chariot wutch nequtta tahshe pasuk88ash silver sheklsash, kah pasu[kh]orse, wutch nequt pasuk88 kah napanna tahshinchagkodtash, kah ne wuttinne sohh8wunoneau horsesoh wutch wame Hittitse ketass8tamwut, kah wutch Syriae ketass8tamwut, nashpe wunnutchegan8out.
E.1.17 And they fetched up, and brought forth out of Egypt a chariot for six hundred shekels of silver, and an horse for an hundred and fifty: and so brought they out horses for all the kings of the Hittites, and for the kings of Syria, by their means.

α.2.1 KAh Solomon pak[od]tantam ayimunat wetu wutch 8wesuonk Jehovah kah wutass8tam8onganekommuk.
E.2.1 And Solomon determined to build an house for the name of the LORD, and an house for his kingdom.

α.2.2 Kah Solomon ogkemau nesausuk tahshinchage muttannonganog kussuog wosketompoh 8weassu[na]oont, kah shwosuk tahshinchage muttannonog kussuog, wanagittohhôsitcheg ut wadchuuhkontu: kah nishwe muttannonganog kussuog, kah nequtta tahshe pasuk88og, nanawunoncheg.
E.2.2 And Solomon told out threescore and ten thousand men to bear burdens, and fourscore thousand to hew in the mountain, and three thousand and six hundred to oversee them.

α.2.3 Kah Solomon negont8au en Hyram Tyre ketass8t n8wau, neanheop David n8sh, kah kenegonchhuontamauop Cedaroh, 8wekuhkonat, wutayinneat, (ne unnehe.)
E.2.3 And Solomon sent to Huram the king of Tyre, saying, As thou didst deal with David my father, and didst send him cedars to build him an house to dwell therein, even so deal with me.

α.2.4 Kusseh, nutayim wetu ut 8wesuonganit Jehovah num-Manitt8m, n8neetupanatamwae aninnumauonat, kah chikohsumunat wetemungquok, ut anaquabit, kah wutche nagwutteae nahtitteáe petukqunneg, kah wutche chikohtae mag8ongash, nompoaeu kah wunnonkquaeu, Sabothdayeu, kah wuske nepauzsaeu kah ut miyae ummishadtupp8onganehtu Jehovah num-Manitt8mun, yeu micheme yeu8 ut Israel.
E.2.4 Behold, I build an house to the name of the LORD my God, to dedicate it to him, and to burn before him sweet incense, and for the continual shewbread, and for the burnt offerings morning and evening, on the sabbaths, and on the new moons, and on the solemn feasts of the LORD our God. This is an ordinance for ever to Israel.

α.2.5 Kah wetu ne ayim, missi: newutche ánuukken8mau kum$Manitt8mun wame Manitt8h.
E.2.5 And the house which I build is great: for great is our God above all gods.

α.2.6 Qut howan tapenug 8wekuhkauonat, newutche kesuk, kah ukkesuk8mo kesukquog matta wuttapeouh? neit howan nen noh woh wekuhkauog? qut webe chikohsumunat wetemungquok ut anaquabit.
E.2.6 But who is able to build him an house, seeing the heaven and heaven of heavens cannot contain him? who am I then, that I should build him an house, save only to burn sacrifice before him?

α.2.7 Newutche yeuyeu nawutch negonshhuwontamah wosketomp, nôhtoe anakausuontog gold, kah silver, kah brasse, kah Iron, kah Purple, kah Crimson, kah 8nôagk, kah noh nôhtoe kohk[ók]ausit, weeche n[ò]htoe anuhkausitcheg neg weetomutcheg ut Judah, kah ut Jerusalem, neh n8sh David quagquoshwunumpuh.
E.2.7 Send me now therefore a man cunning to work in gold, and in silver, and in brass, and in iron, and in purple, and crimson, and blue, and that can skill to grave with the cunning men that are with me in Judah and in Jerusalem, whom David my father did provide.

α.2.8 Kah wonk negonshhuwontamah Cedaruhtugquash, Fi[rr]uhtugquash, kah Almuguhtugquash, wutch Lebanon (newutche n8wahteoh kittinneumog néhtóe tummethamwog timber ut Lebanon) kah kusseh, nuttinneumog pish weetomaog kittinneumoh.
E.2.8 Send me also cedar trees, fir trees, and algum trees, out of Lebanon: for I know that thy servants can skill to cut timber in Lebanon; and, behold, my servants shall be with thy servants,

α.2.9 Nukquagquashwehtamunkqunáoont m8[-]cheke timber, newutche wetu ne kodayim, pish missi kah monchanatamweyeu8.
E.2.9 Even to prepare me timber in abundance: for the house which I am about to build shall be wonderful great.

α.2.10 Kah kusseh, nuttinnumau kittinneumog wunagittahhôsuenuóg neg támetohhogig timber, nesnehchage muttannonganogkodt qutt8hwhosuash, sukquehthósu[e] wheatash: kah nesnehchage muttannonganogkodtu quttuhwhosuash barlyhash, kah nesnehchage muttannonanogkodtash wine bathsash: kah nesnehchage muttannonganogkodte pummée bathsash.
E.2.10 And, behold, I will give to thy servants, the hewers that cut timber, twenty thousand measures of beaten wheat, and twenty thousand measures of barley, and twenty thousand baths of wine, and twenty thousand baths of oil.

α.2.11 Neit Hyram Tyre ketass8t, wussukwhosue namp8ham, ne negonshhuadt en Solomonut, newutche Jehovah womonau ummissinninneumoh, na kuttit kutass8tamukonukqun.
E.2.11 Then Huram the king of Tyre answered in writing, which he sent to Solomon, Because the LORD hath loved his people, he hath made thee king over them.

α.2.12 Wonk Hyram n8wau, wunnanumunach Jehovah ummanitt8moh Israel, noh kesteunk kesuk kah ohke, noh anumauont Davidoh ketass8toh, waantamw[é] wunnaumoniinneuh, noh wahteunk wunnehtauunat, kah wohwohtam8onk, onk woh wekikauau Jehovahoh, kah ukketáss8tamukkomuk.
E.2.12 Huram said moreover, Blessed be the LORD God of Israel, that made heaven and earth, who hath given to David the king a wise son, endued with prudence and understanding, that might build an house for the LORD, and an house for his kingdom.

α.2.13 Kah yeuyeu nutann8n nehtuhtoenin, (wahteou wohwohtam8onk) noh wadchiit Huram n8shit.
E.2.13 And now I have sent a cunning man, endued with understanding, of Huram my father's,

α.2.14 Wunnaumonuh mittamwossis wutch Dane wuttauneunk, kah 8shoh wut-Tyre wosketomp, netuhto anakausuwontamun gold, kah Silver, kah brasse kah Iron, kah qussuk, kah timber kah purple, kah 8nóagk, kah wanegik hashabponagk, kah Crimson: wonk kogohkusohsinneah wame eiyane kogohksum8ongash, kah namehtinneat eiyane ussinnewonk, ne pish ponamauut, kenugke kenetuhtaeneumog, kah kenugke 8netuhtáeneumoh nussontimom David k8sh.
E.2.14 The son of a woman of the daughters of Dan, and his father was a man of Tyre, skilful to work in gold, and in silver, in brass, in iron, in stone, and in timber, in purple, in blue, and in fine linen, and in crimson; also to grave any manner of graving, and to find out every device which shall be put to him, with thy cunning men, and with the cunning men of my lord David thy father.

α.2.15 Newutche yeuyeu, wheatash kah barlyhash, kah pummee, kah wine, nish nussontimom keket8kontogish, negonshhuaj en wuttinneumehtu.
E.2.15 Now therefore the wheat, and the barley, the oil, and the wine, which my lord hath spoken of, let him send unto his servants:

α.2.16 Kah nenawun nuttummetahhamumun wuttuhqunash wutch Lebanon, ne woh teashe quenauwahikquean, kah kuppaudtauununan ut wutóhsuppahwuttauunat ut kehtahhannit en Joppa, k[á]h ken pish kutuss8tauun en Jerusalem.
E.2.16 And we will cut wood out of Lebanon, as much as thou shalt need: and we will bring it to thee in floats by sea to Joppa; and thou shalt carry it up to Jerusalem.

α.2.17 Kah Solomon ogkemau wame pen8wohteuh neh apinitcheh ut Israele ohkit, neanogkemoneup Davidoh 8shoh, kah naut nameheoneau, nequt pasuk8e kah napanna ta[h]hshinchage muttannonganog kussuog, kah nishwe muttannonganog kussuog, kah nequtta tahshe pasuk.
E.2.17 And Solomon numbered all the strangers that were in the land of Israel, after the numbering wherewith David his father had numbered them; and they were found an hundred and fifty thousand and three thousand and six hundred.

α.2.18 Kah weassumwaheau nesausuk tahshinchage muttannonganog kussuoh, kah wunnagehtahhamwenehheau shwosuk tahshinchage muttannonganog kussuoh, kah nishwe muttannonganog kussuoh nanawunnu[e]nuh, anakausheoncheg missinninnuh.
E.2.18 And he set threescore and ten thousand of them to be bearers of burdens, and fourscore thousand to be hewers in the mountain, and three thousand and six hundred overseers to set the people a work.

α.3.1 NEit Solomon n8che ayim wek Jehovah ut Jerusalem ut Moriahe wadchuut, uttoh adt Jehovah naehtauomp Davidoh 8shoh, ut ayeuonganit ne David quagquoshwehtogkup, ut ahhut tannuppoghog Ornan wutJebusit.
E.3.1 Then Solomon began to build the house of the LORD at Jerusalem in mount Moriah, where the Lord appeared unto David his father, in the place that David had prepared in the threshingfloor of Ornan the Jebusite.

α.3.2 Kah n8che weekitteau nahohtóeu kesukok ut nahohtoeu nepâuz, ut yaue kodtumwae ketass8tam8it.
E.3.2 And he began to build in the second day of the second month, in the fourth year of his reign.

α.3.3 Kah yeush Solomon netuhtauwaheonash, wutch ayimunat wek God, nisahteag nashpe ishquanogkodut, neane weske quttu[h]whosik, nequtta tahshinchage ishquanogkod, kah ne an8hque kishkag nesnehchag ishquanogkod.
E.3.3 Now these are the things wherein Solomon was instructed for the building of the house of God. The length by cubits after the first measure was threescore cubits, and the breadth twenty cubits.

α.3.4 Kah ahhut petutteamuk ne wohwussuhkomuk, nesahteag neaunag kishkag wetu, nesnehchag ishquanogkod, kah nesohkunkok nequt pasuk8e kah nesnehchag: kah woogquottumun ut anomut wanegik Gold.
E.3.4 And the porch that was in the front of the house, the length of it was according to the breadth of the house, twenty cubits, and the height was an hundred and twenty: and he overlaid it within with pure gold.

α.3.5 Kah mohsag wetu wutogquodtumun firuhtugquash, nish ogquodtukish wanegik Golde, kah na upponamun palmuhtugquash kah cháinsash.
E.3.5 And the greater house he cieled with fir tree, which he overlaid with fine gold, and set thereon palm trees and chains.

α.3.6 Kah ogquodtum wetu, mogkoadtikish qussukquanash wutché wunnegenit, kah ne gold, Parvaimme gold.
E.3.6 And he garnished the house with precious stones for beauty: and the gold was gold of Parvaim.

α.3.7 Kah wonk ogquodtum wetu, beamsash, postsash, kah nish sussipponkomukquash, kah ushquont gold kah kogohkswau cherubimsoh ut sussipponkkommuk.
E.3.7 He overlaid also the house, the beams, the posts, and the walls thereof, and the doors thereof, with gold; and graved cherubims on the walls.

α.3.8 Kah ayim waneetupanatamweyeu8g wetu: nesahteagk ne an8hque kishkag wetu nesnehchage ishquanogkod, kah neanukishkag nesnehchage ishquanogkod, káh wutogquodtumun wanegik Gold, nequtta tahshe pasuk8e talentsash.
E.3.8 And he made the most holy house, the length whereof was according to the breadth of the house, twenty cubits, and the breadth thereof twenty cubits: and he overlaid it with fine gold, amounting to six hundred talents.

α.3.9 Kah nean tuhkequog kenunkwhegash, napanna tahshinchagkodtash gole shekls[á]sh: kah ogquodtum gold waabe chambersash.
E.3.9 And the weight of the nails was fifty shekels of gold. And he overlaid the upper chambers with gold.

α.3.10 Kah ut anomut anue waneetupanatamweyeu8k, ayeuau nees8oh cherubimsoh, nunneukontunkane anakausuonk, kah wutogquonuh gold.
E.3.10 And in the most holy house he made two cherubims of image work, and overlaid them with gold.

α.3.11 Kah wunnuppihwhunouh cherubimsog nesnehchag ishquanogkod nesahteahettit pasuk wunnuppoh napanna tahshe isquanogkussu, missussin sussipponkomuk, kah onkatog wunnuppoh napanna tahshe isquanogkussu missuhkauau wunnuppohwhunoh onkatuk Cherub,
E.3.11 And the wings of the cherubims were twenty cubits long: one wing of the one cherub was five cubits, reaching to the wall of the house: and the other wing was likewise five cubits, reaching to the wing of the other cherub.

α.3.12 Kah pasuk wunnuppoh onkatuk cherub napanna tahshe ishquanogkussu, missussin sussipponkkomuk, kah onkatog wunnuppoh napanna tashishquânogkussu wonk mussussin onkatog Cherub wunnuppawhunit.
E.3.12 And one wing of the other cherub was five cubits, reaching to the wall of the house: and the other wing was five cubits also, joining to the wing of the other cherub.

α.3.13 Wunnuppuhwhun8uh yeug [C]erubimsog, sepageog nesnehchag isquanogkodtut: kah nag wesukkompóog wusset8oash, kah wuskesuk8ash anomiyeu.
E.3.13 The wings of these cherubims spread themselves forth twenty cubits: and they stood on their feet, and their faces were inward.

α.3.14 Kah ayim adtnikheg 8nóagk, kah purple, kah Crimson, kah wanegik hashabponagk kah ne wuttit wussukwhon cherubimsoh.
E.3.14 And he made the vail of blue, and purple, and crimson, and fine linen, and wrought cherubims thereon.

α.3.15 Wonk ayim anaquohtag wetu nesinásh pillersash, nishwinchage, kah napanna tahshe ishquanogkod nesohkunkquok, kah uppuhkuk ne woskeche naneeswe, napanna tashishquanogkod.
E.3.15 Also he made before the house two pillars of thirty and five cubits high, and the chapiter that was on the top of each of them was five cubits.

α.3.16 Kah ayim chainsash, onatuh ut oracle$ut, kah upponamunash pillarse uppuhkukquehtu kah ayim nequt pasuk88ash pomgranatsash, kah upponamunash chainsut.
E.3.16 And he made chains, as in the oracle, and put them on the heads of the pillars; and made an hundred pomegranates, and put them on the chains.

α.3.17 Kah neepattau pillersash anaquohtag Temple, pasuk muttinnonkôunit, onkatog menadcheanit, kah wutussowetamun ne muttinnukóuneiyeu Jachin, kah wuttissowetamun ne menadcheuneiyeu Boaz.
E.3.17 And he reared up the pillars before the temple, one on the right hand, and the other on the left; and called the name of that on the right hand Jachin, and the name of that on the left Boaz.

α.4.1 Nano, ayim brasse Altar, nesnehchage ishquanogkod nisahteagk, kah nesnehchag, ishquanogkod neanukkishkag, kah piogquish quanogkod ne sohkunkquok.
E.4.1 Moreover he made an altar of brass, twenty cubits the length thereof, and twenty cubits the breadth thereof, and ten cubits the height thereof.

α.4.2 Wonk ayim sabahsumwe keitoh, piogque ishquanogkod wutch wussadt onk yean wonk wussadt, papetukqui, kah napanna tashishquanogkod nesohkunkquok, kah shwinchage ishquanogkodte pemunneat weenisheau.
E.4.2 Also he made a molten sea of ten cubits from brim to brim, round in compass, and five cubits the height thereof; and a line of thirty cubits did compass it round about.

α.4.3 Kah ut agwu, oxinne nunneukontunkanog, neg ne wéinuhkunkeg: piukqussuog ut nequt ishquanogkod, wéenuhkomwog keitoh waéenu, neese pumikkompoog oxinog wunnupshanóog, wánuppashanit.
E.4.3 And under it was the similitude of oxen, which did compass it round about: ten in a cubit, compassing the sea round about. Two rows of oxen were cast, when it was cast.

α.4.4 Quenohteau nabo neese oxinit: nishuog unnuhquaeog nanummiyeu, kah nishuog unnuhquaeog wutcheksuiyeu kah nishuog unnuhquaeog sowaniyeu, kah nishuog unnuhquaeog wutchepwoiyeu: kah kehtoh wosketohtauuneau kah wame 8tamiyeumoash anomiyeu.
E.4.4 It stood upon twelve oxen, three looking toward the north, and three looking toward the west, and three looking toward the south, and three looking toward the east: and the sea was set above upon them, and all their hinder parts were inward.

α.4.5 Kah nean ukkuhpogkag pasuk menuhcheganit unnukkuhque kuppogki, kah wussadt onatuh wuttattamwaechue wus, nashpe lillee peshaónash, kah togqun nishwe muttannonganogkodtash bathsash.
E.4.5 And the thickness of it was an handbreadth, and the brim of it like the work of the brim of a cup, with flowers of lilies; and it received and held three thousand baths.

α.4.6 Kah wonk ayim piogquodtash ahhut kutchessumumukish, kah napanna tahshinash ponam unninohkôunit, kah napanna tahshinash menadcheanit, na ut kutchessittauinneat, nish maghetticheh wutche chikohtae mag8onk, na wuttit kutchissittauuneau, qut keitoh sephausuenuog wuttit kutchessumuneau.
E.4.6 He made also ten lavers, and put five on the right hand, and five on the left, to wash in them: such things as they offered for the burnt offering they washed in them; but the sea was for the priests to wash in.

α.4.7 Kah ayim piogquodtash golde wequananteganuhtugquash, n[é]anteomuk, kah nish uppondamunash temple, napanna tahshinash wuttinohkounit, kah napanna tahshinash menadcheanit.
E.4.7 And he made ten candlesticks of gold according to their form, and set them in the temple, five on the right hand, and five on the left.

α.4.8 Kah wonk ayim piogquadtash tablsash, kah upponamunash ut templeut, napanna tahshinash muttinnuhkôunit, kah napanna tahshinash menadcheanit: kah ayim nequt pasuk8ash golde wunnonganash.
E.4.8 He made also ten tables, and placed them in the temple, five on the right side, and five on the left. And he made an hundred basons of gold.

α.4.9 Kah wonk ayim wutchippineutunkan8 sephausuenúog, kah mohsag chippinneutunk, kah chippinneutungane squontash, kah kuppuhh8unash wutogquodtumunash brasse.
E.4.9 Furthermore he made the court of the priests, and the great court, and doors for the court, and overlaid the doors of them with brass.

α.4.10 Kah ponam keitoh muttinnuhkôuneiyeu wutchepwoiyeueiyeu, papiuhsuke sowaniyeu.
E.4.10 And he set the sea on the right side of the east end, over against the south.

α.4.11 Kah Huram ayim wishquash kah shovelsash, kah wunnonganash, kah Huram pakodjteo anakausuonk ne ayimauont Solomonoh, wutche wek God.
E.4.11 And Huram made the pots, and the shovels, and the basons. And Huram finished the work that he was to make for king Solomon for the house of God;

α.4.12 Neesinash pillarsash, kah pomelsash, kah uppuhkukquash nish woskeche neese pillarsut, kah neenash pepemsqunnum8ongash, unkhumunat neesinash uppuhkuk8e pummelsash, nish woskeche pillarsut.
E.4.12 To wit, the two pillars, and the pommels, and the chapiters which were on the top of the two pillars, and the two wreaths to cover the two pommels of the chapiters which were on the top of the pillars;

α.4.13 Kah yauut pasuk88ash pomgranatsash, ut neesinit pepemsqunnum8onganit, neese pomussinash pomgranatsash, na neese pepemsqunnum8onganit, onkhumunat chapiterse pummelsash, nish ohtagish pillarsut.
E.4.13 And four hundred pomegranates on the two wreaths; two rows of pomegranates on each wreath, to cover the two pommels of the chapiters which were upon the pillars.

α.4.14 Kah wonk ayimuk basesash, kah ahhut kutchessittomukish ut woskeche basesut.
E.4.14 He made also bases, and lavers made he upon the bases;

α.4.15 Pasuk keitoh, kah nabo nes8og oxenog agwe appuog.
E.4.15 One sea, and twelve oxen under it.

α.4.16 Wishquash wonk, kah shovelsash, kah weyause uhquonash, kah wame auwohteaongash, Huram 8shoh wutayimaúunápash Solomonoh ketass8toh, wutch wek Lord, wôhsepahtáe brasse.
E.4.16 The pots also, and the shovels, and the fleshhooks, and all their instruments, did Huram his father make to king Solomon for the house of the LORD of bright brass.

α.4.17 Ut Jordane mukoshquttaut, ketass8t nish 8nuppashadtauunash, ut man8nskohkit, nanashaue Succoth kah Zeredotha.
E.4.17 In the plain of Jordan did the king cast them, in the clay ground between Succoth and Zeredathah.

α.4.18 Yeu wuttin Solomon ayimun wame yeush auwohteaongash, monatash: newutche neantuhkequok brasse matta mishkom8un.
E.4.18 Thus Solomon made all these vessels in great abundance: for the weight of the brass could not be found out.

α.4.19 Kah Solomon ayim wame wishquash, nish wutch wek God, kah wonk golde altar, kah nahtitteáe petukqunnungane tablesash.
E.4.19 And Solomon made all the vessels that were for the house of God, the golden altar also, and the tables whereon the shewbread was set;

α.4.20 Wonk wequananteganuhtugquash, nashpe wul-lampsash, nish$noh chikohtauut ne woh ônag anaquohtag pahke golde oracle.
E.4.20 Moreover the candlesticks with their lamps, that they should burn after the manner before the oracle, of pure gold;

α.4.21 Kah uppeshauauash kah lampsash, kah golde tongsash, pannuppeyeue gold.
E.4.21 And the flowers, and the lamps, and the tongs, made he of gold, and that perfect gold;

α.4.22 Kah snuffersash, kah wunnongash, kah kenamóog, kah censersash, pahke goldeu8ash, kah ahhut petutteámuke wetu, anome ushquont, wutch anue wunnetupanatamwe kommukqut, kah ohkeiyeu ut temple wetuómut, goldeu8.
E.4.22 And the snuffers, and the basons, and the spoons, and the censers, of pure gold: and the entry of the house, the inner doors thereof for the most holy place, and the doors of the house of the temple, were of gold.

α.5.1 YEuin wame anakausuonk ne Solomon ayikup wutch wek Jehovah, pakodjteausu, kah Solomon petukodto wame teanteaquashinish, nish Davidoh 8shoh waneetupanatamwahteunkupash, kah silver kah g[o]ld, kah wame auwohteaongash ukkenukohtauunash wunnompak8unit ut wekit God.
E.5.1 Thus all the work that Solomon made for the house of the LORD was finished: and Solomon brought in all the things that David his father had dedicated; and the silver, and the gold, and all the instruments, put he among the treasures of the house of God.

α.5.2 Neit Solomon miyanau Israelle Eldersoh, kah wame chippan8e wabuhkuhk8utcheg, keihche wut8shinneunk ut wunnaumonat Israel, en Jerusalem, kuhkuhk8wuttauunat 8n8wae wut-arkum Jehovah, wutch wutotanat David ne Zion.
E.5.2 Then Solomon assembled the elders of Israel, and all the heads of the tribes, the chief of the fathers of the children of Israel, unto Jerusalem, to bring up the ark of the covenant of the LORD out of the city of David, which is Zion.

α.5.3 Ne waj wame Israelle wosketompaog, miyawéog en ketass8tamwut, ut mishadtupp8onganit, ne nesausuk adtahs8it nepauz.
E.5.3 Wherefore all the men of Israel assembled themselves unto the king in the feast which was in the seventh month.

α.5.4 Kah wame Israelle Eldersog peyaog, kah Levitsog nemunnumwog ark.
E.5.4 And all the elders of Israel came; and the Levites took up the ark.

α.5.5 Kah kuhkuhk8wuttóog ark, kah mukkinneae kommuk, kah wame wunnetupanatamwe auwohteaongash, nish ohtagish tabernakleut, yeush Levitsog kah sephausuenuog uppaudtauunáoash.
E.5.5 And they brought up the ark, and the tabernacle of the congregation, and all the holy vessels that were in the tabernacle, these did the priests and the Levites bring up.

α.5.6 Kah wonk ketass8t Solomon, kah wame Israelle mukkinnéonk, neg miyaécheg ut anaquohtag ark, sephausuog shepsoh kah oxenoh, neg matta woh wâogkemomukeg newutche muttaanwog.
E.5.6 Also king Solomon, and all the congregation of Israel that were assembled unto him before the ark, sacrificed sheep and oxen, which could not be told nor numbered for multitude.

α.5.7 Kah sephausuenuog petukodtóog 8n8wae wut-arkum Lord, en wutayeuonganit, en wetuóme Oracleut, en anue wunneetupanatamwe ayeuonganit, ut agwe wunnupp8whunn8wóu cherubimsog.
E.5.7 And the priests brought in the ark of the covenant of the LORD unto his place, to the oracle of the house, into the most holy place, even under the wings of the cherubims:

α.5.8 Newutche cherubimsog sepagin[á]og wunnupp8whun8uh, waábe arke aye[ú]onganit, kah cherubimsog nuhkuhkomwog ark, kah nish qunuhtukquash, waábe.
E.5.8 For the cherubims spread forth their wings over the place of the ark, and the cherubims covered the ark and the staves thereof above.

α.5.9 Kah kodtinnumwog arke qunuhtugquash ne waj uhquáe qunuhtugquash nogquodtash wutch arkut anaquohtag Oracle, qut matta poquadchit wutch nogquodtinn8wash, kah na ohteau pajeh yeu kesukok.
E.5.9 And they drew out the staves of the ark, that the ends of the staves were seen from the ark before the oracle; but they were not seen without. And there it is unto this day.

α.5.10 Wanne teag ohtano ut arkut, webe nesinash tablesash nish Moses petunkupash ut Horeb, Jehovah wann8wáhettit Israeloh wutch sohhamóhettit Egypt.
E.5.10 There was nothing in the ark save the two tables which Moses put therein at Horeb, when the LORD made a covenant with the children of Israel, when they came out of Egypt.

α.5.11 Kah n$niyeup, sephausuenúog sohhamwehettit wutch wunneetupanatamwe ayeuonganit, (newutche wame sephausuenúog neg na apitcheg, 8neetupánatamwa[h]eôog, neit matta wunashittue wowussummúwow8og.
E.5.11 And it came to pass, when the priests were come out of the holy place: (for all the priests that were present were sanctified, and did not then wait by course:

α.5.12 Kah wonk Levitsog, neg kodt8hómaenúutcheg, wame neg wadchiitcheg Asaph, Heman, Jeduthun, weeche wunnaumonáuh, kah wemat8oh, áhqhettit womponak, ohtauéhettit, cymbalsash, kah psalterisash, kah harpsash, neepóog wutchepwoiyeue altarut, kah nag weechayeumukquog nequt pas[u]k88oh, kah nesnehchagkussuoh sephausuénunnúh, puhpequohtóog nashpe monopuhpegquash.)
E.5.12 Also the Levites which were the singers, all of them of Asaph, of Heman, of Jeduthun, with their sons and their brethren, being arrayed in white linen, having cymbals and psalteries and harps, stood at the east end of the altar, and with them an hundred and twenty priests sounding with trumpets:)

α.5.13 Kah n$niyeup, puhpequaenúog kah ket8hamwáenuog, onatuh pasuk8hettit, nequttont8wahteauwahettit, wowenomónat k[á]h tabuttantamauónat Jehovah, káh mohtshont8wáhettit nashpe monopuhpegquonash, kah cymbalsash, kah wunnont8wae auwohteaongash, kah wowenomáhettit Jehovah, newutche wunneet8 newutche ummonaneteaong michemeyeu8, neit wetu numwohta matokqus, wek Jehovah.
E.5.13 It came even to pass, as the trumpeters and singers were as one, to make one sound to be heard in praising and thanking the LORD; and when they lifted up their voice with the trumpets and cymbals and instruments of musick, and praised the LORD, saying, For he is good; for his mercy endureth for ever: that then the house was filled with a cloud, even the house of the LORD;

α.5.14 Newaj sephausuenuog n8numhettit neepauun wowussummuónat, newutche mattokqs, newutche wussohsumóonk Jehovah numwohtau wekit God.
E.5.14 So that the priests could not stand to minister by reason of the cloud: for the glory of the LORD had filled the house of God.

α.6.1 NEit Solomon n8wau, Jehovah n8wop, nuttai$kuhpogke pohkenatu.
E.6.1 Then said Solomon, The LORD hath said that he would dwell in the thick darkness.

α.6.2 Qut kutayimoush kutayeuongane kommuk, kah micheme kutayeuonk.
E.6.2 But I have built an house of habitation for thee, and a place for thy dwelling for ever.

α.6.3 Kah ketass8t qunnuppenum wuskesuk, kah wunnanumau mamusse Israelle mukkinneonguh (kah wame Israelle mukkinnéonk neepóog.)
E.6.3 And the king turned his face, and blessed the whole congregation of Israel: and all the congregation of Israel stood.

α.6.4 Kah n8wau, wunnanumunach Jehovah Israel um-Manitt8moh, noh aseit nashpe wunnutcheg, ne anomp Davidoh n8shoh nashpe wutt8n, n8wop,
E.6.4 And he said, Blessed be the LORD God of Israel, who hath with his hands fulfilled that which he spake with his mouth to my father David, saying,

α.6.5 Nadteuh ne kesukok sohh8wunog nummissinninneumog wutch Egypte ohkeit, wanne nuppepenam8h keitotan, ut kenugke wame wutchippann8ongan8óut Israel, ne ut ayimunat wetu, n8wesuonk na ohtáut, asuh matta howae wosketomp wunnánauunonat Israelloh nummissinninneumoh.
E.6.5 Since the day that I brought forth my people out of the land of Egypt I chose no city among all the tribes of Israel to build an house in, that my name might be there; neither chose I any man to be a ruler over my people Israel:

α.6.6 Qut nuppepenum Jerusalem, na ohtáut n8wesuonk, kah nuppepenau David wunnánawunónat nummissinninneumoh Israeloh.
E.6.6 But I have chosen Jerusalem, that my name might be there; and have chosen David to be over my people Israel.

α.6.7 Kah ahtóp ut wuttahut David n8sh, wekuhkonat ut wesuonganit Jehovah um-Manitt8moh Israel.
E.6.7 Now it was in the heart of David my father to build an house for the name of the LORD God of Israel.

α.6.8 Qut Lord unnau n8shoh Davidoh: newutche kuttahut ohteau k8wekuhkonat ut n8wesuonganit, k8neseip newutche ne ohtóp ut kuttahut.
E.6.8 But the LORD said to David my father, Forasmuch as it was in thine heart to build an house for my name, thou didst well in that it was in thine heart:

α.6.9 Qut ken matta pish kutayimo wetu, qut kenaumon, noh woh sohhog wutch kusseganit, noh pish wekehteau ut n8wesuonganit.
E.6.9 Notwithstanding thou shalt not build the house; but thy son which shall come forth out of thy loins, he shall build the house for my name.

α.6.10 Newaj Jehovah pakodche usseuit yeu kutt8onk ne an8wop: newutche nunnompe waabéhtau David n8sh, kah nukquenap Israelle appuonganit, nean ukquoshóop, kah n8wekukkontam 8wesuonk Jehovah um-Manitt8moh Israel.
E.6.10 The LORD therefore hath performed his word that he hath spoken: for I am risen up in the room of David my father, and am set on the throne of Israel, as the LORD promised, and have built the house for the name of the LORD God of Israel.

α.6.11 Kah na nupponamun ark, ne ohtag 8n8waonk Jehovah, ne áyimwóhetteup wunnaumonuh Israel.
E.6.11 And in it have I put the ark, wherein is the covenant of the LORD, that he made with the children of Israel.

α.6.12 Kah nepau anaquohtag wut-altarum Jehovah, anaquabhettit wame Israelle mukkinneonk, kah sepáginitcháeu.
E.6.12 And he stood before the altar of the LORD in the presence of all the congregation of Israel, and spread forth his hands:

α.6.13 (Newutche Solomon ayimup brasse quésekompauonk, napanna tashishquonogkod nesahteagk, kah napanna tashishquanogkod neanukkishkag, kah nishweishquanogkod ne sohkunkquok, kah upponamunáh, ut noeu chippinneutunkanit, kah ne quesekompauin, uppésetukqussin ut ukkuttukqut ut anaquabhettit Israelle mukkinneonk, kah sepagenum wunnutchegash en kesukquieu.)
E.6.13 For Solomon had made a brasen scaffold of five cubits long, and five cubits broad, and three cubits high, and had set it in the midst of the court: and upon it he stood, and kneeled down upon his knees before all the congregation of Israel, and spread forth his hands toward heaven.

α.6.14 Kah n8wau, woi Jehovah um-Manitt8moh Israel wanne Manit kuttinnunk8, kesukqut asuh ohkeit, noh nanawehteunk 8n8waonk, kah kummonanum kittinneumog, neg paumushácheg anaquabean nashpe mamusse wuttahh8woash.
E.6.14 And said, O LORD God of Israel, there is no God like thee in the heaven, nor in the earth; which keepest covenant, and shewest mercy unto thy servants, that walk before thee with all their hearts:

α.6.15 Kén kenanawehteau kittinneum n8sh ne quoshomop: kah ne an8waop wutch kutt8nut, kah kutussen nashpe kenutcheg, neane yeu kesukok.
E.6.15 Thou which hast kept with thy servant David my father that which thou hast promised him; and spakest with thy mouth, and hast fulfilled it with thine hand, as it is this day.

α.6.16 Newutche yeuyeu, woi Jehovah um-Manitt8moh Israel, nanawehteau David kittinneum n8sh, ne quoshomop, kussip, matta pish kuppanishodtauwahu wosketomp ut anaquabeh, apinneat Israelle appuonganit: qut tohneit keneechanog nunnukqussehettit, pomushaóunónat nuttinnaumatuonk, neane pomushaan anaquabeh.
E.6.16 Now therefore, O LORD God of Israel, keep with thy servant David my father that which thou hast promised him, saying, There shall not fail thee a man in my sight to sit upon the throne of Israel; yet so that thy children take heed to their way to walk in my law, as thou hast walked before me.

α.6.17 Neit yeuyeu woi Jehovah ummanitt8moh Israel, wunnomwaahteauunach, ne anomp kittinninneum David.
E.6.17 Now then, O LORD God of Israel, let thy word be verified, which thou hast spoken unto thy servant David.

α.6.18 (Qut wunnamuhkut sun God wetomau wosketompuh ut ohkeit: kussek kesuk, kah ukkesuk8m8 kesukquog, matta kuttapenuk8: uttoh en anue peásin yeu wetu ne ayim)
E.6.18 But will God in very deed dwell with men on the earth? behold, heaven and the heaven of heavens cannot contain thee; how much less this house which I have built!

α.6.19 Newutche wutt8wontash uppeantamóonk kittinneum, kah 8wehquetumóonk, woi Jehovah nummanitt8m n8tamunat mauonk kah peantamoonk, ne kittinneum an peantog ut anaquabean.
E.6.19 Have respect therefore to the prayer of thy servant, and to his supplication, O LORD my God, to hearken unto the cry and the prayer which thy servant prayeth before thee:

α.6.20 Kuskesukquash woh woshwem8it ut yeu wetuómut kesukodáeu kah nukonáeu, ut áyeuonanit ne papaume an8wáop, woh na kupponumunat k8wesuonk, n8tamunat peantamóonk, ne kittinneum ain peantog nogque en yeu ayéuonganit.
E.6.20 That thine eyes may be open upon this house day and night, upon the place whereof thou hast said that thou wouldest put thy name there; to hearken unto the prayer which thy servant prayeth toward this place.

α.6.21 Newutche n8tash 8wehquetum8onk kittinneum, kah kummissinninneumog Israel, ne woh áyimwéhettit yeu nogque in áyeuonganit: n8tash wutch kutayeuonganit, wutch kesukqut, kah n8taman ahquontash.
E.6.21 Hearken therefore unto the supplications of thy servant, and of thy people Israel, which they shall make toward this place: hear thou from thy dwelling place, even from heaven; and when thou hearest, forgive.

α.6.22 Howan matchenéheont wetahteamungoh, kah chadchekeyeuwáonk ponamauut, chadchekeyeuwáheonat; kah ne chadchekeyeuwáonk peyom8uk anaquohtag kut-altarumut ut yeu wetuómut.
E.6.22 If a man sin against his neighbour, and an oath be laid upon him to make him swear, and the oath come before thine altar in this house;

α.6.23 Neit n8tash wutch kesukqut, kah ussish, kah wussum kittinneumog, onkquatauónat mátchetou, nompenumauónat nehenwonche ummay ut nehenwonche upuhkukqut, kah sampweneheo[n]at sampweusseaenuog, aninnumauonat neaunak wussampweusseonk.
E.6.23 Then hear thou from heaven, and do, and judge thy servants, by requiting the wicked, by recompensing his way upon his own head; and by justifying the righteous, by giving him according to his righteousness.

α.6.24 Kah kummissinninneumog Israel togkomit ut anaquabenit ummatwóm8uh, newutche kummatchenehikquog, kah nag quinnuppehettit kah samp8waontamwéhettit k8wesuonk, kah peantamwehettit, kah wehquetumohettit ut anaquabean ut yeu wetuo[m]ut.
E.6.24 And if thy people Israel be put to the worse before the enemy, because they have sinned against thee; and shall return and confess thy name, and pray and make supplication before thee in this house;

α.6.25 Neit n8tash wutch kesukqut, kah ahquontamau ummatcheseongan8 kummissinninnumog Israel, kah wonk pas8h, en ohkeit ne anumauop, kah en 8sh8out.
E.6.25 Then hear thou from the heavens, and forgive the sin of thy people Israel, and bring them again unto the land which thou gavest to them and to their fathers.

α.6.26 Kesuk kuppuhhausik, kah matta sokanounun8g, newutche kummatchenehikquog: peantamwhettit yeu nogque in ayeuonganit, kah sampoantamwehettit k8wesuonk, kah quiñuppehettit wutch ummatcheseongan8out nag onkquanumweheadt.
E.6.26 When the heaven is shut up, and there is no rain, because they have sinned against thee; yet if they pray toward this place, and confess thy name, and turn from their sin, when thou dost afflict them;

α.6.27 Neit n8tash wutch kesukqut, kah ahquontamau ummatcheseongan8 kittinneumog, kah kummissinninneumog Israel; mahche kuhk8tomauadt wunne may, ne woh áahettit, kah sokanonteash en ohkeit, ne anumauadt kummissinninneumog 8tahtauonganinneaóont.
E.6.27 Then hear thou from heaven, and forgive the sin of thy servants, and of thy people Israel, when thou hast taught them the good way, wherein they should walk; and send rain upon thy land, which thou hast given unto thy people for an inheritance.

α.6.28 Mashagquok ut ohkeit eninneaonganù88k, ohp8htag, asuh mildew88k, chonsomspsu88k, asuh m8pó88k: ummatwom8oh wéenuhkongkhéttit, en ohkee keitotanahtu: ne teage kehkechiyeu8k, asuh ne teague matchinnaonganu8k.
E.6.28 If there be dearth in the land, if there be pestilence, if there be blasting, or mildew, locusts, or caterpillers; if their enemies besiege them in the cities of their land; whatsoever sore or whatsoever sickness there be:

α.6.29 Ne teagwe peantamoonk, asuh ne teague wehquetum8onk, ne woh howan ayik, asuh wame kummissinninneumog Israel, nish$noh pasuk wahteunk nehenwonche ukkéhkechesuonk kah nehenwonche wutonkquomom8onk, kah sepágenuk wunnutcheganash yeu en wetuómut.
E.6.29 Then what prayer or what supplication soever shall be made of any man, or of all thy people Israel, when every one shall know his own sore and his own grief, and shall spread forth his hands in this house:

α.6.30 Neit n8tash wutch kesukqut kutayeuonganit, kah ahquontash, kah onkquatau nishnoh wosketomp neaunak wame ummayash, noh wuttah wahteauan (newutche webe ken k8wahteoh wuttahh8óash wunnaumonáuh wosketompaog.)
E.6.30 Then hear thou from heaven thy dwelling place, and forgive, and render unto every man according unto all his ways, whose heart thou knowest; (for thou only knowest the hearts of the children of men:)

α.6.31 Onk woh nag kukqushhukquog, pomushonat kumm[à]yikontu, nisáhke pomantamwehettit ut ohkeit, ne anumauop k8shinónoh.
E.6.31 That they may fear thee, to walk in thy ways, so long as they live in the land which thou gavest unto our fathers.

α.6.32 Wonk papaume pen8wot, noh matta wadchiegk kummissinninneumog Israel, qut 8m88 nôadtit wutohtimóneat, newutche kummishe wesuonk, kah kumménuhkinnutcheg, kah kussummogkinnum8e kuhpit: nag peyahettit, kah peantamwehettit yeuut wetuómut.
E.6.32 Moreover concerning the stranger, which is not of thy people Israel, but is come from a far country for thy great name's sake, and thy mighty hand, and thy stretched out arm; if they come and pray in this house;

α.6.33 Neit n8tash wutch kesukqut, wutch kutayeuongane áyeuonganit, kah ussish neaunak wame, ne pen8wot wehquetumunkquean: onk woh wame ohke wahteauog k8wesuonk, kah woh kuhqushhukquog, ne aséhettit Israelle kummissinninneumog, kah woh wahteauog, yeu wetu ne ayim, ne ussowetamun k8wesuonganit.
E.6.33 Then hear thou from the heavens, even from thy dwelling place, and do according to all that the stranger calleth to thee for; that all people of the earth may know thy name, and fear thee, as doth thy people Israel, and may know that this house which I have built is called by thy name.

α.6.34 Kummissinninnúmwog sohhamwehettit ayeuuhkonónat ummatwom8oh, nashpe may, ne woh ann8taman; kah peantamwehettit en nogque yeu keitotanat, ne pepenamau, kah yeu wetu, ne ayim wutche k8wesuonk.
E.6.34 If thy people go out to war against their enemies by the way that thou shalt send them, and they pray unto thee toward this city which thou hast chosen, and the house which I have built for thy name;

α.6.35 Neit ken n8tash wutch kesukqut, uppeantam8ongán8, kah 8wehquetum8ongan8, kah menuhketeaush wuttinniyeuongan8.
E.6.35 Then hear thou from the heavens their prayer and their supplication, and maintain their cause.

α.6.36 Matchenehikquéan, (newutche wanne howan noh matta matcheásik) kah nag musquanumadt, kah nag mag8an en anaquabhettit ummatwom8oh, nag missinnóhteáhettit, en nóadt wutohtimóneat asuh pas8che.
E.6.36 If they sin against thee, (for there is no man which sinneth not,) and thou be angry with them, and deliver them over before their enemies, and they carry them away captives unto a land far off or near;

α.6.37 Qut onch qushkeâeahettit ut wuttahh8óut, ut ne ohkeit ottoh adt missinohteamuk, nag quinnuppéhettit, kah peantamunkquean ut en ummissinóe ohkeyeuóont n8wahettit, nummatchesemun, nuppanneussemun, numm8cheke matchesemun.
E.6.37 Yet if they bethink themselves in the land whither they are carried captive, and turn and pray unto thee in the land of their captivity, saying, We have sinned, we have done amiss, and have dealt wickedly;

α.6.38 Nag qushkehettit en kuhhogkat nashpe mamusse kuttahou, kah nashpe mamusse ukketeahogkounoh, en ummissináe ohkeyeuóut, uttoh as8wunáhettit missinuh, peantamwehettit nogque en ohkeit ne anumauop 8sh8oh, kah nogque en keitotanat ne pepenaman, kah nogque en wetuómut ne ayim ut k8wesuonganit.
E.6.38 If they return to thee with all their heart and with all their soul in the land of their captivity, whither they have carried them captives, and pray toward their land, which thou gavest unto their fathers, and toward the city which thou hast chosen, and toward the house which I have built for thy name:

α.6.39 Neit n8tash wutch kesukqut, wutch kutayeuongane ayeuonganit, uppeantam8ongan8óash, kah 8wehquetum8ongash, kah menehketeaush wuttinniyeuonk, kah ahquontamau kummissinninneumog, neg matchenehikqueaneg.
E.6.39 Then hear thou from the heavens, even from thy dwelling place, their prayer and their supplications, and maintain their cause, and forgive thy people which have sinned against thee.

α.6.40 Yeuyeu num-Manitt8m, k8wehquetumoush, kuskesukquash wôshwohtaj, kah kuhtauogash ahchúsittamóm8utch peantam8onk yeu ut ayeuonganit.
E.6.40 Now, my God, let, I beseech thee, thine eyes be open, and let thine ears be attent unto the prayer that is made in this place.

α.6.41 Newutche yeuyeu omohkish woi Lord God, en kutanwósinne ayeuonganit, ken, kah kummenuhkesue ark; kussephausueneumog woi Jehovah, hogk8m8utch wadchanittuonk, kah k8neetupanatam8mog, wekontam8m8utch en wunnet8onganit.
E.6.41 Now therefore arise, O LORD God, into thy resting place, thou, and the ark of thy strength: let thy priests, O LORD God, be clothed with salvation, and let thy saints rejoice in goodness.

α.6.42 Woi Jehovah Manit, ahque amáe quinnupinish wuskesuk sasequnadt: mehquontash ummonaneteaongash David kittinneum.
E.6.42 O LORD God, turn not away the face of thine anointed: remember the mercies of David thy servant.

α.7.1 KAh Solomon mahche peantog, n8tau n8kem8 wutch kesukqut, kah mahchuhkussum chikohtae mag8ongash, kah sephausuongash, kah wussohsumóonk Jehovah numwohteau wetuómut.
E.7.1 Now when Solomon had made an end of praying, the fire came down from heaven, and consumed the burnt offering and the sacrifices; and the glory of the LORD filled the house.

α.7.2 Kah sephausuenuoh n8nanumóog petukon wekit Jehovah, newutche wussohsumóonk Jehovah numwohteau Jehovah wekit.
E.7.2 And the priests could not enter into the house of the LORD, because the glory of the LORD had filled the LORD's house.

α.7.3 Kah wame wunnaumonuh Israel naumohettit uttoh án n8tau n8kem8uk, kah wussohsum8onk Jehovah ut wetuómut, nauwaéog, nashpe wuskesukk88ash en ohkekontu, ut wunnomskinausuut, wowussummuwáog kah woweenomáog Jehovaoh, newutche wunneetou, newutche ummonanitteaonk michemohteau.
E.7.3 And when all the children of Israel saw how the fire came down, and the glory of the LORD upon the house, they bowed themselves with their faces to the ground upon the pavement, and worshipped, and praised the LORD, saying, For he is good; for his mercy endureth for ever.

α.7.4 Neit ketass8t, kah wame missinninnuog, mag8og sephausuongash ut anaquabit Jehovah.
E.7.4 Then the king and all the people offered sacrifices before the LORD.

α.7.5 Kah ketass8t Solomon sephausuonk mag8, nesnehchage kah neese muttannongkussuog oxenog, kah nequtpasuk8e, kah nesnehchage muttannonganogkussuog shepsog, neit ketass8t kah wame missinninnúog wunneetupanatamwéhteauog wek God.
E.7.5 And king Solomon offered a sacrifice of twenty and two thousand oxen, and an hundred and twenty thousand sheep: so the king and all the people dedicated the house of God.

α.7.6 Kah sephausuenúog usseog wutannohsuongan8: kah wonk Levitsog nashpe wunnont8wáe wutauwohteaongash Jehovah, nish David ketass8t ayikupash wowenumonat Jehovah, newutche ummonàneteaongash michemohtáash; David wáeenomuadt nashpe nag wunnutchegan8oash: kah sephausuenuog wunnont8watauog monopuhpegqunash ut anaquabhettit, kah wame Israel neepóog.
E.7.6 And the priests waited on their offices: the Levites also with instruments of musick of the LORD, which David the king had made to praise the LORD, because his mercy endureth for ever, when David praised by their ministry; and the priests sounded trumpets before them, and all Israel stood.

α.7.7 Nano, Solomon wunneetupanatamwáteo nasháue chippinneutunk, ne anaquohtag wek Jehovah: newutche na wuttit magun chikohtae mag8ongash, kah wunnohteáe mag8ongane wees; newutche brasse altar ne Solomon ayeuompoh, matta tapenum8 attumunumunat, chikohtae mag8ongash, kah meetsue mag8ongash kah wees.
E.7.7 Moreover Solomon hallowed the middle of the court that was before the house of the LORD: for there he offered burnt offerings, and the fat of the peace offerings, because the brasen altar which Solomon had made was not able to receive the burnt offerings, and the meat offerings, and the fat.

α.7.8 Kah wonk ne ahquompak nesausuk tahshikquinne mishadtupp8, kah wame weeche Israel, ahche mishe mukkinneonk, wutch ahhut petutteamuk Hamath, wehque Egypte sepuut.
E.7.8 Also at the same time Solomon kept the feast seven days, and all Israel with him, a very great congregation, from the entering in of Hamath unto the river of Egypt.

α.7.9 Kah shwosuk adtahshikquinogkok, ayimwog wunnetupanatamwe moéonk: newutche nanawehteauog wunneetupanatamwahteóonk altar, nesausuk tahshikquinne, kah mishadtupp8onk nesausuk tahshikquinne.
E.7.9 And in the eighth day they made a solemn assembly: for they kept the dedication of the altar seven days, and the feast seven days.

α.7.10 Kah nesnehchadtequnhog kah nish, nesausuk adtahs8it nepauz, moncheaheau missinninnúh en wekuómut, wekontamwog, kah muskouánatamwúhteahâog wutch wanegig ne nahtinont Davidoh kah Solomonoh, kah Israeloh ummissinninneumoh.
E.7.10 And on the three and twentieth day of the seventh month he sent the people away into their tents, glad and merry in heart for the goodness that the LORD had shewed unto David, and to Solomon, and to Israel his people.

α.7.11 Yeu wuttin Solomon kesteauun wek Jehovah, kah ketass8t wek, kah wame nish paom8ukish Solomon wuttahhut ayimunat ut wekit Jehovah, kah ut nehenwonche wekit, 8niyeue ussen.
E.7.11 Thus Solomon finished the house of the LORD, and the king's house: and all that came into Solomon's heart to make in the house of the LORD, and in his own house, he prosperously effected.

α.7.12 Kah Jehovah naéhtauau Solomonoh nukkonáeu, kah wuttinuh, nunn8tam kuppeantamóonk, kah yeu ayeuonk nuppepènamwaushun nuhhog, wutche sephausúkomuk.
E.7.12 And the LORD appeared to Solomon by night, and said unto him, I have heard thy prayer, and have chosen this place to myself for an house of sacrifice.

α.7.13 Yânunnúmon kesuk matta sokanon8ut, asuh ann8nog chansompsog ummatchteauunnaóont ohke; asuh enninneáonk ann8nog, en nummissinninnúmut.
E.7.13 If I shut up heaven that there be no rain, or if I command the locusts to devour the land, or if I send pestilence among my people;

α.7.14 Nummissinninnúmog, neg as8wesitcheg nashpe n8wesuonk, nag hohpaheáhettit wuhhogkauh, kah peantamwehettit, kah natinnehamohettit nuskesuk, kah qushkehettit wutch ummatche mayeuwóut: neit pish nunn8tam wutch kesukqut, kah pish nutahquontam ummatcheseongan8, kah pish nunneetskehteo wutohkéyeu.
E.7.14 If my people, which are called by my name, shall humble themselves, and pray, and seek my face, and turn from their wicked ways; then will I hear from heaven, and will forgive their sin, and will heal their land.

α.7.15 Yeuyeu nuskesukquash pish woshwem8ash, kah nehtauogash pish ahchúsittam8m8ash peantamóonk yeuut ayeuonganit.
E.7.15 Now mine eyes shall be open, and mine ears attent unto the prayer that is made in this place.

α.7.16 New[ú]tche yeuyeu nuppepenam, kah n8neetupanatamwahteo yeu wetu, n8wesuonk na woh michemohtea, kah nuskesukquash kah nuttah na pish nagwutteohteau.
E.7.16 For now have I chosen and sanctified this house, that my name may be there for ever: and mine eyes and mine heart shall be there perpetually.

α.7.17 Kah papaume ken, pomush[â]an anaquabeh neane David k8sh pomushop: kah ussean wame neanann8nun, kah kuhkinneaséan nukkuhk8waongash kah nosittum8ongash.
E.7.17 And as for thee, if thou wilt walk before me, as David thy father walked, and do according to all that I have commanded thee, and shalt observe my statutes and my judgments;

α.7.18 Neit pish nummenuhkehteoh ketass8tamwe appuonk, neane wunn8waogkup David k8sh, nussip, matta pish pannushano w[ò]sketomp wutche ken wunnánawunnúaennúunneat ut Israel.
E.7.18 Then will I stablish the throne of thy kingdom, according as I have covenanted with David thy father, saying, There shall not fail thee a man to be ruler in Israel.

α.7.19 Qut qushkeóg, kah nukkodtumóg nukkuhk8waongash, kah nutann8team8ongash nish ponamonish anaquabeóg; kah moncheóg kah wuttinneumuhkauóg kah wowussumóg onkatogig manitt8og:
E.7.19 But if ye turn away, and forsake my statutes and my commandments, which I have set before you, and shall go and serve other gods, and worship them;

α.7.20 Neit pish nukkodtahchabpúhkonóog wutch nutohkit, ne anúmauog, kah yeu wetu ne wunneetupanatamwáhteau, wutche n8wesuonk, pish nuppogketamun wutch anaquabeh, kah pish núnnukkummuwóhtauun, kah nutóiontogkodtauwahteauun ut kenugke wame wutohtimóneat.
E.7.20 Then will I pluck them up by the roots out of my land which I have given them; and this house, which I have sanctified for my name, will I cast out of my sight, and will make it to be a proverb and a byword among all nations.

α.7.21 Kah yeu wetu, ne mahsh[à]numukquok, pish wutchepshàadtamun nish$noh howan noh pamwushâadtog, newaj pish n8wadt, tohwutch yeu unnéhteunk Jehovah yeu ohkée, kah yeu wetu?
E.7.21 And this house, which is high, shall be an astonishment to every one that passeth by it; so that he shall say, Why hath the LORD done thus unto this land, and unto this house?

α.7.22 Kah pish en namp8hamwontamun, newutche nukkonáog Jehovahoh um-Manitt8m8uh 8sh8oh, noh sohh8wunont wutch Egypte ohkeit, kah menuhkenáog onkatogeh manitt8h, kah wowussumáog, kah 8tinninneumuhkauóuh, newaj nukúhkauwáheont wame yeu machuk.
E.7.22 And it shall be answered, Because they forsook the LORD God of their fathers, which brought them forth out of the land of Egypt, and laid hold on other gods, and worshipped them, and served them: therefore hath he brought all this evil upon them.

α.8.1 KAh nniyeup (mahche nesnechage kodtum8k ne adt kesteunk Solomon, wek Jehovah, kah nehenwonche wek.)
E.8.1 And it came to pass at the end of twenty years, wherein Solomon had built the house of the LORD, and his own house,

α.8.2 Keitotanash nish Huram nompenumauonche Solomonoh: Solomon nish wutayimunash, kah nó wutáyeuwaheon wunnaumonuh Israel.
E.8.2 That the cities which Huram had restored to Solomon, Solomon built them, and caused the children of Israel to dwell there.

α.8.3 Kah Solomon au Hamoth$Zobah, kah wússohkomun.
E.8.3 And Solomon went to Hamathzobah, and prevailed against it.

α.8.4 Kah ayim Tadmor ut touohkomukqut, kah wame ogqunniikkomukque keitotanash, nish ayikish ut Hamath.
E.8.4 And he built Tadmor in the wilderness, and all the store cities, which he built in Hamath.

α.8.5 Kah wonk ayim Bethhoron, koduhkôageiyeu, kah Bethhoron 8muhkoiageiyeu, pummeneutausu otanash, nashpe pummeneutungash, ushquontamash, kah bársash.
E.8.5 Also he built Bethhoron the upper, and Bethhoron the nether, fenced cities, with walls, gates, and bars;

α.8.6 Kah Baalath, kah wame wadchanumwe keitotanash, nish Solomon ohtunk, kah wame chariotse keitotanash, kah Horsesoh na8mukqutcheg ukkeitotanash, kah wamu ne Solomon kodtantog ayimunat ut Jerusalem, kah ut Lebanon, kah papannuppe wame wunnanawunumwe ohkeit.
E.8.6 And Baalath, and all the store cities that Solomon had, and all the chariot cities, and the cities of the horsemen, and all that Solomon desired to build in Jerusalem, and in Lebanon, and throughout all the land of his dominion.

α.8.7 Papaume wame missinninnuog neg sequttawhutcheg wut-Hittitsog, kah wut$Amoritsog, kah up-Perizitsog, kah wut-Hivitsog, kah wutJebusitsog, neg matta wadchiegig Israel.
E.8.7 As for all the people that were left of the Hittites, and the Amorites, and the Perizzites, and the Hivites, and the Jebusites, which were not of Israel,

α.8.8 Qut wunneechan8oh, neg asquttawhutcheg asuhkaue ut ohkeit, neh wunnaumonuh Israel matta mohtupanahettegeh: neh Solomon wutompweteaheuh pajeh yeu kesukok.
E.8.8 But of their children, who were left after them in the land, whom the children of Israel consumed not, them did Solomon make to pay tribute until this day.

α.8.9 Qut wutch wunnaumonat Israel, Solomon matta 8tinninneumehteaunuh wutche wutanakausuonk, qut nag ayeuhteaenuog, 8kehchemugquompominneuh, wut$chariotse Mugq[ú]ompomoh, kah horsesoh na8mukqutcheg.
E.8.9 But of the children of Israel did Solomon make no servants for his work; but they were men of war, and chief of his captains, and captains of his chariots and horsemen.

α.8.10 Kah yeug megonneyeuutcheg wutannohsueneumoh ketass8t Solomon, neese pasuk88og kah napanna tahshinchag, neg nánawunoncheg missinninnuh.
E.8.10 And these were the chief of king Solomon's officers, even two hundred and fifty, that bare rule over the people.

α.8.11 Kah Solomon kuhkuhk8unau wuttaunoh Pharoh wutch wutotanat David, en wetuomut ne ayimauont, newutche n8wau, nummittamwos matta pish ayéeu wekit David Israelle ketass8t, newutche ayeuongash wunneetupanat[à]mweyeu8ash uttoh adt peyaum8uk wut-Arkum Jehovah.
E.8.11 And Solomon brought up the daughter of Pharaoh out of the city of David unto the house that he had built for her: for he said, My wife shall not dwell in the house of David king of Israel, because the places are holy, whereunto the ark of the LORD hath come.

α.8.12 Neit Solomon mag8 chikohtae sephausuongash en Jehovahut, ut wut-Altarumut Jehovah, ne ayik ut anaquohtag porch.
E.8.12 Then Solomon offered burnt offerings unto the LORD on the altar of the LORD, which he had built before the porch,

α.8.13 Kukquttum8e tahshe asekesukokish, maguk neaunak wuttinnaumatuonk Moses, Sasaboth$dayeu, kay ut wuske nepauzsahtu, kah ut mishe mishadtupp8onganehtu, nishwudt nish$noh podtumm8, mat seanne petukquenongane mishadtupp8onkanit, kah wekse mishadtupp8onkanit, kah Tabernaklee mishadtupp8onganit.
E.8.13 Even after a certain rate every day, offering according to the commandment of Moses, on the sabbaths, and on the new moons, and on the solemn feasts, three times in the year, even in the feast of unleavened bread, and in the feast of weeks, and in the feast of tabernacles.

α.8.14 Kah kuhquttum, neaunak 8nohtóonk 8shoh Davidoh, sephausuenue 8nappuongash, ut 8tinninneumuhkausuongan8óut, kah Levitsog ut ummeechumuhkonaonganit, woweenomuwonat, kah wuttinneumuhkausinneat ut anaquabhettit sephausuenuog, neane nishnoh kesukodtae wuttiñeumuka[u]simuk: kah wonk nanausquontamenuog ut 8nappuongan8out ut nish$noh asquontamut, newutche ne wuttinne Manittowomp David ann8teamwunneah.
E.8.14 And he appointed, according to the order of David his father, the courses of the priests to their service, and the Levites to their charges, to praise and minister before the priests, as the duty of every day required: the porters also by their courses at every gate: for so had David the man of God commanded.

α.8.15 Kah nag matta nukkodtum8og wutann8team8onk ketass8t, neanann8nont sephausuenuog, kah Levitsog, papume ne teaguas, asuh papaume nompak8unash.
E.8.15 And they departed not from the commandment of the king unto the priests and Levites concerning any matter, or concerning the treasures.

α.8.16 Kah wame wutanakausuonk Solomon, quagquoshwunumun wutche ne kesukok wanahtauhettit quenohtag wetu J[e]hovah, kah nô pajeh kestauunat: neit wek God pannuppeteauun.
E.8.16 Now all the work of Solomon was prepared unto the day of the foundation of the house of the LORD, and until it was finished. So the house of the LORD was perfected.

α.8.17 Neit Solomon au Ezion$Geber, kah en Elith ut kishke ketahhannit ut Edome ohkit.
E.8.17 Then went Solomon to Eziongeber, and to Eloth, at the sea side in the land of Edom.

α.8.18 Kah Huram na en negonshhuau kuht8nogwash nashpe wunnutchegan8out wuttinneumoh, kah wuttinneumuneunk neg wahteunkig keitoh, kah nag weechaauog wuttinneumoh Solomon en Ophir, kah na 8tinnumuneau yauut pasuk8e, kah napanna tahshinchage golde talentsash, kah uppaudtauunaoash ketass8toh Solomonoh.
E.8.18 And Huram sent him by the hands of his servants ships, and servants that had knowledge of the sea; and they went with the servants of Solomon to Ophir, and took thence four hundred and fifty talents of gold, and brought them to king Solomon.

α.9.1 KAh Shebae sonkusq n8tog 8wenomaonk Solomon peyau, qutcheheonat Solomonoh nashpe siogke nat8tomwehteaongash, ut Jerusalem, nashpe muttaán8e chipwushaog, kah Camelsog neg nayeutogig, spicesash kah Gold m8cheke, kah magôadtikish qussukquanash: kah paohonont Solomonoh, ukkeket8kauau papaume wame ne wuttahhut.
E.9.1 And when the queen of Sheba heard of the fame of Solomon, she came to prove Solomon with hard questions at Jerusalem, with a very great company, and camels that bare spices, and gold in abundance, and precious stones: and when she was come to Solomon, she communed with him of all that was in her heart.

α.9.2 Kah Solomon wuttinnonash wame wunnat8tomwehteaongash, kah monteag adtuhtôsin8 wutch Solomon ne matta anunk.
E.9.2 And Solomon told her all her questions: and there was nothing hid from Solomon which he told her not.

α.9.3 Kah Shebae sonksq nag* 8wáantamóonk Solomon kah wetu ne kesteunk.
E.9.3 And when the queen of Sheba had seen the wisdom of Solomon, and the house that he had built,

α.9.4 Kah meetsuonk ut wuttableumut, kah ne apinit wuttinneumoh: kah nean wuttinneumit wuttinneumoh, kah wuthogk8un8oash, & wonk 8tattamwaitch kôunnumunutcheg, kah wuthogk8n8ash, kah ukkuhkuhqueonk nean kuhkuhqueit en wekit Jehovah, wanne wonk wunnashaonganeu.
E.9.4 And the meat of his table, and the sitting of his servants, and the attendance of his ministers, and their apparel; his cupbearers also, and their apparel; and his ascent by which he went up into the house of the LORD; there was no more spirit in her.

α.9.5 Kah unnau ketass8tóh, wunnamuhkuteyeu8 unnehtunkquodt ne n8tam ut nehenwonche nutohkit papaume kutusseong[â]sh, kah papaume k8waantamóonk.
E.9.5 And she said to the king, It was a true report which I heard in mine own land of thine acts, and of thy wisdom:

α.9.6 Qut matta n8namptam8 ukkutt8ongan8oash, nó pajeh nuppeyonat, kah nuskesukqutash wunnaumun, kah kusseh pohshe mátanunkquok k8wáantamoonk matta nuttitteaan, newutche kummishteoh wowenodtuonk ne n8tamomp.
E.9.6 Howbeit I believed not their words, until I came, and mine eyes had seen it: and, behold, the one half of the greatness of thy wisdom was not told me: for thou exceedest the fame that I heard.

α.9.7 Wunniyeuog k8wosketompaog, kah wunniyeuog yeug kuttinneumog, neg nagwutteagkompauitcheg anaquabean, kah n8togig k8waantam8onk.
E.9.7 Happy are thy men, and happy are these thy servants, which stand continually before thee, and hear thy wisdom.

α.9.8 Wunnanumunach Jehovah kum$Manitt8m, noh tapeneunkquean, kupponukqunat yeu appuonganit, ketass8tam8ineat wutche Jehovah kum-Manitt8m, newutche kum-Manitt8m womonau Israeloh nah um̃enuhkeheonat micheme, newaje naut kutass8tam̃ukkônukqueā, ussēat wussittūóonk & sampwagk
E.9.8 Blessed be the LORD thy God, which delighted in thee to set thee on his throne, to be king for the LORD thy God: because thy God loved Israel, to establish them for ever, therefore made he thee king over them, to do judgment and justice.

α.9.9 Kah aninnumauau ketass8toh nequt pasuk8e kah nesnehchage golde talentsash, kah spicash monatash, kah magôadtikish qussukquanash, kah ne matta nano spicash, nish Shebae sonksq anúmauonche ketass8toh Solomonoh.
E.9.9 And she gave the king an hundred and twenty talents of gold, and of spices great abundance, and precious stones: neither was there any such spice as the queen of Sheba gave king Solomon.

α.9.10 Kah wonk wuttinneumoh Huram, kah wuttinneumoh Solomon, neg paudtunkig gold wutch Ophir, paudtóog almuhtukquash, kah magôadtikish qussukquanash.
E.9.10 And the servants also of Huram, and the servants of Solomon, which brought gold from Ophir, brought algum trees and precious stones.

α.9.11 Kah ketass8t nashpe almuhtukquash wut-stairsuhkónash ut wekit Jehovah, kah ut ketass8t wekit, kah harpsash, kah ps[á]lterisash wutche ket8hamwaenúog, kah matta wonk nein negonne naum8unah ut ohkeit Judah.
E.9.11 And the king made of the algum trees terraces to the house of the LORD, and to the king's palace, and harps and psalteries for singers: and there were none such seen before in the land of Judah.

α.9.12 Kah ketass8t Solomon aninnumauau Shebae sonksquau wame ukkodtanatam8onk, uttoh an wehquetuk, chaubok ne paudtauont ketass8toh: neit qushkeu, kah monchu nehenwonche wutohkeit, nagum kah wuttinneumoh.
E.9.12 And king Solomon gave to the queen of Sheba all her desire, whatsoever she asked, beside that which she had brought unto the king. So she turned, and went away to her own land, she and her servants.

α.9.13 Kah nean tuhkequok gold, ne paógqut Solomon nequt kodtumwáe, ne nequtta tahshe pasuk8e, kah nequtta tahshinchage, kah nequtta tahshe golde talentsash.
E.9.13 Now the weight of gold that came to Solomon in one year was six hundred and threescore and six talents of gold;

α.9.14 Chaubok ne adtoáenuog kah anaqushaenúog paudtauéhettit, kah wame Arabiáe ketass8tamwog, kah wutohtimóinne nanauwunnuenúog, paudtauáog gold Solomonoh.
E.9.14 Beside that which chapmen and merchants brought. And all the kings of Arabia and governors of the country brought gold and silver to Solomon.

α.9.15 Kah ketass8t Solomon ayim nesepasuk8e sukquehthamwe golde targetsash, nequtta tahshe pasuk88ash sukquehthamwe golde shekelsash, pasukqunnú8 target.
E.9.15 And king Solomon made two hundred targets of beaten gold: six hundred shekels of beaten gold went to one target.

α.9.16 Kah nishwudt pasuk88ash sugquehthamwe golde ogqunnegash, nishwudt pasuk88ash golde shekelsash pasukqunnú8 ogqunneg, kah ketass8t nash upponamunash ut Lebanone tauohkomukque wetuómut.
E.9.16 And three hundred shields made he of beaten gold: three hundred shekels of gold went to one shield. And the king put them in the house of the forest of Lebanon.

α.9.17 Wonk ketass8t ayim Ivorie mishe appuonk, kah wutogquodtumun wanegik gold.
E.9.17 Moreover the king made a great throne of ivory, and overlaid it with pure gold.

α.9.18 Kah nequtta tashanéhtuonganu8 en appuonganit, nashpe golde quenannéhtuonk, nish manuhkohtagish appuonganit: kah aninnuhk8unash, aéetaue ne ahapimuk, kah nesuog qunnónúog, kehchekompóog, aninúhk8unit.
E.9.18 And there were six steps to the throne, with a footstool of gold, which were fastened to the throne, and stays on each side of the sitting place, and two lions standing by the stays:

α.9.19 Kah nabo nees8og qunnon8og na wunneepauunneau aéetaue, ut nequtta adtahshánittuonganogkok: matta neanteausin8 woh toh ut ass8tam8onganit.
E.9.19 And twelve lions stood there on the one side and on the other upon the six steps. There was not the like made in any kingdom.

α.9.20 Kah wame wuttattamwaitchuash ketass8t Solomon goldeu8ash, kah wame auwohteaongash ut Lebanone touohkomukque wetuómut pahke goldeu8ash: wanne silvereu8ash, matta toh ogquantam8un, pâmontog Solomon.
E.9.20 And all the drinking vessels of king Solomon were of gold, and all the vessels of the house of the forest of Lebanon were of pure gold: none were of silver; it was not any thing accounted of in the days of Solomon.

α.9.21 Newutche ketass8t kuht8nogquash aum8ash Tarshish, weche wuttinneumoh Huram: nishnoh nishwe kodtumwáe pasukqut peyaum8ash kuht8nogquash wutch Tarshish, paudtóog gold kah silver, Ivory, kah Apes, kah Peacocks.
E.9.21 For the king's ships went to Tarshish with the servants of Huram: every three years once came the ships of Tarshish bringing gold, and silver, ivory, and apes, and peacocks.

α.9.22 Kah ketass8t Solomon aneúauau wame muttaohke ketass8tamwoh, ut weenauwetuonganit, kah waantam8onganit.
E.9.22 And king Solomon passed all the kings of the earth in riches and wisdom.

α.9.23 Kah wame ketass8tamwog ohkeit, natinnehamwog wuttinnuhquábuonk Solomon n8tamunat 8waantamóonk, ne God ponamauont wuttahut.
E.9.23 And all the kings of the earth sought the presence of Solomon, to hear his wisdom, that God had put in his heart.

α.9.24 Kah nag paudtóog nish$noh ummag8onk, silvere wishquash, kah golde wishquash, kah hogk8ongash, kenauwameongash, kah spicash, horsesog kah mulsog, kuhquttumwe âadtehteáonk nish$noh kodtumm8.
E.9.24 And they brought every man his present, vessels of silver, and vessels of gold, and raiment, harness, and spices, horses, and mules, a rate year by year.

α.9.25 Kah Solomon ohtóou yauut pasuk88ash horsese stalsash, kah chariotsash, kah nabo neese muttannonganogkussuog horsesoh na8mukqutcheg, neh pononcheh ut chariotte keitotanahtu, kah weeche ketass8t ut Jerusalem.
E.9.25 And Solomon had four thousand stalls for horses and chariots, and twelve thousand horsemen; whom he bestowed in the chariot cities, and with the king at Jerusalem.

α.9.26 Kah piahtimau wame ketass8tamwoh wutch sepuut, wehque Philistianse ohkeit, kah wehque Egypte sussippoiyeuut.
E.9.26 And he reigned over all the kings from the river even unto the land of the Philistines, and to the border of Egypt.

α.9.27 Kah ketass8t ogquehteau silver qussukquanit, kah Cedaruhtugquash ogquehteau Sycamoruhtugqut, nish monakish ut mukoshqutuhtu.
E.9.27 And the king made silver in Jerusalem as stones, and cedar trees made he as the sycomore trees that are in the low plains in abundance.

α.9.28 Kah paudtauáog Solomonoh, horsesoh wutch Egypt, kah wutch wame ohkeit.
E.9.28 And they brought unto Solomon horses out of Egypt, and out of all lands.

α.9.29 Kah onkatogish wutusseongash Solomon, negonneyeu8gish kah maumachishú8gish, sunnummatta wussukwhosinash ut 8sukuhwhonganit Nathan quoshodtumwaen, kah ut ukquoshodtum8ongonit Ahijah wus-Shilonit, kah ut wunnaumoonganit Iddo naumwaenin, ayeuuhkonittue Jeroboam wunnaumonuh Nebat.
E.9.29 Now the rest of the acts of Solomon, first and last, are they not written in the book of Nathan the prophet, and in the prophecy of Ahijah the Shilonite, and in the visions of Iddo the seer against Jeroboam the son of Nebat?

α.9.30 Kah Solomon ketass8tam88 ut Jerusalem, ut wame Israel, yauunchage kodtumwae.
E.9.30 And Solomon reigned in Jerusalem over all Israel forty years.

α.9.31 Kah Solomon weesequom8mau 8shoh, kah posekinau ukkeitotanat 8shoh Davidoh, kah Rehoboamoh wunnaumonuh wunnompass8tam8mukquoh.
E.9.31 And Solomon slept with his fathers, and he was buried in the city of David his father: and Rehoboam his son reigned in his stead.

α.10.1 KAh Rehoboam au Shechem, newutche wame Israel peyaog Shechem ukketass8tamuhkonaóont.
E.10.1 And Rehoboam went to Shechem: for to Shechem were all Israel come to make him king.

α.10.2 Kah n$niyeup, Jeroboam wunnaumonuh Nebat (noh apit Egypt, uttoh ashph8op wutch anaquabit Solomon ketass8t) n8tog, Jeroboam qushkeu wutch Egypt.
E.10.2 And it came to pass, when Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who was in Egypt, whither he fled from the presence of Solomon the king, heard it, that Jeroboam returned out of Egypt.

α.10.3 Kah ann8team8og kah 8wehkomóuh, neit Jeroboam kah wame Israel peyaog, kah ken8naog Rehoboamoh, n8waog,
E.10.3 And they sent and called him. So Jeroboam and all Israel came and spake to Rehoboam, saying,

α.10.4 K8sh, unkquéheop neyoakumùnonoh, yowutche nompunkitteaush ogguhse, nutunkque wuttiñeumuhkauwaonganun k8sh, kah wuttuhkéque yoakumoh, ne ponamunkqueog, kah k8tinninneumuhkauunumun.
E.10.4 Thy father made our yoke grievous: now therefore ease thou somewhat the grievous servitude of thy father, and his heavy yoke that he put upon us, and we will serve thee.

α.10.5 Kah nah wuttinuh, wonk peyaausek, mahche nishikquinogkok, kah missinninnúog moncheog.
E.10.5 And he said unto them, Come again unto me after three days. And the people departed.

α.10.6 Kah ketass8t Rehoboam ken8nau kehchisoh, neh neepauunitcheh anaquabenit Solomonoh 8shoh, ash pâmontog, n8wau, toh kittin ken8simw8 namp8hamauónat yeug missinninn[u]og?
E.10.6 And king Rehoboam took counsel with the old men that had stood before Solomon his father while he yet lived, saying, What counsel give ye me to return answer to this people?

α.10.7 Kah ukken8nóuh, n8waog, womonadt yeug missinninnúog, kah wussikkitteaheadt, kah wunne kén8nadt, nag pish micheme kittinneumog.
E.10.7 And they spake unto him, saying, If thou be kind to this people, and please them, and speak good words to them, they will be thy servants for ever.

α.10.8 Qut nukkodtum ken8nittuonk, ne kechisog án ken8nahettit: kah ken8nau wuskenúh, neh weecheteumukqutcheh, neh nepauunitcheh, anaquabit.
E.10.8 But he forsook the counsel which the old men gave him, and took counsel with the young men that were brought up with him, that stood before him.

α.10.9 Kah nah wuttinuh, toh kittin ken8s8wam8, onk woh kenamp8hamauómun yeug missinninnúog, neg kôn8sitcheg n8waog, ogguhse nunkeh, ne yoak k8sh ponamunkqueogkup.
E.10.9 And he said unto them, What advice give ye that we may return answer to this people, which have spoken to me, saying, Ease somewhat the yoke that thy father did put upon us?

α.10.10 Kah wuskenúog neh weechetumukqutcheh, ukken8nóuh, n8waog, yeu woh kittin namp8hamauon missinninnúog, neg kôn8nukqueaneg, n8waog, k8sh tuhkekqheóp keyoakumunónuh, qut ken ogguhse nunkeáteainnean; yeu woh nag kittinnóneau, nummattassonitch pish ánue kuhpogki, onk ne n8sh wusseganit.
E.10.10 And the young men that were brought up with him spake unto him, saying, Thus shalt thou answer the people that spake unto thee, saying, Thy father made our yoke heavy, but make thou it somewhat lighter for us; thus shalt thou say unto them, My little finger shall be thicker than my father's loins.

α.10.11 Newutche n8sh takequeteunkqueóg keyoakumóuh; nen kukk8tnehteauunumw8 keyoakumw8: n8sh kussasametóhuk8óp whipsash, qut nen scorpionsog.
E.10.11 For whereas my father put a heavy yoke upon you, I will put more to your yoke: my father chastised you with whips, but I will chastise you with scorpions.

α.10.12 Neit Jeroboam kah wame missinninnuog peyaonáog Rehoboamoh nashikquinogok, ne ánont ketass8t, n8wop, peyaausek wonk nashikquinogkok.
E.10.12 So Jeroboam and all the people came to Rehoboam on the third day, as the king bade, saying, Come again to me on the third day.

α.10.13 Kah ketass8t nah ummusquanittamwe namp8hamauoh, kah ketass8t Rehoboam nukkodtum kehchisog ukken8s8waongan8.
E.10.13 And the king answered them roughly; and king Rehoboam forsook the counsel of the old men,

α.10.14 Kah nag wuttinnamp8hamauoh neaunak ukken8s8waongan8 wuskenuog, n8wau, n8sh kutt[ù]hkequéhteunk8óp keyoakum8uh, qut nen nukk8tneh, n8sh kussasamatuhhuk8 whipsash, qut nen scorpionsog.
E.10.14 And answered them after the advice of the young men, saying, My father made your yoke heavy, but I will add thereto: my father chastised you with whips, but I will chastise you with scorpions.

α.10.15 Neit ketass8t matta kuhkehtauóou missinninnúh, newutche ne 8m88 Godut, onk woh Jehovah ussenat wuttinn8waonk ne án8wop, nashpe wunnutcheg Ahijah wus-Shilonit, en Jeroboamut wunnaumonuh Nebat.
E.10.15 So the king hearkened not unto the people: for the cause was of God, that the LORD might perform his word, which he spake by the hand of Ahijah the Shilonite to Jeroboam the son of Nebat.

α.10.16 Kah wame Israel namohettit matta ketass8t ukkeiketauoh, namp8hamauáog ketass8toh n8waog, teaguas kutchippôiyeumun ut David? kah matta k8tohtoonganeúmun[na]t wunnaumonat Jesse, nishnoh pasuk en wekit woi Israel: kah yeuyeu David nanawehteaush nehenwonche kek: neit wame Israel auog wekuóont.
E.10.16 And when all Israel saw that the king would not hearken unto them, the people answered the king, saying, What portion have we in David?  and we have none inheritance in the son of Jesse: every man to your tents, O Israel: and now, David, see to thine own house. So all Israel went to their tents.

α.10.17 Qut yeug wunnaumonuh Israel, apitcheg Judae keitotanahtu, Rehoboam nah uppiahtimuh.
E.10.17 But as for the children of Israel that dwelt in the cities of Judah, Rehoboam reigned over them.

α.10.18 Neit Rehoboam ann8nau Adoramoh, noh nanawunuk ompweteaonk, kah wunnaumonuh Israel, ukqussukquantahwhóuh, ne waj nuppuk: qut ketass8t Rehoboam kenuppe kuhkuhqueu wut-chariotumut, ushpuhh8wonat Jerusalem.
E.10.18 Then king Rehoboam sent Hadoram that was over the tribute; and the children of Israel stoned him with stones, that he died. But king Rehoboam made speed to get him up to his chariot, to flee to Jerusalem.

α.10.19 Kah Israel ayeuuhkonittue cheketamwog wek David pajeh yeu kesukok.
E.10.19 And Israel rebelled against the house of David unto this day.

α.11.1 KAh Rehoboam paont Jerusalem, miyanau, wutch wekit Judah, kah Benjamin, nequt pasuk8e, kah shwosuk tahshinchage muttannonganog kussuoh, pepenauutcheg, neg ayeuwéhteaenuitcheg, ayeuhkononat Israel, woh wonk uppaudtauunat wutass8tamóonk Rehoboam.
E.11.1 And when Rehoboam was come to Jerusalem, he gathered of the house of Judah and Benjamin an hundred and fourscore thousand chosen men, which were warriors, to fight against Israel, that he might bring the kingdom again to Rehoboam.

α.11.2 Qut wuttinn8waonk Jehovah peyaonuk Shemajah Manittowomp, n8wau,
E.11.2 But the word of the LORD came to Shemaiah the man of God, saying,

α.11.3 Ken8s Rehoboam wunnaumonuh Solomon ketass8t ut Judah, kah wame Israel ut Judah kah Benjamin, n8wash.
E.11.3 Speak unto Rehoboam the son of Solomon, king of Judah, and to all Israel in Judah and Benjamin, saying,

α.11.4 Yeu wussin Jehovah matta pish kukkuhk8mw8, asuh kutayeuuhkonomw8 keematt8oog: qushkek nish$noh wosketomp en wekit newutche yeu nutussen: kah nag n8swehtamwog wutinn8waongash Jehovah kah qushkeog wutch n8swetahwhonat Jeroboam.
E.11.4 Thus saith the LORD, Ye shall not go up, nor fight against your brethren: return every man to his house: for this thing is done of me. And they obeyed the words of the LORD, and returned from going against Jeroboam.

α.11.5 Kah Rehoboam ayeu Jerusalem, kah ayim pummeneutausue keitotanash ut Judah.
E.11.5 And Rehoboam dwelt in Jerusalem, and built cities for defence in Judah.

α.11.6 Ayim Bethlehem, kah Etam, kah Tekoa.
E.11.6 He built even Bethlehem, and Etam, and Tekoa,

α.11.7 Kah Bethzur, kah Shoco, kah Adullam.
E.11.7 And Bethzur, and Shoco, and Adullam,

α.11.8 Kah Gath, kah Mareshah, kah Ziph.
E.11.8 And Gath, and Mareshah, and Ziph,

α.11.9 
E.11.9 And Adoraim, and Lachish, and Azekah,

α.11.10 Kah Zorah, kah Ajalon, kah Hebron, nish ohtagish ut Judah kah Benjamin: pummeneutausue keitotanash.
E.11.10 And Zorah, and Aijalon, and Hebron, which are in Judah and in Benjamin fenced cities.

α.11.11 Kah men[o]hketeou menuhkonogquash, kah na upponon mugquompuh kah mummishkod meechum kah pummee, kah wine.
E.11.11 And he fortified the strong holds, and put captains in them, and store of victual, and of oil and wine.

α.11.12 Kah nish$noh ut pasuk keitotan, na$ut ponamun ogqunnegash, kah qunuhtugquash, kah ahche menuhkehteauunash, Judahoh kah Benjaminoh weech8humuk.
E.11.12 And in every several city he put shields and spears, and made them exceeding strong, having Judah and Benjamin on his side.

α.11.13 Kah sephausuenuog Kah Levitsog, u[t] wame Israel, uppeyaounouh wutch wame wutayeuongan8out.
E.11.13 And the priests and the Levites that were in all Israel resorted to him out of all their coasts.

α.11.14 Newutche Levitsog, nukkodtumwog 8wonkôiyeum8ash, kah wutohtoonganóoash, kah peyaog Judah, kah Jerusalem: newutche Jeroboam kah wunnaumonuh, uppogkenouh wutch wussephausue anninnohsuenuunneat en Jehovah$ut.
E.11.14 For the Levites left their suburbs and their possession, and came to Judah and Jerusalem: for Jeroboam and his sons had cast them off from executing the priest's office unto the LORD:

α.11.15 Kah wussephausuenuheuh ut qunuhqui ayeuonganit, kah ut mattannit8uhtu, kah ut Calfsut neh kezheoncheh.
E.11.15 And he ordained him priests for the high places, and for the devils, and for the calves which he had made.

α.11.16 Kah nag asuhkaue, wutch wame Israelle chippan8onganehtu neg ponukeg wuttahh8oash wowussumonat Jehovah um-Manitt8moh Israel, peyaog Jerusalem, sepha[m]auonat, Jehovah, ummanitt8m8uh 8sh8uh.
E.11.16 And after them out of all the tribes of Israel such as set their hearts to seek the LORD God of Israel came to Jerusalem, to sacrifice unto the LORD God of their fathers.

α.11.17 Neit menehketeauog Judae ketass8tamóonk, kah menehkheaog Rehoboamoh wunnaumonuh Solomon, nishwe kodtumwae, newutche nishwe kodtumwae pomushaog ummayut David Kah Solomon.
E.11.17 So they strengthened the kingdom of Judah, and made Rehoboam the son of Solomon strong, three years: for three years they walked in the way of David and Solomon.

α.11.18 Kah Rehoboam ummittamwussu Mahalath wuttaunoh Jerimoth, wunnaumonuh David, kah Abihail, wuttaunoh Eliab wunnaumonuh Jesse.
E.11.18 And Rehoboam took him Mahalath the daughter of Jerimoth the son of David to wife, and Abihail the daughter of Eliab the son of Jesse;

α.11.19 Noh nekitteauont, Joash kah Shamariah, kah Zaham.
E.11.19 Which bare him children; Jeush, and Shamariah, and Zaham.

α.11.20 Kah noh asuhkaue ummittamwussu Maachah, wuttaunoh Absolom, noh wunnekitteauoh Abijah, kah Attai, kah Ziza, kah Shelomith
E.11.20 And after her he took Maachah the daughter of Absalom; which bare him Abijah, and Attai, and Ziza, and Shelomith.

α.11.21 Kah Rehoboam womonau Maachah wuttaunoh Absolom, anue onk wame ummittamwussoh, kah 8skappeumoh, newutche nabo shwosuk tahsh8hkauau, kah nequtta tahshinchag kussuoh 8skappeumoh, kah wunnaumonieu nesnehchagkodtoh kah shwosuk tahsuoh wunnaumonuh, kah nequtta tahshinchagkodtoh wuttaunoh.
E.11.21 And Rehoboam loved Maachah the daughter of Absalom above all his wives and his concubines: (for he took eighteen wives, and threescore concubines; and begat twenty and eight sons, and threescore daughters.)

α.11.22 Kah Rehoboam negonneaheau Abijah wunnaumonuh Maachah, wunnanawunnuaenuunneat ut kenugke wematut, newutche ukkodketass8tamuhkonuh.
E.11.22 And Rehoboam made Abijah the son of Maachah the chief, to be ruler among his brethren: for he thought to make him king.

α.11.23 Kah waantamwe ussu, sepagehheau wunneechanoh, pannuppe wame Judae kah Benjamine ohkeit, ut nish pummeneutausue otanat kah umm8cheke assamuh, kah kodtanumau m8naoh ummittamwussoh.
E.11.23 And he dealt wisely, and dispersed of all his children throughout all the countries of Judah and Benjamin, unto every fenced city: and he gave them victual in abundance. And he desired many wives.

α.12.1 KAh nniyeup, Rehoboam manuhkehteunk ketass8tamóonk kah nanuhketeunk wunnogkuh, ohquontam wuttinnaumatuonk Jehovah, kah wame weeche Israel.
E.12.1 And it came to pass, when Rehoboam had established the kingdom, and had strengthened himself, he forsook the law of the LORD, and all Israel with him.

α.12.2 Kah nniyeup, napanna wutteashe kodtum8mit Rehoboam, Shishak Egypte ketass8t ayeuuhkonittue kuhkuhqueontam Jerusalem (newutche matcheneheaog Jehovahoh.)
E.12.2 And it came to pass, that in the fifth year of king Rehoboam Shishak king of Egypt came up against Jerusalem, because they had transgressed against the LORD,

α.12.3 Nashpe naboneese pasuk88ash chariotsash, kah nequtta tahshinchage muttannonganog kussuog horsesoh na8mukqutcheg: kah missinninnuog matta waogkem8og neg weechogqutcheg wutch Egypt Labimsog kah Sukkimsog, kah Ethiopiansog.
E.12.3 With twelve hundred chariots, and threescore thousand horsemen: and the people were without number that came with him out of Egypt; the Lubims, the Sukkiims, and the Ethiopians.

α.12.4 Kah sohkom pummeneutausue keitotanash nish ut Judah, kah peyaog Jerusalem.
E.12.4 And he took the fenced cities which pertained to Judah, and came to Jerusalem.

α.12.5 Neit Shemajah quoshodtumwaen peyaonau Rehoboamoh, kah Judae sontimuh, neg miyaecheg ut Jerusalem newutche Shishak, kah na wuttinuh yeu wussin Jehovah: kenaau kutohquanumimw8, kah newaj nukonunog ut wunnutcheganit Shishak.
E.12.5 Then came Shemaiah the prophet to Rehoboam, and to the princes of Judah, that were gathered together to Jerusalem because of Shishak, and said unto them, Thus saith the LORD, Ye have forsaken me, and therefore have I also left you in the hand of Shishak.

α.12.6 Newaj Israelle sontimóog kah ketass8t, hohpaheahettit, kah n8waog, Jehovah sampweusseaen.
E.12.6 Whereupon the princes of Israel and the king humbled themselves; and they said, The LORD is righteous.

α.12.7 Kah Jehovah nag* hohpáheáog wuhhogkauh wuttiñ8waonk Jehovah peyaónuk Shemajah n8wau: nag hohaheáog wuhhogkauh matta nuppaguanóog, qut nuttinnumauaog ne teagwe tomhettuonk, kah nummasquantam8onk matta pish sohkemun8, ut Jerusalem, nashpe wunnutcheg Shishak.
E.12.7 And when the LORD saw that they humbled themselves, the word of the LORD came to Shemaiah, saying, They have humbled themselves; therefore I will not destroy them, but I will grant them some deliverance; and my wrath shall not be poured out upon Jerusalem by the hand of Shishak.

α.12.8 Qut nah pish 8tinninneumuneuh, onk woh wahteauog n8tinninneumuhko[n]teaonk, kah wuttinneumuhkontamoonk wutohtimoinne ketass8tam8ongash.
E.12.8 Nevertheless they shall be his servants; that they may know my service, and the service of the kingdoms of the countries.

α.12.9 Neit Shishak Egypte ketass8t ayeuuhkonittue kuhkuhquehtam Jerusalem, kah amaunum nompak8ansh ut wekit Jehovah, kah nompakouunash ut ketass8t wekit, 8wame maumunash: kah wonk amaunum golde ogquñeg[á]sh, nish Solomon ayikupash.
E.12.9 So Shishak king of Egypt came up against Jerusalem, and took away the treasures of the house of the LORD, and the treasures of the king's house; he took all: he carried away also the shields of gold which Solomon had made.

α.12.10 Nompe nish, ketass8t Rehoboam ayim brasse ogqunegash: kah wutahtashonash en wunnutcheganit, negonneyeuit ut wadchanonganit, noh nanawehteunk ahhut petutteamuk ketass8t wek.
E.12.10 Instead of which king Rehoboam made shields of brass, and committed them to the hands of the chief of the guard, that kept the entrance of the king's house.

α.12.11 Kah ketass8t petutteadt wekit Jehovah, wadchanuacheg peyaog, kah wunneemskomunaoash kah wonk uppaudtamunaoash wadchanuae chamberut.
E.12.11 And when the king entered into the house of the LORD, the guard came and fetched them, and brought them again into the guard chamber.

α.12.12 Kah ohhohpaheont wuhhogkuh ummusquanitteaonk Jehovah qushkehtunk, kah matta pannuppe uppaguanuh, kah wonk ut Judah wunniyeuog.
E.12.12 And when he humbled himself, the wrath of the LORD turned from him, that he would not destroy him altogether: and also in Judah things went well.

α.12.13 Neit ketass8t Rehoboam menehkheau wuhhogkuh ut Jerusalem, kah ketass8tam88: newutche Rehoboam yauunchage kah nequtta kodtumwohkomup n8che ketass8tam8it, kah nabo nesausuk tahshe kodtumwae ketass8tam88 ut Jerusalem, ut keitotanat, ne Jehovah pepenog, wutch wame wutchippan8onganit Israel[,] na upponamunat 8wesuonk: kah ohkasoh ussowesuoh Naamah, wut-Ammonitesse.
E.12.13 So king Rehoboam strengthened himself in Jerusalem, and reigned: for Rehoboam was one and forty years old when he began to reign, and he reigned seventeen years in Jerusalem, the city which the LORD had chosen out of all the tribes of Israel, to put his name there. And his mother's name was Naamah an Ammonitess.

α.12.14 Kah matchesu newutche matta quagquashwunnum8 wuttah natinneawhonat Jehovah.
E.12.14 And he did evil, because he prepared not his heart to seek the LORD.

α.12.15 Kah wutusseongash Rehoboam, negonneyeuukish kah maumachisheu8gish, sunnummatta wussukwhosinash ut wussukwhonganit Shemajah quoshodtumwaen, kah Iddo naumwaen, papaume wutontseongash? kah ayeuwuttuonganu8 nagwutteaeu nashaue ut Rehoboam kah Jeroboam.
E.12.15 Now the acts of Rehoboam, first and last, are they not written in the book of Shemaiah the prophet, and of Iddo the seer concerning genealogies? And there were wars between Rehoboam and Jeroboam continually.

α.12.16 Kah Rehoboam weesequom8mau 8shoh, kah posekinau ut ukkeitotanat David, kah Abijahoh wunnaumonuh wunnompass8tam8mukquoh.
E.12.16 And Rehoboam slept with his fathers, and was buried in the city of David: and Abijah his son reigned in his stead.

α.13.1 KAh nabo shwosuk wutteashe kodtum8mit Jeroboam, Abijah n8che ketass8tam88 ut Judah.
E.13.1 Now in the eighteenth year of king Jeroboam began Abijah to reign over Judah.

α.13.2 Ketass8tam88 nishwe kodtumwae ut Jerusalem: (kah wonk ohkasoh ussowesu Micajah wuttaunoh Uzziel wutch Gibeah) kah na ayeuwuttuonganu8, nashaue Abijah Kah Jeroboam.
E.13.2 He reigned three years in Jerusalem. His mother's name also was Michaiah the daughter of Uriel of Gibeah. And there was war between Abijah and Jeroboam.

α.13.3 Kah Abijah wunohto ayeuwuttuonk, nashpe menuhkoshektomp kenauwameonk yauut pasuk88e muttannonganog kussuog, pepenauutcheg, kah wonk Jeroboam wutayeuuhkonittue wunohtauoh, shwosuk táhshe pasuk8e muttannonganog kussuog wosketompaog, menuhkesuenuog.
E.13.3 And Abijah set the battle in array with an army of valiant men of war, even four hundred thousand chosen men: Jeroboam also set the battle in array against him with eight hundred thousand chosen men, being mighty men of valour.

α.13.4 Kah Abijah neepau ut Zemaraimme wadchuut, ne Ephraimme wadchuut, kah n8wau, n8tah ken Jeroboam, & wame Israel.
E.13.4 And Abijah stood up upon mount Zemaraim, which is in mount Ephraim, and said, Hear me, thou Jeroboam, and all Israel;

α.13.5 Sunnummatta woh kutahche wahteau8mw8, Lord um-Manitt8moh Israel aninnumauau Davidoh wutass8tamonk Israel micheme, en wuhhogkat, kah en wunnaumonat, nashpe salte wunn8waonk?
E.13.5 Ought ye not to know that the LORD God of Israel gave the kingdom over Israel to David for ever, even to him and to his sons by a covenant of salt?

α.13.6 Qut Jeroboam wunnaumonuh Nebat, wuttinneumoh Solomon, wunnaumonuh David, waábu, kah ayeuuhkonittue cheketauau wussontimom.
E.13.6 Yet Jeroboam the son of Nebat, the servant of Solomon the son of David, is risen up, and hath rebelled against his lord.

α.13.7 Kah noh wuttit miyánumauon tohn8cheyeuunitche, wunnaumonuh Belial, kah menehkheáog wuhhogkauh, ayeuuhkonittue Rehoboamoh wunnaumonuh Solomon, Rehoboam peississit, kah n8chumweteáhont, kah n8nannum8 wuttapenonat.
E.13.7 And there are gathered unto him vain men, the children of Belial, and have strengthened themselves against Rehoboam the son of Solomon, when Rehoboam was young and tenderhearted, and could not withstand them.

α.13.8 Kah yeuyeu kuttenantamw8 wuttammehteauunat wutass8tamóonk Jehovah, ut wunnutcheganit wunnaumonuh David, kah kummuttaánumw8, kah k8wetomukumw8 golde Calvesog, neh Jeroboam ayeuompuh wutch kum-manitt8m8óog.
E.13.8 And now ye think to withstand the kingdom of the LORD in the hand of the sons of David; and ye be a great multitude, and there are with your golden calves, which Jeroboam made you for gods.

α.13.9 Sunnummatta kuppogkenomw8 wussephausuéneumoh Jehovah, wunnaumonuh Aaron, kah Levitsog, kah kussephausuewennu[à]heamw8 kuhhogkaóog, ne aséhettit wutohtimoneash ut ohkeit? newutche wuttinniin howan peyont, 8neetupanatamwaheonat wuhhogkuh, nashpe wushkoshim ox, kah nesausuk tahsuog ramsog: onk noh woh sephausuenu8 ut nag matta wamanitt8mogig?
E.13.9 Have ye not cast out the priests of the LORD, the sons of Aaron, and the Levites, and have made you priests after the manner of the nations of other lands? so that whosoever cometh to consecrate himself with a young bullock and seven rams, the same may be a priest of them that are no gods.

α.13.10 Qut neenawun, Jehovah num-Manitt8mun, kah matta nutohquan[u]móun, kah sephausuenuog neg wowussumoncheg Jehovahoh neh wunnaumonuh Aaron, kah Levitsog usseog wutusseongan8.
E.13.10 But as for us, the LORD is our God, and we have not forsaken him; and the priests, which minister unto the LORD, are the sons of Aaron, and the Levites wait upon their business:

α.13.11 Kah nag chikohsumauáog Jehovahoh nishnoh mohtomp[à]eu nishnoh wunnonkquaeu chikohsumóe sephausuongash, kah wetemungquok, kah wonk nahtitteáe petukqunnunk wunohtóog ut pahke tableut, kah golde wequananteganuhtug nashpe wul$lampsash, chikohsumunat nishnoh wunnonk8, newutche nanawehteómun ummeechumuhkausuáonk Jehovah num-Manitt8mun, qut kenaau kutohquanumau.
E.13.11 And they burn unto the LORD every morning and every evening burnt sacrifices and sweet incense: the shewbread also set they in order upon the pure table; and the candlestick of gold with the lamps thereof, to burn every evening: for we keep the charge of the LORD our God; but ye have forsaken him.

α.13.12 Kah kusseh, God k8wetomukqun, mugquomp, kah wussephausueneumoh, nashpe mishont8wáe monopuhpegquash, ayeuuhkonittue kenaau ummishont8wáe puhpequonat, woi wunnaumonuh Israel, ayeukonúhteogk Lord um-Manitt8moh k8sh8óog, newutche matta pish koniyeum8.
E.13.12 And, behold, God himself is with us for our captain, and his priests with sounding trumpets to cry alarm against you. O children of Israel, fight ye not against the LORD God of your fathers; for ye shall not prosper.

α.13.13 Qut Jeroboam adhôsuonk quinnuppeá[h] au ut uppusquan8óut, newaj nag negonuhk[a]uâhettit Judah, & adhausuonk uppushquan8óont.
E.13.13 But Jeroboam caused an ambushment to come about behind them: so they were before Judah, and the ambushment was behind them.

α.13.14 Kah Judah ompámuhquait, kusseh ayeuwuttuonk anaquabit, kah uppusquanit; kah nag mauunnitteaog Jehovahoh, kah sephausuenúog puhpequaog.
E.13.14 And when Judah looked back, behold, the battle was before and behind: and they cried unto the LORD, and the priests sounded with the trumpets.

α.13.15 Neit Judae wosketompaog mishont8waog: kah mashant8wáhettit wosketompaog Judah, n$niyeup, God togkomau Jeroboamoh, kah wame Israeloh, anaquabhettit Abijah, kah Judah.
E.13.15 Then the men of Judah gave a shout: and as the men of Judah shouted, it came to pass, that God smote Jeroboam and all Israel before Abijah and Judah.

α.13.16 Kah wunnaumonuh Israel wusseemoog wutch anaquabhettit Judah: kah God nah upponuh wunnutchegan8óut.
E.13.16 And the children of Israel fled before Judah: and God delivered them into their hand.

α.13.17 Kah Abijah kah ummissinninneumoh nah wunnushóuh nashpe mishe paguanittùonk: neit na wuttit nushóe penushóneau, napaña tahshit pasuk88e muttañonganogkussuog pepenauutcheg Israelle wosketompaog.
E.13.17 And Abijah and his people slew them with a great slaughter: so there fell down slain of Israel five hundred thousand chosen men.

α.13.18 Yeu in wunnaumonuh Israel sohkauóneau, na ahquompak: kah wunnaumonuh Judah sohkóhsuoh, newutche pabuhtanumáog Jehovahoh, um-Manitt8m8uh 8sh8oh.
E.13.18 Thus the children of Israel were brought under at that time, and the children of Judah prevailed, because they relied upon the LORD God of their fathers.

α.13.19 Kah Abijah n8swetahwau Jeroboamoh, kah wunnemanumauoh keitotanash, Bethel kah nish otanash, kah Jeshanah, kah nish otanash, kah Ephron, kah nish otanash.
E.13.19 And Abijah pursued after Jeroboam, and took cities from him, Bethel with the towns thereof, and Jeshanah with the towns thereof, and Ephraim with the towns thereof.

α.13.20 Kah Jeroboam matta wonk nompenuhkésu, ut ukkesukodtumut Abijah, kah Jehovah wuttogkomuh, kah nupp8.
E.13.20 Neither did Jeroboam recover strength again in the days of Abijah: and the LORD struck him, and he died.

α.13.21 Kah Abijah nano menuhkesu, kah nabo yau8kauau, kah nesnehchag kenaumóniau kah nees8oh, kah nabo nequtta tahsuoh wuttaunoh.
E.13.21 But Abijah waxed mighty, and married fourteen wives, and begat twenty and two sons, and sixteen daughters.

α.13.22 Kah onkatogish wutusseongash Abijah, kah ummayash, kah wunnupwóaongash, nish wussukwhosuash, ut 8wohtamwáhuónat Iddo quoshodtumwáen.
E.13.22 And the rest of the acts of Abijah, and his ways, and his sayings, are written in the story of the prophet Iddo.

α.14.1 NEit Abijah weesequom8mau 8shoh, kah upposekinóuh ut ukkeitotanat David, kah Asahoh wunnaumonuh, wunnompass8tamomukquoh: ut ukkesukodtumut, ohke chequnohteau piogque kodtumwae,
E.14.1 So Abijah slept with his fathers, and they buried him in the city of David: and Asa his son reigned in his stead. In his days the land was quiet ten years.

α.14.2 Kah Asa ussu ne wanegik, kah ne sampwagk ut wuskesukqut Jehovahoh um-Manitt8moh.
E.14.2 And Asa did that which was good and right in the eyes of the LORD his God:

α.14.3 Newutche amaunau wut-altarumóuh penóe manittóog, kah qunuhqui ayeuongash, kah sohquetahwhau nunneukontunkoh, kah m8setahham kuppiyeuash.
E.14.3 For he took away the altars of the strange gods, and the high places, and brake down the images, and cut down the groves:

α.14.4 Kah ann8nau Judahoh wunnatineahwhonat Jehovaoh um-Manitt8m8oh 8sh8oh, kah ussenat wuttinnaumatuonk, kah ann8team8onk.
E.14.4 And commanded Judah to seek the LORD God of their fathers, and to do the law and the commandment.

α.14.5 Wonk amaunum wutch Judae keitotanahtu, qunuhqui ayeuongash, kah nunneukontunkoh: kah an8tamóonk nanowóhteau ut anaquabit.
E.14.5 Also he took away out of all the cities of Judah the high places and the images: and the kingdom was quiet before him.

α.14.6 Kah ayim pummeneutausue otanash ut Judah, newutche ohke anwôshshin, kah matta ayeuwuttéin yeush ut kodtum8ash, newutche Jehovah wutanwôhsum8wáheuh.
E.14.6 And he built fenced cities in Judah: for the land had rest, and he had no war in those years; because the LORD had given him rest.

α.14.7 Newaj unnont Judahoh, ayimuttuh yeush otanash, kah nash quinnuppeneutauuttuh, kah qunuhqui wonkonôsuash, squontamash, kah barsash, ohke ash anaquabeog áohtagkup: newutche kenatinneawhómun kum-Manitt8mun, kenátinneawhóunnônup, kah kutanwohsumwáhikqun waéenu: neit wekitteáog kah wunniyeuog.
E.14.7 Therefore he said unto Judah, Let us build these cities, and make about them walls, and towers, gates, and bars, while the land is yet before us; because we have sought the LORD our God, we have sought him, and he hath given us rest on every side. So they built and prospered.

α.14.8 Kah Asa wutáyeuwehteómw8 neg ohtunkeg ogqunnegash kah qunnuhtukquash, wutch Judah, nishwudt pasuk8e muttannonganogkussuog, kah wutch Benjamin, neg kôunukeg ogqunegash, kah wadohtompéitcheg, neese pasuk8e kah shwosuk tahshinchage muttannonganogkussuog, wame yeug menuhkesuénuog.
E.14.8 And Asa had an army of men that bare targets and spears, out of Judah three hundred thousand; and out of Benjamin, that bare shields and drew bows, two hundred and fourscore thousand: all these were mighty men of valour.

α.14.9 Kah wutayeuuhkonittue sohwehtau Zerah wut$Ethiopian, nashpe muttannongane muttannonganogkussuog ayeuteáog, kah nishwudt pasuk88ash chariotsash, kah peyaog Mareshah.
E.14.9 And there came out against them Zerah the Ethiopian with an host of a thousand thousand, and three hundred chariots; and came unto Mareshah.

α.14.10 Neit Asa ayeuwehkonittue s[ô]hwehtau, kah wunohto ayeuwuttuonk ut Zephathae 8nouhkoiyeuut, ut Mareshah.
E.14.10 Then Asa went out against him, and they set the battle in array in the valley of Zephathah at Mareshah.

α.14.11 Kah Asa mauunnitteauau Jehovaoh um-Manitt8moh, kah n8wau, Woi Jehovah peamesau teaguas kutanumaiinneanónut, asuh nashpe m8náog, asuh nashpe neg matta wâmenuhkésuo[n]ganegig: aninnumaiinnean woi Jehovah num-Manitt8mun, newutche kutanwôhsinn8wóunumun, kah ut k8wesuonganit nutayeukôunómun yeug mattaánukeg: woi Jehovah, ken num$Manitt8mun; howae wosketomp sohkunk8hkan.
E.14.11 And Asa cried unto the LORD his God, and said, LORD, it is nothing with thee to help, whether with many, or with them that have no power: help us, O LORD our God; for we rest on thee, and in thy name we go against this multitude. O LORD, thou art our God; let no man prevail against thee.

α.14.12 Neit Jehovah togkomau Ethiopiansoh ut anaquabit Asa, kah anaquabhettit Judah, kah Ethiopiansog wussem8og.
E.14.12 So the LORD smote the Ethiopians before Asa, and before Judah; and the Ethiopians fled.

α.14.13 Kah Asa, kah missinninnuog neg wetomoncheg, wunn8suttahwhouh en Gerar: kah Ethiopiansog, kepuhkonunk, kah matta wonk menuhkeséog, newutche nag ushkoméhheôog ut anaquabit Jehovah, kah ut anaquabenit wutáyeuwehteomuh, kah monchatauog m8cheke sequttahham8onk.
E.14.13 And Asa and the people that were with him pursued them unto Gerar: and the Ethiopians were overthrown, that they could not recover themselves; for they were destroyed before the LORD, and before his host; and they carried away very much spoil.

α.14.14 Kah nag togkodtamwog wame keitotanash waéenu Gerar, newutche qushaonk Jehovah nuhkuhkongquog: kah sequttahhamwontamwog wame keitotanash, newutche na$ut m8cheke sequttahhamóonk.
E.14.14 And they smote all the cities round about Gerar; for the fear of the LORD came upon them: and they spoiled all the cities; for there was exceeding much spoil in them.

α.14.15 Kah wonk togkodtamwog puppinashimwe wetuómash, kah monchanáog shepsoh kah camelsoh m8cheke, kah qushkeog en Jerusalem.
E.14.15 They smote also the tents of cattle, and carried away sheep and camels in abundance, and returned to Jerusalem.

α.15.1 KAh wunnashauanitt8moh God nuhkuhkauau Azariahoh wunnaumonuh Oded
E.15.1 And the Spirit of God came upon Azariah the son of Oded:

α.15.2 Kah sohham wunnogskauónat Asahoh, kah wuttinuh, n8tiegk Asa, kah wame Judah, kah Benjamin, Jehovah k8wetomuk8, ash weetomog; kah noh natinneáhwhóog, noh woh naméheau wutche kenaau: qut nukkonóg, noh pish kutóhquanumukou.
E.15.2 And he went out to meet Asa, and said unto him, Hear ye me, Asa, and all Judah and Benjamin; The LORD is with you, while ye be with him; and if ye seek him, he will be found of you; but if ye forsake him, he will forsake you.

α.15.3 Yeuyeu sepe, Israel matta sampwe um-Manitt8mu, kah wannekuhk8tomuhteáe sephausuenúmeu, kah matta wuttinnaumatuonganu.
E.15.3 Now for a long season Israel hath been without the true God, and without a teaching priest, and without law.

α.15.4 Qut nag wadtamehpunahettit, quinnuppehettit en Jehovahut um-Manitt8moh Israel, kah natinnewháhettit, noh nah wunn[a]mhikquoh.
E.15.4 But when they in their trouble did turn unto the LORD God of Israel, and sought him, he was found of them.

α.15.5 Kah nish ahquompagish wanne 8nohteaonganu noh sohhog, asuh noh petutteadt, qut mishe wuttammehpunnaonganúog wame ne wadohkitcheg ne wutohtimóneat.
E.15.5 And in those times there was no peace to him that went out, nor to him that came in, but great vexations were upon all the inhabitants of the countries.

α.15.6 Kah wutohtimóin ôshkommehtóhuk wutohtimóin, kah keitotan keitotan: newutche God 8taméhpunáheuh nashpe wame wuttaméhpunnaongash.
E.15.6 And nation was destroyed of nation, and city of city: for God did vex them with all adversity.

α.15.7 Newutche menuhkesek, kah kenutchegan8ash n8chumwahkitch: newutche kutanakausuonganu pish onkquatantamun.
E.15.7 Be ye strong therefore, and let not your hands be weak: for your work shall be rewarded.

α.15.8 Kah Asa n8tog yeush kutt8wongash, kah ukquoshodtumóonk Oded quoshodtumwáen wutt8antam, kah amaunau wame unkquanumwe nunneukontunkoh, wutch wame Judae ohkeit, kah Benjamin, kah wutch keitotanash nish neemunukish wutch Ephraime wadchuut, kah wushkeheau Jehovah wut-altarumoh, ne anaquohtag Jehovah up-porchum.
E.15.8 And when Asa heard these words, and the prophecy of Oded the prophet, he took courage, and put away the abominable idols out of all the land of Judah and Benjamin, and out of the cities which he had taken from mount Ephraim, and renewed the altar of the LORD, that was before the porch of the LORD.

α.15.9 Kah miyanau wame Judahoh, kah Benjaminoh, kah penuwohteuh neh wetomukquehetticheh wutch Ephraim, kah wutch Manasseh, kah wutch Simeon: (newutche na 8ch 8weech8whin Israelut m8naoh, namohettit Jehovahoh um-Manitt8moh weetomuk)
E.15.9 And he gathered all Judah and Benjamin, and the strangers with them out of Ephraim and Manasseh, and out of Simeon: for they fell to him out of Israel in abundance, when they saw that the LORD his God was with him.

α.15.10 Neit miyawéog ut Jerusalem, ut nash8unitcheh nepâuzsoh, nabo napanna tahshe kodtumwae ketass8tam8it Asa.
E.15.10 So they gathered themselves together at Jerusalem in the third month, in the fifteenth year of the reign of Asa.

α.15.11 Kah nag sephamauáog Jehovaoh, ne kesukok, nawhutch sequttahham8onk ne paudtauahettit, nesausuk tahshe pasuk88og oxenog, kah nesausuk tahshe muttannonganogkussuog shepsog.
E.15.11 And they offered unto the LORD the same time, of the spoil which they had brought, seven hundred oxen and seven thousand sheep.

α.15.12 Kah wunn8wáog natinneawhonat Jehovah um-Manitt8m8oh 8sh8oh, nashpe mamusse wuttahh8óash, kah nashpe mamusse ukketeahogkôunuh.
E.15.12 And they entered into a covenant to seek the LORD God of their fathers with all their heart and with all their soul;

α.15.13 Kah noh howan matta natinneáwhonk Jehovahoh um$Manitt8moh Israel, pish nushau, uttoh en peississit asuh masugkenit, uttoh en wosketomp asuh mittumwossis.
E.15.13 That whosoever would not seek the LORD God of Israel should be put to death, whether small or great, whether man or woman.

α.15.14 Kah nag chadchekeimaog Jehovahoh nashpe mishont8waonk, kah nashpe kussont8waonk, kah nashpe monopuhpequonash, kah nashpe Cornetsash.
E.15.14 And they sware unto the LORD with a loud voice, and with shouting, and with trumpets, and with cornets.

α.15.15 Kah wame Judah wekontamwog ut chadchekeyeuwaonganit, newutche nag chadchekeyeuwaog nashpe mamusse wuttahhou, kah wunnatinneawhouh nashpe mamusse ukkodtantam8ongan8, kah noh nah wunnamhukquoh: kah Jehovah wutanwohsumwaheuh waeenu.
E.15.15 And all Judah rejoiced at the oath: for they had sworn with all their heart, and sought him with their whole desire; and he was found of them: and the LORD gave them rest round about.

α.15.16 Kah wonk papaume Maacha, ohkasoh Asa ketass8t, wutontashuh wutch wussonksquauninneat, newutche nunneukontunkanehteau ut kuppahtu, kah Asa wuttummetahhamauoh wuttiñeukontunkoh, & wuttogwhuh, kah wutchikoss8h ut Kidrone sepuut.
E.15.16 And also concerning Maachah the mother of Asa the king, he removed her from being queen, because she had made an idol in a grove: and Asa cut down her idol, and stamped it, and burnt it at the brook Kidron.

α.15.17 Qut qunuhqui ayeuongash matta amaunum8unash wutch Israel: qut wuttah Asa pannuppeyeu8 nisohke pomantog.
E.15.17 But the high places were not taken away out of Israel: nevertheless the heart of Asa was perfect all his days.

α.15.18 Kah uppaudtauunash wekit God, nish 8shoh waneetupanatamwateunkupash, silver kah Gold kah auwohteaongash.
E.15.18 And he brought into the house of God the things that his father had dedicated, and that he himself had dedicated, silver, and gold, and vessels.

α.15.19 Kah matta wonk ayeuwuttuonganinno, nô pajeh nishwinchage kah napannah kohtass8tam8it Asa:
E.15.19 And there was no more war unto the five and thirtieth year of the reign of Asa.

α.16.1 NIshwinchage kah nequtta kehtass8tam8it Asah Baasha Israelle ketass8t, ayeuuhkonittue kuhkuhquehtam Judah, kah ayim Ramah, yeu wutche, matta woh howan wussohham8unat, asuh petutteaonat Asa ketass8t ut Judah.
E.16.1 In the six and thirtieth year of the reign of Asa Baasha king of Israel came up against Judah, and built Ramah, to the intent that he might let none go out or come in to Asa king of Judah.

α.16.2 Neit Asa sohh8wuttau gold, kah nompakouunash wutch wekit Jehovah, kah wutch wekit ketass8t, kah wunnegonshhuon en Benhadadut Syriae ketass8t, noh wadohkit Damascus, n8wau.
E.16.2 Then Asa brought out silver and gold out of the treasures of the house of the LORD and of the king's house, and sent to Benhadad king of Syria, that dwelt at Damascus, saying,

α.16.3 Wunn8waonganu8 nashaue ut nen kah ken, neane ut nashaue ut n8sh kah k8sh: kusseh negonshhuam en kuhhogkat s[i]ver kah gold, monchish, pohquenush k8n8waongan8 Baashah Israelle ketass8t, onk woh nutamaehtunk.
E.16.3 There is a league between me and thee, as there was between my father and thy father: behold, I have sent thee silver and gold; go, break thy league with Baasha king of Israel, that he may depart from me.

α.16.4 Kah Benhadad n8tauau ketass8t Asa, kah ayeuuhkonittue ann8nau, en Israelle keitotanat wutayeuwuhteae ummugquompomoh kah togkodtamwog Jion, kah Dan, kah Abel$maim, kah wame 8wadchanumwe otanash Naphthali.
E.16.4 And Benhadad hearkened unto king Asa, and sent the captains of his armies against the cities of Israel; and they smote Ijon, and Dan, and Abelmaim, and all the store cities of Naphtali.

α.16.5 Kah niyeup, Baasha n8tog, ahque weekitteau ut Ramah, kah wutanakausuonk netahshinnu8.
E.16.5 And it came to pass, when Baasha heard it, that he left off building of Ramah, and let his work cease.

α.16.6 Neit ketass8t Asa, nemunau wame Judahoh, kah nag uss8wuttauog qussukquanash Ramah, kah ne Timber, ne nashp[é] Baasha weekitteaop, kah ne wunnashpe wekukon Geba, kah Mizpah.
E.16.6 Then Asa the king took all Judah; and they carried away the stones of Ramah, and the timber thereof, wherewith Baasha was building; and he built therewith Geba and Mizpah.

α.16.7 Kah na ahquompak Hanani naumwaen peyau Asa Judae ketass8tam8ut, kah wuttinuh, newutche kuppabahtanum Syriae keta[a]ss8t, kah matta kuppabahtanumóh Jehovah kum-Manitt8m, newaj wutáyeuwéhteomoh Syriae ke[t]ss8t; pohquohham wutch kenutcheganit.
E.16.7 And at that time Hanani the seer came to Asa king of Judah, and said unto him, Because thou hast relied on the king of Syria, and not relied on the LORD thy God, therefore is the host of the king of Syria escaped out of thine hand.

α.16.8 Sunnummatta Ethiopiansog, kah Lubimsog missi wutayeuwehteongan8, weeche monatash chariotsash kah horsesoh na8mukqutcheh? qut newutche kuppabohtanumomp Jehovah, upponah ut kenutcheganit.
E.16.8 Were not the Ethiopians and the Lubims a huge host, with very many chariots and horsemen? yet, because thou didst rely on the LORD, he delivered them into thine hand.

α.16.9 Newutche wuskesukquash Jehovah papannupushaash mamusse ohkeit, ummenuhkeeu weech8hamonat nah wuttahh8óash pannuppeyeu8gish nogque en wuhhogkat, yeu kuttit mattammagwe ussen, newutche, yeu wutch pish k8matompag8m.
E.16.9 For the eyes of the LORD run to and fro throughout the whole earth, to shew himself strong in the behalf of them whose heart is perfect toward him. Herein thou hast done foolishly: therefore from henceforth thou shalt have wars.

α.16.10 Neit Asa musquanumau naumwaenuh kah ukkupshagkinuh, newutche ummishe musquanumuh, newutche yeu, kah Asa sunukohwau nawhutch missinninnuh ne nan ahquompag.
E.16.10 Then Asa was wroth with the seer, and put him in a prison house; for he was in a rage with him because of this thing. And Asa oppressed some of the people the same time.

α.16.11 Kah kusséh wutusseongash Asa negonne kah maumachish, kusseh, wussukwhosuash, ut 8sukuhwhongan8out Judae, kah Israelle ketass8tamwog.
E.16.11 And, behold, the acts of Asa, first and last, lo, they are written in the book of the kings of Judah and Israel.

α.16.12 Kah Asa nishwinchage kah pasuk8gun tahshe kodtumwae ketass8tam8it, mahchinau ut wusseetut, nô pajeh ummahchinnáonk missiyeuit: qut onch ut wunn8chumwesuonganit matta natinneawhoou Jehovahoh, qut ponaskehtuaenuh.
E.16.12 And Asa in the thirty and ninth year of his reign was diseased in his feet, until his disease was exceeding great: yet in his disease he sought not to the LORD, but to the physicians.

α.16.13 Kah Asa weesequom8mau 8shoh, kah nupp8 yauunnehchage kah nahen nequt kodtumwae kohtass8tam8it.
E.16.13 And Asa slept with his fathers, and died in the one and fortieth year of his reign.

α.16.14 Kah upposekinouh nehenwonche wenohkeit, ne ayimauont wuhhogkuh, ut wut8tanat David, kah wussepsumouh appinneat, ne nomwohtag wetemungquokish, kah eiyane spicash; quagquashwehtogish nashpe wunnetuhtauonk Apothecary: kah ummishe chikohsumwontamauouh.
E.16.14 And they buried him in his own sepulchres, which he had made for himself in the city of David, and laid him in the bed which was filled with sweet odours and divers kinds of spices prepared by the apothecaries' art: and they made a very great burning for him.

α.17.1 KAh Jehosaphatoh wunnaumonuh wunnompass8tamomukquoh, kah ayeuuhkonittue menehkheau wuhhogkuh Israeloh.
E.17.1 And Jehoshaphat his son reigned in his stead, and strengthened himself against Israel.

α.17.2 Kah wunohto wadchanuaongash, ut wame pummeneutausue keitotanash ut Judah, kah ut Ephraime keitotanash, nish Asaoh 8shoh neemunuhpash.
E.17.2 And he placed forces in all the fenced cities of Judah, and set garrisons in the land of Judah, and in the cities of Ephraim, which Asa his father had taken.

α.17.3 Kah Jehovah wetômau Jehosophatoh, newutche pomushau negonne ummayash 8shoh Davidoh, kah matta natinneawhau Baalimoh.
E.17.3 And the LORD was with Jehoshaphat, because he walked in the first ways of his father David, and sought not unto Baalim;

α.17.4 Qut natinneawhau Lord um$Manitt8m8uh 8shoh, kah pomushauoh wutann8team8onganit, kah matta asuhkaue wutusseongash Israel.
E.17.4 But sought to the Lord God of his father, and walked in his commandments, and not after the doings of Israel.

α.17.5 Newaj Jehovah menehketeunk ketass8tamóonk ut wunnutcheganit, kah wame Judah mag8og wenauwetuonk kah quttianittuonk m8cheke.
E.17.5 Therefore the LORD stablished the kingdom in his hand; and all Judah brought to Jehoshaphat presents; and he had riches and honour in abundance.

α.17.6 Kah wuttah tahshinausu ut ummayut Jehovah: kah wonk amaunum qunuhqui ayeuongash, kah kuppiyeuash wutch Judah.
E.17.6 And his heart was lifted up in the ways of the LORD: moreover he took away the high places and groves out of Judah.

α.17.7 Wonk ut nashwe kodtumwae kohtass8tam8it, negont8au, wussontimausimoh, Benhailoh, kah Obadiahoh, kah Zechariahoh kah Nathaneeloh, kah Micajatoh, kuhk8tomuhkonat ut keitotanahtu Judah.
E.17.7 Also in the third year of his reign he sent to his princes, even to Benhail, and to Obadiah, and to Zechariah, and to Nethaneel, and to Michaiah, to teach in the cities of Judah.

α.17.8 Kah nag weechayeumukquog Levitsoh, Shemajah, & Nathaniah, & Zebadiah, & Asahel, kah Shemiramoth, kah Jehonathan, kah Adonijah, kah Tobijah, kah Tob-Adonijah, Levitsog, kah nag weechayeumukquog Elishama, kah Jehoram sephausuenuog.
E.17.8 And with them he sent Levites, even Shemaiah, and Nethaniah, and Zebadiah, and Asahel, and Shemiramoth, and Jehonathan, and Adonijah, and Tobijah, and Tobadonijah, Levites; and with them Elishama and Jehoram, priests.

α.17.9 Kah kuhk8tomwehteaog ut Judah, kah weeche kenunnumwog wuttinnaumatue Jehovah b8k, kah pannupwushaog wame Judae keitotanash, kah kuhk8tomauaog missinninnuh.
E.17.9 And they taught in Judah, and had the book of the law of the LORD with them, and went about throughout all the cities of Judah, and taught the people.

α.17.10 Kah qushaonk Jehovah nuhkuhkom wame, wutohtimoine ketass8tam8ongash, nish weenohtagish Judah, newaj matta ayeuuhkonahetteg Jehosophatoh.
E.17.10 And the fear of the LORD fell upon all the kingdoms of the lands that were round about Judah, so that they made no war against Jehoshaphat.

α.17.11 Wonk nawhutch Philistiansog pau[à]tauaog mag8ongash Jehosophatoh, kah ompweteae silver, kah Arabiansog uppaudtauouh floksog, nesausuk tahṣhe muttannonganog kussuog ramsog, kah nesausuk tahṣhe muttannonganog kussuog nomposhimwe goatsog.
E.17.11 Also some of the Philistines brought Jehoshaphat presents, and tribute silver; and the Arabians brought him flocks, seven thousand and seven hundred rams, and seven thousand and seven hundred he goats.

α.17.12 Kah Jehoshaphat nano missugken m8cheke, kah ayim ut Judah wonkon8sinash, kah wadchanumwae otanash.
E.17.12 And Jehoshaphat waxed great exceedingly; and he built in Judah castles, and cities of store.

α.17.13 Kah missi wutusseongash ut Judae keitotanahtu, kah ayeuteaenuog, menuhkesuenuog ut Jerusalem.
E.17.13 And he had much business in the cities of Judah: and the men of war, mighty men of valour, were in Jerusalem.

α.17.14 Kah yeu wutteas8unneau, neaunak 8sh8oh week8oash ut Judah muttannongane mugquompuh, Adnah negonneyeu8, kah weechayeumuk menuhkesuenuh nishwudt pasuk8e muttannonganog kussuoh.
E.17.14 And these are the numbers of them according to the house of their fathers: Of Judah, the captains of thousands; Adnah the chief, and with him mighty men of valour three hundred thousand.

α.17.15 Kah asukunkqutcheh, Jehohanan mugquomp, kah weechayeumok neese pasuk8e kah shwosuk tahshinchage muttannonganog kussuoh.
E.17.15 And next to him was Jehohanan the captain, and with him two hundred and fourscore thousand.

α.17.16 Kah asuhkonk Amasiah wunnaumonuh Zichri, noh weekontamwe maguk wuhhogkuh en Jehovah$ut, kah weechayeumuk neese pasuk8e muttannonganogkussuoh menuhkesuenuog.
E.17.16 And next him was Amasiah the son of Zichri, who willingly offered himself unto the LORD; and with him two hundred thousand mighty men of valour.

α.17.17 Kah wutch Benjaminit Eliada menuhkesuen, kah weechay[e]umuk, kenauwameenuh nashpe ahtompeh kah ogqunneganash, neese pasuk8e muttannonganog kussuoh.
E.17.17 And of Benjamin; Eliada a mighty man of valour, and with him armed men with bow and shield two hundred thousand.

α.17.18 Kah asuhkunk Jehosabadoh, kah weechayeumuk nequt pasuk8e & shwosuk tahshinchag muttannonganog kussuoh, pakodche quashweog wutch ayeuwuttuonk.
E.17.18 And next him was Jehozabad, and with him an hundred and fourscore thousand ready prepared for the war.

α.17.19 Yeu kenompamaog ketass8toh chabussinitcheh yeuh ketass8t pononcheh ut pummeneutausue otanashtu pannuppe wame Judah.
E.17.19 These waited on the king, beside those whom the king put in the fenced cities throughout all Judah.

α.18.1 KAh Jehosaphat wenaneetuongash kah quttianittuonk ohtóu m8cheke, kah weetauadtue nongk8tuog Ahaboh.
E.18.1 Now Jehoshaphat had riches and honour in abundance, and joined affinity with Ahab.

α.18.2 Kah mahtshunk nawhutche kodtum8ash, w8msu en Ahabut en Samaria, kah wunnehtauoh m8cheke shepsoh kah oxenoh, kah wutch missinninnúh neh weechógqutcheh, kah wunnupwéshanuh 8weeche kuhkuhk8mukqunat en Ramoth-Gilead.
E.18.2 And after certain years he went down to Ahab to Samaria. And Ahab killed sheep and oxen for him in abundance, and for the people that he had with him, and persuaded him to go up with him to Ramothgilead.

α.18.3 Kah Ahab Israelle ketass8t unnau Jehosaphat Judae ketass8toh, woh k8weecháeh en Ramoth-Gilead? kah wunnamp8hamauoh, nen netatupe ken, kah nummissinninnumog netatuppe kummissinninnúmog, kah k8weetomunnumun ut ayeuwuttinneat.
E.18.3 And Ahab king of Israel said unto Jehoshaphat king of Judah, Wilt thou go with me to Ramothgilead? And he answered him, I am as thou art, and my people as thy people; and we will be with thee in the war.

α.18.4 Kah Jehosaphat unnau Israelle ketass8toh, nat8tamwéhteash, k8wehquetumoush, wuttinn8wáonk Jehovah yeu kesukok.
E.18.4 And Jehoshaphat said unto the king of Israel, Enquire, I pray thee, at the word of the LORD to day.

α.18.5 Newaj Israelle ketass8t miyanau quoshodtumwaénuh yauut pasuk88oh wosketompuh, kah wuttinuh, sun woh nutaumun Ramoth-Gilead en ayeuwuttinneat, asuh sun nukkehchetuhhómu? kah nag n8waog, kuhkuhquish, newutche God pish upponamun ketass8t wunnutcheganit.
E.18.5 Therefore the king of Israel gathered together of prophets four hundred men, and said unto them, Shall we go to Ramothgilead to battle, or shall I forbear? And they said, Go up; for God will deliver it into the king's hand.

α.18.6 Qut Jehosaphat n8wau, sunnummatta yeu wutappein chippe ukquoshodtumwaéneumoh Jehovah, onk woh noh kenat8tomauóun?
E.18.6 But Jehoshaphat said, Is there not here a prophet of the LORD besides, that we might enquire of him?

α.18.7 Kah ketass8t unnau Jehosaphatoh, na onkatuk wosketomp, noh woh n[à]shpe nat8tomauogkut Jehovah: qut nussekeneau, newutche matta n8wáunne quoshodtumwanshik8, qut nagwutteáe machuk: ne nan Micajah wunnaumonuh Iimla: kah Jehosaphat n8wau, ketass8t ahque ne n8waj.
E.18.7 And the king of Israel said unto Jehoshaphat, There is yet one man, by whom we may enquire of the LORD: but I hate him; for he never prophesied good unto me, but always evil: the same is Micaiah the son of Imla. And Jehoshaphat said, Let not the king say so.

α.18.8 Kah Israelle ketass8t wehkomau pasuk8h wuttannohsuéneumoh, kah n8wau, teanuk nós8k Micajah wunnaumonuh Iimla.
E.18.8 And the king of Israel called for one of his officers, and said, Fetch quickly Micaiah the son of Imla.

α.18.9 Kah Israelle ketass8t, kah Jehosaphat Judae ketass8t appuog naneeswe ut wutappuongan8óut hogk8og ketass8tamwe hogk8ongash; kah appuog, chippe appuonganit ahhut petutteamuk Samarie squont, kah wame quoshodtumwaenúog, quoshodtumwog ut anaquabenit.
E.18.9 And the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat king of Judah sat either of them on his throne, clothed in their robes, and they sat in a void place at the entering in of the gate of Samaria; and all the prophets prophesied before them.

α.18.10 Neit Zedekiah wunnaumonuh Chenaanah, umm8ohshog quoshkonuhkauópuh, kah n8wau, yeu wussin Jehovah, nashpe yeug pish kukkonnukkéhtau Syria nô pajeh ummohtupaénaóont.
E.18.10 And Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah had made him horns of iron, and said, Thus saith the LORD, With these thou shalt push Syria until they be consumed.

α.18.11 Kah wame quoshodtumwaenuog ne wuttin quoshodtumuneau, n8waog, kuhkuhquish en Ramoth-Gilead, kah wunniish: newutche Jehovah pish ummagun en wunnutcheganit ketass8t.
E.18.11 And all the prophets prophesied so, saying, Go up to Ramothgilead, and prosper: for the LORD shall deliver it into the hand of the king.

α.18.12 Kah ann8naen noh wehkomont Micajahoh, ukken8nuh wuttinuh, kusseh, ukkutt8ongan8oash quoshodtumwaénuog wunnegenash ut ketass8tamut, nashpe nequtt8wáonk: yowutche, k8wehquetumoush, kuttinn8wáonk netatuppeyeuitch, ukkutt8wongan8out, kah n8w[a]sh wanegik.
E.18.12 And the messenger that went to call Micaiah spake to him, saying, Behold, the words of the prophets declare good to the king with one assent; let thy word therefore, I pray thee, be like one of their's, and speak thou good.

α.18.13 Kah Micaj[a]h n8wau, nean uppomantog Jehovah, uttoh num-Manitt8m an8adt ne nussin.
E.18.13 And Micaiah said, As the LORD liveth, even what my God saith, that will I speak.

α.18.14 Kah paont ketass8tamut, ketass8t wuttinuh, Micajah, sun woh nutaumun en Ramoth-Gilead, ayeuwuttinneat, asuh woh nukkehchetahhun? kah n8wau, kuhkuhquish kah wunniish, kah nag pish magununk en kenutcheganit.
E.18.14 And when he was come to the king, the king said unto him, Micaiah, shall we go to Ramothgilead to battle, or shall I forbear? And he said, Go ye up, and prosper, and they shall be delivered into your hand.

α.18.15 Kah ketass8t wuttinuh, toh woh kutteashish chadchekéeuwáhesh, matta teag kusséinadt qut ne wanumuhkuteyeuonk ut 8wesuonganit Jehovah?
E.18.15 And the king said to him, How many times shall I adjure thee that thou say nothing but the truth to me in the name of the LORD?

α.18.16 Neit n8wau nunnau wame Israel naswáiyeuog ut wadchuuhkontu, onatuh shepsog neg matta wananaushepsomégig, kah Jehovah n8wau, yeug matta wussontimó[8]éog, qushkehettich nish$noh pasuk en wekit, wunohteáe.
E.18.16 Then he said, I did see all Israel scattered upon the mountains, as sheep that have no shepherd: and the LORD said, These have no master; let them return therefore every man to his house in peace.

α.18.17 (Kah Israelle ketass8t unnau Jehosophatoh, sunnummatta kuttinnonop, matta noh n8nequoshodtumwanshik8, qut machuk)
E.18.17 And the king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, Did I not tell thee that he would not prophesy good unto me, but evil?

α.18.18 Wonk n8wau, newutche n8tash wuttinn8waonk Jehovah: nunnau Lord, appu wutappuonganit kah wame kesukque kenauwameonk nepóoh wuttinuhkôunit, kah ummenadcheanit.
E.18.18 Again he said, Therefore hear the word of the LORD; I saw the LORD sitting upon his throne, and all the host of heaven standing on his right hand and on his left.

α.18.19 Kah Jehovah n8wau, howan woh napweshanont Ahaboh Israelle ketass8toh, onk woh kuhkuhqueu, kah woh penushau, ut Ramoth$Gilead? kah pasuk ket8kau, n8wau, yeu enneu, onkatuk ket8kau, n8wau, naunneu.
E.18.19 And the LORD said, Who shall entice Ahab king of Israel, that he may go up and fall at Ramothgilead? And one spake saying after this manner, and another saying after that manner.

α.18.20 Neit nashauonk sohham, kah neepau anaquabit Lord, kah n8wau, nen nupweshon, kah Jehovah wuttinuh, uttoh ut?
E.18.20 Then there came out a spirit, and stood before the LORD, and said, I will entice him. And the LORD said unto him, Wherewith?

α.18.21 Kah n8wau, nussohham, kah nuppann8wáeu nashauonganu, ut wutt8n8wóut wame ukquoshodtumwaéneumoh, kah Jehovah n8wau, pish kenupshan, kah pish kussohkau: sohhash kah ne ussish.
E.18.21 And he said, I will go out, and be a lying spirit in the mouth of all his prophets. And the Lord said, Thou shalt entice him, and thou shalt also prevail: go out, and do even so.

α.18.22 Newutche yeuyeu, Jehovah ponau pann8wae nashauonguh wutt8n8out, yeuh kukquoshodtumwaéneumoh: kah Jehovah kutayeuuhkonittue matche ken8nuk.
E.18.22 Now therefore, behold, the LORD hath put a lying spirit in the mouth of these thy prophets, and the LORD hath spoken evil against thee.

α.18.23 Neit Zedechiah wunnaumonuh Chenaanah pas8tshau, kah togkomau Micajahoh ut wann8nauut, kah n8wau, toh nogque wutónás nogkussit wunnashauanitt8moh Jehovah, kukken8nukqunat:
E.18.23 Then Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah came near, and smote Micaiah upon the cheek, and said, Which way went the Spirit of the LORD from me to speak unto thee?

α.18.24 Kah Micajah n8wau, kusseh, pish kenaumun ne kesukok, petutteaan keme chamberut puttogquean.
E.18.24 And Micaiah said, Behold, thou shalt see on that day when thou shalt go into an inner chamber to hide thyself.

α.18.25 Neit Israelle ketass8t n8wau, nemunuk Micajah, quehch8on8k en Amonut nanánuáen keitotanat, kah en Joashut ketass8t wunnaumonuh:
E.18.25 Then the king of Israel said, Take ye Micaiah, and carry him back to Amon the governor of the city, and to Joash the king's son;

α.18.26 Kah n8wagk yeu wussin ketass8t, yeuoh kuppishagkinok, kah assam8k unkquanumóe petukqunnunk, kah unkquanumóe nippe, nô pajeh n8nohteáe qushkenadt.
E.18.26 And say, Thus saith the king, Put this fellow in the prison, and feed him with bread of affliction and with water of affliction, until I return in peace.

α.18.27 Kah Micajah n8wau, wunnamuhkut wunohteáe qushkean, neit Jehovah matta ket8kóou nashpe nen, kah n8wau, n8tiegk wame missinninnúog.
E.18.27 And Micaiah said, If thou certainly return in peace, then hath not the LORD spoken by me. And he said, Hearken, all ye people.

α.18.28 Neit Israelle ketass8t, kah Jehosaphat Judae ketass8t, kuhkuhqueog en Ramoth-Gilead.
E.18.28 So the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat the king of Judah went up to Ramothgilead.

α.18.29 Kah Israelle ketass8t, unnau Jehosaphatoh, nuppen8wauwóhós, kah nuttom ayeuwuttinneat, qut hogqush kuppetwoshqushaongash, neit Israelle ketass8t penuwauuhwhósu, kah au ayeuwuttuonganit.
E.18.29 And the king of Israel said unto Jehoshaphat, I will disguise myself, and I will go to the battle; but put thou on thy robes. So the king of Israel disguised himself; and they went to the battle.

α.18.30 Kah Syriae ketass8t ann8nop wut-chariotse ummugquompuh, neh weetomukqutcheh, n8wau, ayeuhkonuhteok papeississitcheg asuh matikenukeg, webe Israelle ketass8t.
E.18.30 Now the king of Syria had commanded the captains of the chariots that were with him, saying, Fight ye not with small or great, save only with the king of Israel.

α.18.31 Kah niyeup chariotse mugquompaog nauahettit Jehosaphatoh, n8waog, noh Israelle ketass8t, newaj wéenuhkauwáhettit wutáyeuwuttinneaóont, qut Jehosaphat mishont8wau, kah Lord wuttannumauoh, kah God neh wutamáeáheuh.
E.18.31 And it came to pass, when the captains of the chariots saw Jehoshaphat, that they said, It is the king of Israel. Therefore they compassed about him to fight: but Jehoshaphat cried out, and the LORD helped him; and God moved them to depart from him.

α.18.32 Newutch n$niyeup, chariotse mugquompaog, wahteauhettit noh matta Israelle ketass8t, qushkeog wutch wunn8swehtahwhonaóont.
E.18.32 For it came to pass, that, when the captains of the chariots perceived that it was not the king of Israel, they turned back again from pursuing him.

α.18.33 Kah howae wosketomp nanwohtau, kah muswau Israelle ketass8toh ut nashaue adt wâadjishunk kenauwameonk, newaj unnont wutchariotse woksetompomoh, quinnupinish kenutcheg, onk woh kussohh8wuneh wutch ayeuhteáut, newutche nunn8chumwetáwhut.
E.18.33 And a certain man drew a bow at a venture, and smote the king of Israel between the joints of the harness: therefore he said to his chariot man, Turn thine hand, that thou mayest carry me out of the host; for I am wounded.

α.18.34 Kah nano missi ayeuwuttuonk ne kesukok: qut Israelle ketass8t, chetanunau ut wutchariotumut, ayeukonittue Syriansoh nô pajeh wunnonk8ut: kah papaume wayont nupp8.
E.18.34 And the battle increased that day: howbeit the king of Israel stayed himself up in his chariot against the Syrians until the even: and about the time of the sun going down he died.

α.19.1 KAh Jehosaphat Judae ketass8t, wunohteáe qushkeu en wekit en Jerusalem.
E.19.1 And Jehoshaphat the king of Judah returned to his house in peace to Jerusalem.

α.19.2 Kah Jehu wunnaumonuh Hanani naumwaenin sohham wunnogskauónat, kah unnau ketass8toh Jehosaphatoh, sun woh kutanninnumau matcheseaen, kah sun woh k8womun neg sekeneauoncheg Lordoh: newutche musquanittuonk kenuhkukunk wutch anaquabit Lord.
E.19.2 And Jehu the son of Hanani the seer went out to meet him, and said to king Jehoshaphat, Shouldest thou help the ungodly, and love them that hate the LORD? therefore is wrath upon thee from before the LORD.

α.19.3 Qut wanegugish kenamheunt, newutche kutamaunum kuppiyeuash wutch ohkeit, kah k8quagquashwunum kuttah kenatinneawhonat God.
E.19.3 Nevertheless there are good things found in thee, in that thou hast taken away the groves out of the land, and hast prepared thine heart to seek God.

α.19.4 Kah Jehosaphat ayeu Jerusalem, kah wonk sohham pañuppe missiñinnúhtu, wutch Beersheba, wehque Ephraime wadchuut, kah quehchuunau en Jehovahut um-Manitt8m8oh 8sh8oh.
E.19.4 And Jehoshaphat dwelt at Jerusalem: and he went out again through the people from Beersheba to mount Ephraim, and brought them back unto the LORD God of their fathers.

α.19.5 Kah ponau wussittumwaénúh ohkeit, pannuppe wame pummeneutausue keitotanáhtu ut Judah, kukkeitotanáeu.
E.19.5 And he set judges in the land throughout all the fenced cities of Judah, city by city,

α.19.6 Kah unnau wussittumwaénùh, nunnukqussek toh aséog, newutche matta k8sittumwanshomw8 wosketomp, qut Jehovah, noh wetomukqueóg ut wussittum8onganit.
E.19.6 And said to the judges, Take heed what ye do: for ye judge not for man, but for the LORD, who is with you in the judgment.

α.19.7 Newutche yeuyeu qusháonk Jehovah appehtunk8k, nunnukqussek, kah ussek, newutche na mo matcheseonganinno Jehovahut kum-Manitt8mun, asuh papenauánumóou howane, asuh mat neemunnum8 mag8onk.
E.19.7 Wherefore now let the fear of the LORD be upon you; take heed and do it: for there is no iniquity with the LORD our God, nor respect of persons, nor taking of gifts.

α.19.8 Kah wonk, ut Jerusalem, Jehosaphat ponau nawhutch Levitsoh, kah nawhutch sephausuéninnúh, kah nawhutch kehche wut8shinneunk ut Israel, wutche 8sittumóonk Jehovah, kah chann8waongash, nag quashkehettit en Jerusalem.
E.19.8 Moreover in Jerusalem did Jehoshaphat set of the Levites, and of the priests, and of the chief of the fathers of Israel, for the judgment of the LORD, and for controversies, when they returned to Jerusalem.

α.19.9 Kah noh ummeechumuhkonuh wuttinuh, yeu pish kuppabuhtanumwe usseneau, ut qushaonganit Jehovah, kah nashpe pannuppée metah.
E.19.9 And he charged them, saying, Thus shall ye do in the fear of the LORD, faithfully, and with a perfect heart.

α.19.10 Kah ne teag peyaonukqueóg wutch kematt8óut neg wadohkitcheg u[h]keitotanaóont, nashaue wasqueheonganit, nashaue naumatuonganit kah ann8team8onganit, kuhk8waongash kah wussittum8ongash, nag pish kutamoóog matta uppaneussehtauónaóont Jehovah: kah newaj musquanittuonk nuhkuhkongqueog, kah kematt8óog: yeu ussek, kah matta pish kuppanneusseumw8.
E.19.10 And what cause soever shall come to you of your brethren that dwell in your cities, between blood and blood, between law and commandment, statutes and judgments, ye shall even warn them that they trespass not against the LORD, and so wrath come upon you, and upon your brethren: this do, and ye shall not trespass.

α.19.11 Kah kusseh, Amariah negonne sephausuaen noh kenánawunukou, ut wame wuttinniyeuonganit Jehovah: kah Zebadiah wunnaumonuh Ishmael, nanaúnnuénin ut wekit Judah, wutche wame ketass8t wuttinniyeuognash; kah wonk Levitsog neg aninnohsuénuog ut anaquabeóg, wutt8anatamwe ussek, kah Jehovah wetomau wunneet8oh.
E.19.11 And, behold, Amariah the chief priest is over you in all matters of the LORD; and Zebadiah the son of Ishmael, the ruler of the house of Judah, for all the king's matters: also the Levites shall be officers before you. Deal courageously, and the LORD shall be with the good.

α.20.1 Kah n$nih yeu mahche n$nag, wunnaumonuh Moab, kah wunnaumonuh Ammon, kah nag weech ayeumukquog onkatogeh chabesitcheg Ammonitsoh, ayeuhkonôog Jehosophatoh.
E.20.1 It came to pass after this also, that the children of Moab, and the children of Ammon, and with them other beside the Ammonites, came against Jehoshaphat to battle.

α.20.2 Neit nawhutch peyaog anoncheg Jehosaphatoh, n8wáog, kutayeuuhkonittue peyaonuk mattaánukeg, wutch ongkoue kehtahhannit, wutuhshame Syria, kah kusseh, nag appuog Hazazon-Tamar ne Engedi.
E.20.2 Then there came some that told Jehoshaphat, saying, There cometh a great multitude against thee from beyond the sea on this side Syria; and, behold, they be in Hazazontamar, which is Engedi.

α.20.3 Kah Jehosaphat wabesu, kah ponau wuhhog natinneawhónat Jehovah, kah wahteauwáhuau mat meetseonk papashpe wame Judah.
E.20.3 And Jehoshaphat feared, and set himself to seek the LORD, and proclaimed a fast throughout all Judah.

α.20.4 Kah Judah miyaéog, 8wehquetumauónaóont Jehovah wutannumunkqunanóont, wutch wame Judae keitotanahtu, nag peyaog wunnatinneawhonaóont Jehovah.
E.20.4 And Judah gathered themselves together, to ask help of the LORD: even out of all the cities of Judah they came to seek the LORD.

α.20.5 Kah Jehosaphat neepau ut Judae, kah Jerusaleme mukkinneonganit, ut wekit Jehovah, anaquohtag wuske chippinneutunk.
E.20.5 And Jehoshaphat stood in the congregation of Judah and Jerusalem, in the house of the LORD, before the new court,

α.20.6 Kah n8wau, woi Jehovah um-Manitt8m8uh n8shunónog, sunnummatta ken God ut kesukqut? kah sunnummatta kenanawunnum8 wame wutass8tam8ongash pen8wohteaog? kah ut kenutcheganit menuhkesuonk kah missugkenuonk, newaj matta howan tapenum8k kutayeuuhkonittue keneepauwehtunkqunat.
E.20.6 And said, O LORD God of our fathers, art not thou God in heaven? and rulest not thou over all the kingdoms of the heathen? and in thine hand is there not power and might, so that none is able to withstand thee?

α.20.7 Sunnummatta ken num-Manitt8mun, nph ama8hkauomp wadohkinitcheh yeu ohkeit wutch anaquabhettit kummissinninnumog Israel, jah kittinnumauónap 8skanneumuneuh Abraham ketomp, micheme.
E.20.7 Art not thou our God, who didst drive out the inhabitants of this land before thy people Israel, and gavest it to the seed of Abraham thy friend for ever?

α.20.8 Kah na wutaiinneau, kah na kuttit ayimunkquneau Sanctuarium wutche k8wesuonk, n8waog,
E.20.8 And they dwelt therein, and have built thee a sanctuary therein for thy name, saying,

α.20.9 Machuk nuhkuhkongqueog, togkodteg, wussittumóonk, asuh eninneáonk, asuh mahshagquodt, neepauéóog anaquohtag yeu wetu, ut anaquabean, (newutche k8wesuonk ohteau yeu wetuómut) kah mauunnitteauunóg ut nutuhquanum8onganunónut, neit pish ken8tam, kah kutannunos.
E.20.9 If, when evil cometh upon us, as the sword, judgment, or pestilence, or famine, we stand before this house, and in thy presence, (for thy name is in this house,) and cry unto thee in our affliction, then thou wilt hear and help.

α.20.10 Kah yeuyeu kusseh, wunnaumonuh Ammon, kah Moab, kah Seire wadchu, neh matta Israel ânánumóadcheh sohkok, sohhamwehettit wutch ohkeit Egypt, qut ukqushkehtauóuh, kah matta uppaguanóuh.
E.20.10 And now, behold, the children of Ammon and Moab and mount Seir, whom thou wouldest not let Israel invade, when they came out of the land of Egypt, but they turned from them, and destroyed them not;

α.20.11 Kusseh, uttoh nuttinunkquottunkqunan, uppeyonaóont nussohwhokónukqunnanónut wutch kutohtóonganit, ne anumiéog nutohtauunnanónut.
E.20.11 Behold, I say, how they reward us, to come to cast us out of thy possession, which thou hast given us to inherit.

α.20.12 Woi num-Manitt8mun sunnummatta woh k8sumóog? newutche matta n8menuhkesuonganeumun, ayeuuhkonittue yeug mattaánukeg, neg ayeuuhkonittue peyaonukqueagig, asuh matta n8wahteomun uttoh woh aséog, qut nuskesukqunnónash kuhkogkaeiyeu.
E.20.12 O our God, wilt thou not judge them? for we have no might against this great company that cometh against us; neither know we what to do: but our eyes are upon thee.

α.20.13 Kah wame Judah neepóog anaquabit Lord, nashpe ummukkiesum8uh kah ummittamwussúm8uh, kah wunneechan8uh.
E.20.13 And all Judah stood before the LORD, with their little ones, their wives, and their children.

α.20.14 Neit wunnashauanitt8moh Jehovah nuhkuhkunk Jahaziel, wunnaumonuh Zechariah, wunnaumonuh Benajah, wunnaumonuh Jehiel, wunnaumonuh Mattaniah, wul-Levit wutch wunnaumonat Asaph, ut nashaue mukkinneonganit.
E.20.14 Then upon Jahaziel the son of Zechariah, the son of Benaiah, the son of Jeiel, the son of Mattaniah, a Levite of the sons of Asaph, came the Spirit of the LORD in the midst of the congregation;

α.20.15 Kah n8wau, n8tam8k wame Judah, kah wadohkeógish Jerusalem, kah ken ketass8t Jehosaphat, yeu kuttukqun Jehovah, wabesehteógk, asuh chepsúhteóg, newutche yeug mataánukeg, newutche ayeuwuttuonk matta kuttaiheyeu, qut Jehovah.
E.20.15 And he said, Hearken ye, all Judah, and ye inhabitants of Jerusalem, and thou king Jehoshaphat, Thus saith the LORD unto you, Be not afraid nor dismayed by reason of this great multitude; for the battle is not yours, but God's.

α.20.16 Saup ayeuhkonittue w8mséhtok, kusseh, nag kuhkuhqueog, kishke w8msuonganit Ziz, kah nag pish kummishkôôog wéhqshik sepueṣus, anaquohtag Jeruelle touohkomuk.
E.20.16 To morrow go ye down against them: behold, they come up by the cliff of Ziz; and ye shall find them at the end of the brook, before the wilderness of Jeruel.

α.20.17 Ayeuteáteogk, 8nappek, neepo8k, kah naum8k 8wadchanuaonk Jehovah ut kuhhogkaóut, woi Judah kah Jerusalem, wabesehteogk, asuh chepsehteogk, saup nag ayeuuhkonittue sohwetók, newutche Jehovah k8wetomukou.
E.20.17 Ye shall not need to fight in this battle: set yourselves, stand ye still, and see the salvation of the LORD with you, O Judah and Jerusalem: fear not, nor be dismayed; to morrow go out against them: for the LORD will be with you.

α.20.18 Kah Jehosaphat nauwánum uppuhkuk, wuskesuk en ohkekontu, kah wame Judah, kah wadohkitcheg Jerusalem, penusháog ut anaquabit Jehovah wowussumàog Jehovahoh.
E.20.18 And Jehoshaphat bowed his head with his face to the ground: and all Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem fell before the LORD, worshipping the LORD.

α.20.19 Kah Levitsog wunnaumonuh Kohathitsog, kah wunnaumonuh Korhitsog, neepoog woweenomonat Jehovah um-Manitt8moh Israel, nashpe mishont8waonk, qunuhque.
E.20.19 And the Levites, of the children of the Kohathites, and of the children of the Korhites, stood up to praise the LORD God of Israel with a loud voice on high.

α.20.20 Kah nag nompoae omohkéog, k[a]h sohhamwog en Tekoae touohkomukqut, kah ne en sohhamwehettit, Jehosophat neepau kah n8wau, n8tiek woi Judah, kah kenaau wadohkeogish Jerusalem, wunnamptog Lord kum-Manitt8mw8, neit woh kuttinne menehkhetteaneau: wunnamptok ukquoshodtumwaeneumoh, neit pish k8niimw8.
E.20.20 And they rose early in the morning, and went forth into the wilderness of Tekoa: and as they went forth, Jehoshaphat stood and said, Hear me, O Judah, and ye inhabitants of Jerusalem; Believe in the LORD your God, so shall ye be established; believe his prophets, so shall ye prosper.

α.20.21 Kah keket8kauont missinninnuh, kehtimau ket8hamaenuh en Lordut, neg woh waeenodtukeg, wunneetupanatamwe wunneetuonk, nean sohhamohettit negonuhkauut ayeuhteáog, kah n8wonat, woweenomuk Jehovah newutche ummonanitteaonk michemohteau.
E.20.21 And when he had consulted with the people, he appointed singers unto the LORD, and that should praise the beauty of holiness, as they went out before the army, and to say, Praise the LORD; for his mercy endureth for ever.

α.20.22 Kah n8che ket8hamahettit, kah woween[ô]muonat, Jehovah wunnashau adhósuoh ayeuuhkonittue wunnaumonuh Ammon, Moab, kah Seire wadchu, neg ayeuuhkontogig Judah, kah nag togkom[o]og.
E.20.22 And when they began to sing and to praise, the LORD set ambushments against the children of Ammon, Moab, and mount Seir, which were come against Judah; and they were smitten.

α.20.23 Newutche wunnaumonuh Ammon, kah Moab, neg ayeuhkonittue neepauwehtauaog neh wadohkinitche wadchuut Seir, uppápaquanne nushonat, kah paguanonat, kah nag mahche paguanahettit wadohkinitche Seir, nag wame paguanittuog.
E.20.23 For the children of Ammon and Moab stood up against the inhabitants of mount Seir, utterly to slay and destroy them: and when they had made an end of the inhabitants of Seir, every one helped to destroy another.

α.20.24 Kah Judah pas8sukamohettit touohkomukque askuhwheteae kommuk, moninneauáog mataánutcheh, kah kusseh nag nuppee muhtogkuk penushaog en ohkekontu, kah wanne howan uppohquohham8.
E.20.24 And when Judah came toward the watch tower in the wilderness, they looked unto the multitude, and, behold, they were dead bodies fallen to the earth, and none escaped.

α.20.25 Kah Jehosophat kah ummissinninneumoh, paahettit wunneemunnumáoont, sequttahhamauaongánoash, nah wunnamehteauouh monatash wenauwetuongash kenugke nuppoe muhhogkuhtu, kah môgoadtue nompakouunash (nish amaunumauwahettiche wuhhogkauh) anue onk ne woh adtahshe monchadtauhettit: kah nishikkesukquae mukkinnumwog sequttahham8ongash, newutche monat.
E.20.25 And when Jehoshaphat and his people came to take away the spoil of them, they found among them in abundance both riches with the dead bodies, and precious jewels, which they stripped off for themselves, more than they could carry away: and they were three days in gathering of the spoil, it was so much.

α.20.26 Kah yauquinogkok, nag miyaeog ut Berachae 8nohkoiyeuut, newutche na wuttit wunnaumoneau Jehovahoh, newaj ne ayeuonk hettamuk Berachae 8nôuhkoi pajeh yeu kesukok.
E.20.26 And on the fourth day they assembled themselves in the valley of Berachah; for there they blessed the LORD: therefore the name of the same place was called, The valley of Berachah, unto this day.

α.20.27 Neit nag qushkeog nish$noh pasuk Judae & Jerusalem wosketomp, kah Jehoshaphat wunnegonuhkauuh wonk weekontamwe onat Jerusalem: newutche Jehovah 8wekontamwáheuh ut ummatwom8óut:
E.20.27 Then they returned, every man of Judah and Jerusalem, and Jehoshaphat in the forefront of them, to go again to Jerusalem with joy; for the LORD had made them to rejoice over their enemies.

α.20.28 Kah nag peyaog Jerusalem nashpe psalterisash kah harps[à]sh, kah monopuhpeguanash, en wekit Jehovah.
E.20.28 And they came to Jerusalem with psalteries and harps and trumpets unto the house of the LORD.

α.20.29 Kah qushaonk God nuhkuhkau wame wutohtimóine ketass8tam8ongash, n8tamwehettit Jehovah ayeuuhkonau ummatwom8oh Israel.
E.20.29 And the fear of God was on all the kingdoms of those countries, when they had heard that the LORD fought against the enemies of Israel.

α.20.30 Neit wutass8tamóonk Jehosaphat chequnohteau, newutche um-Manitt8moh anwôhsumwáhik waéenu.
E.20.30 So the realm of Jehoshaphat was quiet: for his God gave him rest round about.

α.20.31 Kah Jehoshaphat ketass8tam88 ut Judah: noh nishwinchage kah napanna tahshe kodtumwohkom n8che ketass8tam8it, kah nesnehchage kah napanna tahshe kodtumwae ut Jerusalem, kah ohkasoh ussowesu Azubah, wuttaunoh Shilhi.
E.20.31 And Jehoshaphat reigned over Judah: he was thirty and five years old when he began to reign, and he reigned twenty and five years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Azubah the daughter of Shilhi.

α.20.32 Kah pomushau ummayit Asa 8shoh, kah matta wunnukkodtum8un; usseup ne sampwagk ut anaquabit Jehovah.
E.20.32 And he walked in the way of Asa his father, and departed not from it, doing that which was right in the sight of the LORD.

α.20.33 Qut qunuhqui ayeuongash matta amaunum8unash: newutche missiñinnúog asquam quoshwehtamóog wuttahh8óash, en um-Manitt8m8óut 8sh8óuh.
E.20.33 Howbeit the high places were not taken away: for as yet the people had not prepared their hearts unto the God of their fathers.

α.20.34 Kah onkatogish wutusseongash Jehoshaphat, negonne kah maumachish, kusseh wussukwhósuash ut 8sukuhwhonganit Jehu, wunnaumonuh Hanani, noh mâsohwhut ut 8sukuhwhongan8úut, ISraelle ketass8tamwog.
E.20.34 Now the rest of the acts of Jehoshaphat, first and last, behold, they are written in the book of Jehu the son of Hanani, who is mentioned in the book of the kings of Israel.

α.20.35 Kah mahche yeu n$nag, Jehosophat Judae ketass8t, weech8hamau Ahaziahoh Israelle ketass8t, noh ahche macheseit.
E.20.35 And after this did Jehoshaphat king of Judah join himself with Ahaziah king of Israel, who did very wickedly:

α.20.36 Kah 8weech8humuh ayimunat keiht8nogquash ônat Tarshish, kah ayimwog keiht8nogquash ut Ezion$Geber.
E.20.36 And he joined himself with him to make ships to go to Tarshish: and they made the ships in Eziongaber.

α.20.37 Neit Eliezer wunnaumonuh Dodavah wutch Mareshah, ayeuuhkonittue quoshodtumomau Jehoshaphatoh, n8wau, newutche k8weech8hum Ahaziah, Jehovah pohquenum kutanakausuongash, kah keit8nogquash pokshaash, newaj n8nanumwéhettit onat Tarshish.
E.20.37 Then Eliezer the son of Dodavah of Mareshah prophesied against Jehoshaphat, saying, Because thou hast joined thyself with Ahaziah, the LORD hath broken thy works. And the ships were broken, that they were not able to go to Tarshish.

α.21.1 NEit Jehoshaphat weesequom8mau 8shoh kah posekinau weeche 8sh ut ukkeitotanat David: kah Jehoramoh wunnaumonuh wunnompass8tamomukquoh.
E.21.1 Now Jehoshaphat slept with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers in the city of David. And Jehoram his son reigned in his stead.

α.21.2 Kah wematoh wunnaumonuh Jehoshaphat, Azariah, kah Jehiel, kah Zechariah, kah Azáriah, kah Michael, kah Shephatiah, wame yeuh wunnaumonuh Jehosophat, Israelle ketass8t.
E.21.2 And he had brethren the sons of Jehoshaphat, Azariah, and Jehiel, and Zechariah, and Azariah, and Michael, and Shephatiah: all these were the sons of Jehoshaphat king of Israel.

α.21.3 Kah 8sh8uh aninnumunkquog mishe silvere kah Golde mag8ongash, kah mâgoadtikish, nashpe pummeneutausue keitotanash ut Judah: qut ass8tamóonk aninnumauau Jehoramoh, newutche mohtamétu.
E.21.3 And their father gave them great gifts of silver, and of gold, and of precious things, with fenced cities in Judah: but the kingdom gave he to Jehoram; because he was the firstborn.

α.21.4 Kah Jehoram waábit ut wutass8tam8onganit 8shoh, menehkheau wuhhogkuh, kah nushau wame wematuh nashpe togkodteg kah wonk nawhutche Israelle sontimóog,
E.21.4 Now when Jehoram was risen up to the kingdom of his father, he strengthened himself, and slew all his brethren with the sword, and divers also of the princes of Israel.

α.21.5 Jehoram nishwinchage k[u]h neeswe kodtumwohkom n8che ketass8tam8it, kah shwosuk tahshe kodtumwae ketass8tam88 ut Jerusalem.
E.21.5 Jehoram was thirty and two years old when he began to reign, and he reigned eight years in Jerusalem.

α.21.6 Kah pomushau ummayeuout Israelle ketass8tamwog onatuh wek8 Ahab, newutche ummittamwussu wuttaunoh Ahab, kah ussu ne machuk ut anaquabit Jehovah.
E.21.6 And he walked in the way of the kings of Israel, like as did the house of Ahab: for he had the daughter of Ahab to wife: and he wrought that which was evil in the eyes of the LORD.

α.21.7 Qut Jehovah matta paguodtoou wek David, newu[t]che wunn8waonk ne ayimauomp Davidoh, kah neane quoshomomp, wuttinnumauonat, wequananteg, kah wunnaumonuh micheme.
E.21.7 Howbeit the LORD would not destroy the house of David, because of the covenant that he had made with David, and as he promised to give a light to him and to his sons for ever.

α.21.8 Ut ukkesukodtumut Edomitsog amaéog wutch agwe wunnutcheganit Judah: kah ketass8tamuhkonaog wuhhogkauh.
E.21.8 In his days the Edomites revolted from under the dominion of Judah, and made themselves a king.

α.21.9 Neit Jehoram sohham wutch wussontimosumuh, kah wame wutchariotsumash, kah neepau nukonaeu, kah togkomau Edomitsoh neh weenuhkunkqutcheh, kah chariotse Mugquompaog.
E.21.9 Then Jehoram went forth with his princes, and all his chariots with him: and he rose up by night, and smote the Edomites which compassed him in, and the captains of the chariots.

α.21.10 Nemehkuh Edomitsog amaeog wutch agwe wunnutcheganit Judah pajeh yeu kesukok, nenan wonk ahquompak Libnah amaeu wutch agwe wunn[u]tcheganit, newutche ohquanumau 8shoh um-Manitt8moh.
E.21.10 So the Edomites revolted from under the hand of Judah unto this day. The same time also did Libnah revolt from under his hand; because he had forsaken the LORD God of his fathers.

α.21.11 Nano, ayim qunuhqui ayeuongash ut Judae wadchuuhkontu, kah nanwun8dsuasuaheau wadohkinitcheh Jerusalem, kah chetimau Judahoh.
E.21.11 Moreover he made high places in the mountains of Judah and caused the inhabitants of Jerusalem to commit fornication, and compelled Judah thereto.

α.21.12 Kah na wuttit peyaonukqun wussukwhonk wutch Elijah quoshodumwaen, n8wom8, yeu wussin Jehovah um-Manitt8moh David k8sh, newutche matta kuppomshoh ut ummayit Jehoshaphat k8sh, asuh matta en ummayut Asa Judae ketass8t.
E.21.12 And there came a writing to him from Elijah the prophet, saying, Thus saith the LORD God of David thy father, Because thou hast not walked in the ways of Jehoshaphat thy father, nor in the ways of Asa king of Judah,

α.21.13 Qut kuppomusham ummayeuout Israelle ketass8tamwog kah Judah, kah wadohkitcheg Jerusalem, kenanwun8dsquaáusuaheóog, netatupe nanwun8dsquaausuongash wek Ahab, kah wonk kenush kematog wutch k8sh wekit, neg aneúkunkqueaneg.
E.21.13 But hast walked in the way of the kings of Israel, and hast made Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem to go a whoring, like to the whoredoms of the house of Ahab, and also hast slain thy brethren of thy father's house, which were better than thyself:

α.21.14 Kusseh, nashpe mishe togkodtuonk, Jehovah pish togkomau kummissinninneumoh, kah keneechanog, kah kummittamwussog kah wame kummaumachiyeumash.
E.21.14 Behold, with a great plague will the LORD smite thy people, and thy children, and thy wives, and all thy goods:

α.21.15 Kah ken pish kummishe mahchinam, nashpe taninneáonk menugkussit, nô pajeh kenogkus penushont wutche mahchináonk asekesukokish,
E.21.15 And thou shalt have great sickness by disease of thy bowels, until thy bowels fall out by reason of the sickness day by day.

α.21.16 Nano, Jehovah ayeuuhkonittue wogkouinau wunnashauongan8ooh Philistiansog Jehoramoh, kah Arabiansog kishke Ethiopiansog.
E.21.16 Moreover the LORD stirred up against Jehoram the spirit of the Philistines, and of the Arabians, that were near the Ethiopians:

α.21.17 Kah nag kuhkuhqueog en Judah kah uppohkuppúnauúnau, kah amáunumwog maumachiyeuash nish nampteomukish ut ketass8t wekit, kah wonk wunnaumonuh kah ummittamwussoh: newaj matta pasuk8 wunnaumonuh ushqunumauau webe Jehoahaz ummuttasonsuh.
E.21.17 And they came up into Judah, and brake into it, and carried away all the substance that was found in the king's house, and his sons also, and his wives; so that there was never a son left him, save Jehoahaz, the youngest of his sons.

α.21.18 Kah mahche wame yeu n$nag Jehovah wuttogkomuh ut wunnogkussit nashpe matta na neetskeseumuk mahchinaonk.
E.21.18 And after all this the LORD smote him in his bowels with an incurable disease.

α.21.19 Kah n$niyeup, chekeyeu8k, mahche neese kodtum8uk, wunnogkus penusheau nashpe ummahchinaonk: neit nupp8 nashpe mishe mahchinaongash kah ummissinninneumoh matta wutchikkusumwanshik8oh, neane wutchikohsum8ongash 8sh8oh.
E.21.19 And it came to pass, that in process of time, after the end of two years, his bowels fell out by reason of his sickness: so he died of sore diseases. And his people made no burning for him, like the burning of his fathers.

α.21.20 Nishwinchage kah neese kodtumwohkom n8che ketass8tam8mit, kah ketass8tam88 ut Jerusalem shwosuk tahshe kodtumwae, kah amaeu wanne kodtanum[ó]ont: qut upposekinouh ut ukkeitotanat David qut matta 8weenohkeóonk ketass8tamwog.
E.21.20 Thirty and two years old was he when he began to reign, and he reigned in Jerusalem eight years, and departed without being desired. Howbeit they buried him in the city of David, but not in the sepulchres of the kings.

α.22.1 KAh wadohkitcheg Jerusalem, Ahaziah ummuttasonsoh wunnompe ketass8tamuhkonauh: newutche kenauwameénuog neg weeche peyomoncheg Arabiansoh en tuppuksinn8wonganit nushaog wame mohtomeginitcheh, neit Ahaziah wunnaumonuh Jehoram Judae ketass8t ketass8tam88.
E.22.1 And the inhabitants of Jerusalem made Ahaziah his youngest son king in his stead: for the band of men that came with the Arabians to the camp had slain all the eldest. So Ahaziah the son of Jehoram king of Judah reigned.

α.22.2 Ahazia yauunchage kah neese kodtumwohkom, n8che ketass8tam8it, kah neese kodtumwae ketass8tam88 ut Jerusalem, kah ohkasoh ussowesuoh Athaliah wuttaunoh Omri.
E.22.2 Forty and two years old was Ahaziah when he began to reign, and he reigned one year in Jerusalem. His mother's name also was Athaliah the daughter of Omri.

α.22.3 Noh wonk pomushau ummayit wek Ahab: newutche ohkasoh neh ukken8nuaeneumoh, matchesenat.
E.22.3 He also walked in the ways of the house of Ahab: for his mother was his counsellor to do wickedly.

α.22.4 Newaj matcheseit ut anaquabit Jehovah netatuppé wek Ahab: newutche nah ukken8nuaeneumoh, mahche nupinit 8shoh, en wunnuppoonganit.
E.22.4 Wherefore he did evil in the sight of the LORD like the house of Ahab: for they were his counsellors after the death of his father to his destruction.

α.22.5 Kah wonk noh n8swuhkom nag ukken8s8waongan8, kah weechau Jehoramoh wunnaumonuh Ahab, Israelle ketass8t ayeuuhkononat Hazael Syriae ketass8t, ut Ramoth$Gilead, kah Syriansog togkomaog Joramoh.
E.22.5 He walked also after their counsel, and went with Jehoram the son of Ahab king of Israel to war against Hazael king of Syria at Ramothgilead: and the Syrians smote Joram.

α.22.6 Kah qushkeu netskeheonat ut Jezreel, newutche nish ain n8chumwetahwutche ut Ramah ayeuuhkonont Hazaeloh Syriae ketass8toh, kah Azariah wunnaumonuh Jehoram, Judae ketass8t, w8msu nauonat Jehoram wunnaumonuh Ahab ut Jezreel, newutche mahchinau.
E.22.6 And he returned to be healed in Jezreel because of the wounds which were given him at Ramah, when he fought with Hazael king of Syria. And Azariah the son of Jehoram king of Judah went down to see Jehoram the son of Ahab at Jezreel, because he was sick.

α.22.7 Kah wuttinineaonk Ahaziah wutch ayeu8 Godut, nashpe uppeyaononat Joramoh, newutche paont, ayeuuhkonittue Jehuoh wunnaumonuh Nimshi weeche sohham8mau Jehoramoh, noh Jehovah sussequnop tummethamunat wek Ahab.
E.22.7 And the destruction of Ahaziah was of God by coming to Joram: for when he was come, he went out with Jehoram against Jehu the son of Nimshi, whom the LORD had anointed to cut off the house of Ahab.

α.22.8 Kah nniyeup, Jehu asit wussittumóonk ut wekit Ahab, kah namheont Judae sontimoh, kah wunnaumonauh wematoh Ahaziah, neg wadtiñinneumuhkauoncheg Ahazioh.
E.22.8 And it came to pass, that, when Jehu was executing judgment upon the house of Ahab, and found the princes of Judah, and the sons of the brethren of Ahaziah, that ministered to Ahaziah, he slew them.

α.22.9 Kah natinnewhau Ahaziahoh, kah wuttohqunouh (Newutche puttogqueu ut Samaria) kah uppaudtauonauh Jehuoh, kah nushahettit upposekinouh n8waog, newutche yeuh wunnaumonuh Jehosophat noh natinneawhont Jehovahoh nashpe mámusse metah, neit wek Ahaziah matta umménuhkesuonganu ashpumme ohtauunat ass8tamóonk.
E.22.9 And he sought Ahaziah: and they caught him, (for he was hid in Samaria,) and brought him to Jehu: and when they had slain him, they buried him: Because, said they, he is the son of Jehoshaphat, who sought the LORD with all his heart. So the house of Ahaziah had no power to keep still the kingdom.

α.22.10 Qut Athaliah ohkasoh Ahaziah, nag* wunnaumoniuh nupp8i neepau,
E.22.10 But when Athaliah the mother of Ahaziah saw that her son was dead, she arose and destroyed all the seed royal of the house of Judah.

α.22.11 Qut Jehoshabeath wuttaunoh ketass8t nemunau Joashoh wunnaumonuh Ahaziah, kah komm8tinuh wutch kenugke wunnaumonat ketass8t neg nashomukeg, kah upponuh, kah neh nanukkehikqutcheh, appinneáe chamberut, nemehkuh Jehoshabeath wuttaunoh ketass8t Jehoram, ummittamwussoh Jehojada sephausuwaen (newutche neh weetompasu Ahaziah) wutattashuh wutch Athaliahut, newaj matta nushunk.
E.22.11 But Jehoshabeath, the daughter of the king, took Joash the son of Ahaziah, and stole him from among the king's sons that were slain, and put him and his nurse in a bedchamber. So Jehoshabeath, the daughter of king Jehoram, the wife of Jehoiada the priest, (for she was the sister of Ahaziah,) hid him from Athaliah, so that she slew him not.

α.22.12 Kah nah 8wetomuh attahshau ut God wekit nequtta tahshe kodtumwáe, kah Athaliah keichesonksquoou ut ohkeit.
E.22.12 And he was with them hid in the house of God six years: and Athaliah reigned over the land.

α.23.1 KAh nesausuk adtahshe kodtum8k, Jehojada menehkheau wuhhogkuh, kah neumunau pasuk8e mugquompuh, Azariah wunnaumonuh Jeroham, Ishmael wunnaumonuh Jehohanan, kah Azariah wunnaumonuh Obed, kah Maasiah wunnaumonuh Adajah, kah Elishaphat wunnaumonuh Zichri, 8n8wonáuh.
E.23.1 And in the seventh year Jehoiada strengthened himself, and took the captains of hundreds, Azariah the son of Jeroham, and Ishmael the son of Jehohanan, and Azariah the son of Obed, and Maaseiah the son of Adaiah, and Elishaphat the son of Zichri, into covenant with him.

α.23.2 Kah papaumshaog Judah, kah miyanáog Levitsoh wutch wame wut8tanaôont Judah, kah kehche wut8shinneunk ut Israel, kah nag peyaog Jerusalem.
E.23.2 And they went about in Judah, and gathered the Levites out of all the cities of Judah, and the chief of the fathers of Israel, and they came to Jerusalem.

α.23.3 Kah wame mukkinnéonk wunn8wáog ketass8toh ut wekit God, kah nah wuttinuh, kusseh, ketass8t wunnaumonuh pish ketass8tam88, nean8wop Jehovah papaume wunnaumonuh David.
E.23.3 And all the congregation made a covenant with the king in the house of God. And he said unto them, Behold, the king's son shall reign, as the LORD hath said of the sons of David.

α.23.4 Yeu woh kutusseneau, kenaau nashwe chippeógish petutteaog ut Sabath$dayut, sephausuénuog, kah Levitsog, nanausquontamagk.
E.23.4 This is the thing that ye shall do; A third part of you entering on the sabbath, of the priests and of the Levites, shall be porters of the doors;

α.23.5 Kah nashwe chippissitcheg appek ketass8t wekit, kah nashwe chippissitcheg ut quenohtage squont, kah wame missinninnuog appehettich chippinnutonganehtu wekit Jehovah.
E.23.5 And a third part shall be at the king's house; and a third part at the gate of the foundation: and all the people shall be in the courts of the house of the LORD.

α.23.6 Qut howan peyunkitch wekit Jehovah, webe sephausuénuog, kah neg Levitsog wadtinninneumuhkausitcheg, nag pish petutteaog newutche[,] nag wunneetupanatamweyeu8og: uqt wame missinninnúog nanawehteauhettich wutuskuhwheteaonk Jehovah. 
E.23.6 But let none come into the house of the LORD, save the priests, and they that minister of the Levites; they shall go in, for they are holy: but all the people shall keep the watch of the LORD.

α.23.7 Kah Levitsog pish wéenuhkauwaog ketass8toh nish$noh wosketomp wutauwohteaonk wunnutcheganit, kah howan onkatuk petutteadt wetuómut, pish nushau: qut kenaau wetom8k ketass8t petutteadt, kah sohhog.
E.23.7 And the Levites shall compass the king round about, every man with his weapons in his hand; and whosoever else cometh into the house, he shall be put to death: but be ye with the king when he cometh in, and when he goeth out.

α.23.8 Neit Levitsog kah wame Judah usseog neaunak wame ne Jehojada sephausuen ann8teamwit: kah nag neemunáog nishnoh pasuk, 8wosketomp8moh, neg woh petutteacheg Sabath$dayeu, keeche nag woh sohhogig Sabath$dayeu, newutche Jehojada sephausuen, matta moncheahtóou wunohtóongash.
E.23.8 So the Levites and all Judah did according to all things that Jehoiada the priest had commanded, and took every man his men that were to come in on the sabbath, with them that were to go out on the sabbath: for Jehoiada the priest dismissed not the courses.

α.23.9 Wonk Jehojada sephausuen aninnumauau pasuk8e mugquompuh, qunuhtugquash kah buklersash kah ogqunegash, nish wadtiehépash ketass8t David, nish ohtagish wekit God.
E.23.9 Moreover Jehoiada the priest delivered to the captains of hundreds spears, and bucklers, and shields, that had been king David's, which were in the house of God.

α.23.10 Kah wunnashau wame missinninnúh (nishnoh pasuk wutauwohteaonk ut wunnutcheganit) wutch muttinuhkôuneiyeue templeut, wehque menadcheunniyeue templeut, kishke altarut kah templeut, kishke ketass8tamwut waéenu.
E.23.10 And he set all the people, every man having his weapon in his hand, from the right side of the temple to the left side of the temple, along by the altar and the temple, by the king round about.

α.23.11 Neit sohh8wunáog ketass8t wunnaumonáuh, kah upponamauóuh chetukquab, kah wauwáonk, kah ukketass8tamuhkonuh: kah Jehojada kah wunnaumonuh sussequnóuh, kah n8wáog, Ketass8t pomontaj.
E.23.11 Then they brought out the king's son, and put upon him the crown, and gave him the testimony, and made him king. And Jehoiada and his sons anointed him, and said, God save the king.

α.23.12 Kah Athaliah n8tog 8wadtàuatonkqussuongan8 missinninnúog, quagquehettit waweeuomáhettit ketass8tamwoh, noh peyaonau missinninnúh ut wekit Jehovah.
E.23.12 Now when Athaliah heard the noise of the people running and praising the king, she came to the people into the house of the LORD:

α.23.13 Kah natawompu kah kusseh, ketass8t neepau kishke wunneepattunkquonganit, ahhut petutteamuk, kah sontimóog, kah monopuhpegquaénuog kishke ketass8tut, kah wame missinninnúog ne ohkeit muskouanatamwog, kah monopuhpequáog: wonk kodt8homoncheg, nashpe wunónt8wae auwohteaongash, kah neg kohk8tomauutcheg wowénomae ketahom[á]onk: neit Athaliah nehnegukom wuthogk8unash, kah n8wau, wunnombeukohteaonk wunnombeukohteaonk.
E.23.13 And she looked, and, behold, the king stood at his pillar at the entering in, and the princes and the trumpets by the king: and all the people of the land rejoiced, and sounded with trumpets, also the singers with instruments of musick, and such as taught to sing praise. Then Athaliah rent her clothes, and said, Treason, Treason.

α.23.14 Neit Jehojada sephausuen, sohh8wunau pasuk8e mugquompuh, neg nanawunnumwáitcheg: chippan8oh, kah nah wuttinuh, sohh8wunok wutch ussukkompóonganit, kah howan asukauont nushonch nashpe togkodteg newutche sephausuen anwop ahque nush8k ut wekit Jehovah.
E.23.14 Then Jehoiada the priest brought out the captains of hundreds that were set over the host, and said unto them, Have her forth of the ranges: and whoso followeth her, let him be slain with the sword. For the priest said, Slay her not in the house of the LORD.

α.23.15 Neit wuttohqunóuh, kah paont ahhut petutteamuk horsese squont, kishke ketass8t wekit na wuttit nushoneau.
E.23.15 So they laid hands on her; and when she was come to the entering of the horse gate by the king's house, they slew her there.

α.23.16 Kah Jehojada 8n8wonáuh nashaue nagum, kah nashawe wame missinninnúog, kah nashaue ketass8tamut, nag woh Jehovah 8missinninneumuneat.
E.23.16 And Jehoiada made a covenant between him, and between all the people, and between the king, that they should be the LORD's people.

α.23.17 Kah wame missinninnúog auog wekit Baal, kah wussóquttahhamuneau, kah soquttahhamauouh wut-altarumash, kah wuttinneukontunkoh, kah nusháog Mattanoh wussephausuéneumoh Baal, ut anaquohtag altarash.
E.23.17 Then all the people went to the house of Baal, and brake it down, and brake his altars and his images in pieces, and slew Mattan the priest of Baal before the altars.

α.23.18 Wonk Jehojada kehtimau aninnohsuénúh ut wekit Jehov[à]h, nashpe wunnutchegan8óut sephausuénuog kah Levitsog, neh David kéhtimoncheh ut wekit Lord, sephamauónat chikohtae mag8ongash en Lordut, neansukwhosik ut wuttinnaumatuonganit Moses, nashpe wekontamóonk kah keta8hamáonk, nashpe wunnutcheganit David.
E.23.18 Also Jehoiada appointed the offices of the house of the LORD by the hand of the priests the Levites, whom David had distributed in the house of the LORD, to offer the burnt offerings of the LORD, as it is written in the law of Moses, with rejoicing and with singing, as it was ordained by David.

α.23.19 Kah noh ponau nanausquontaménúh, ut squontamehtu wekit Jehovah; wanne howan noh nishqueneunkqussit ne teag nashpe woh petutteaou.
E.23.19 And he set the porters at the gates of the house of the LORD, that none which was unclean in any thing should enter in.

α.23.20 Kah neemunau nequt pasuk8e mugquompuh, kah kehtauáog, kah nanawunnuénuog ut missinninnúut, kah wame missinninnuog ut ohkeit, kah nag womuss[uu]naog ketass8toh wutch wekit Jehovah, kah pannupwush[à]og qunuhqui squontamut en ketass8t wekit, kah ponáog ketass8toh ketass8tamwáe appuonganit.
E.23.20 And he took the captains of hundreds, and the nobles, and the governors of the people, and all the people of the land, and brought down the king from the house of the LORD: and they came through the high gate into the king's house, and set the king upon the throne of the kingdom.

α.23.21 Kah wame missinninnúog ne ohkeit wekontamog, kah keitotan chequnohteau, mahche nushahettit Athaliahoh nashpe togkodteg.
E.23.21 And all the people of the land rejoiced: and the city was quiet, after that they had slain Athaliah with the sword.

α.24.1 IOash nesausuk tahshe kodtumwohkom n8che ketass8tam8it, kah yauunchage kodtumwáe ketass8tam88 ut Jerusalem: wonk ohkasoh ussowesu Zibiah wutch Beersheba.
E.24.1 Joash was seven years old when he began to reign, and he reigned forty years in Jerusalem. His mother's name also was Zibiah of Beersheba.

α.24.2 Kah Joash usseu ne sampwag ut anaquabit Jehovah, nisohkepomontog Jehojada sephausuenin.
E.24.2 And Joash did that which was right in the sight of the LORD all the days of Jehoiada the priest.

α.24.3 Kah Jehojada wunnees8kauáheuh, kah wunnaumonieu, kah wuttauneu.
E.24.3 And Jehoiada took for him two wives; and he begat sons and daughters.

α.24.4 Kah n$niyeup mahche yeu n$nag, Joash unnantam onchteauunat wek Jehovah.
E.24.4 And it came to pass after this, that Joash was minded to repair the house of the LORD.

α.24.5 Kah miyanau sephausu[é]núh kah Levitsoh, kah nah wuttinuh, sohham8k en Judae keitotanahtu, kah pummunum8k wutch wame Israelut, teaguash onchteauunat wek kum-Manitt8mw8 wutch kogkodtumwáe kah naum8k kukkenuppe ussenaóont, qut Levitsog matta ukkenuppe usseneau.
E.24.5 And he gathered together the priests and the Levites, and said to them, Go out unto the cities of Judah, and gather of all Israel money to repair the house of your God from year to year, and see that ye hasten the matter. Howbeit the Levites hastened it not.

α.24.6 Kah ketass8t wehkomau Jehojadahoh kahcheyeuunitcheh, kah wuttinuh, tohwutch matta wehquetumauóadt Levitsog, petakodtauunat uppummenum8ongan8ash wutch Judah, kah wutch Jerusalem, nean8wadt Moses[,] wuttinneumoh Jehovah: kah wutch Israelle mukkinneonganit, wutche wauwáe tabernakle?
E.24.6 And the king called for Jehoiada the chief, and said unto him, Why hast thou not required of the Levites to bring in out of Judah and out of Jerusalem the collection, according to the commandment of Moses the servant of the LORD, and of the congregation of Israel, for the tabernacle of witness?

α.24.7 Newutche wunnaumonuh Athaliah noh matcheetowae mittumwossis, nag soquetahhamwog wek God, kah wonk wame waneetupanatamwahteómukish wekit Jehovah, nash wuttinnumauáoash Baalim.
E.24.7 For the sons of Athaliah, that wicked woman, had broken up the house of God; and also all the dedicated things of the house of the LORD did they bestow upon Baalim.

α.24.8 Kah ketass8t ann8teamit, ayimwog chest, kah poquodchit upponamuneau, ut squontamut Jehovah wekit.
E.24.8 And at the king's commandment they made a chest, and set it without at the gate of the house of the LORD.

α.24.9 Kah wahteauwáhuwaog pannuppe Judah kah Jerusalem, paudtauunat pumminnum8onk Lordut, ne Moses wuttinneumoh God anann8homp Israeloh ut touohkomukqut.
E.24.9 And they made a proclamation through Judah and Jerusalem, to bring in to the LORD the collection that Moses the servant of God laid upon Israel in the wilderness.

α.24.10 Kah wame sontimóog, kah wame missinninnúog, wekontamwog kah petukodtóog, kah uppetuhkoneau chestut nô pajeh ummahche ussenaóont.
E.24.10 And all the princes and all the people rejoiced, and brought in, and cast into the chest, until they had made an end.

α.24.11 Kah n$niyeup, na ahquompak chest pas8it ketass8t wutannohsuonganit, nashpe wunnutchegan8óut Levitsog, kah nag namohettit monatash teaguash, ketass8t wus-Scribumoh, kah kehche sephausuen wutannohsuéneumoh, peyaog, kah sequnáog chestoh, kah wunnunnumunáoash, kah wonk wutuss8wuttauuneau en wutayeuonganit, yeu wutusseneau asekesukokish, kah m8cheke pumminnumwog teaguash.
E.24.11 Now it came to pass, that at what time the chest was brought unto the king's office by the hand of the Levites, and when they saw that there was much money, the king's scribe and the high priest's officer came and emptied the chest, and took it, and carried it to his place again. Thus they did day by day, and gathered money in abundance.

α.24.12 Kah ketass8t, kah Jehojada, wuttinnumauóneau wuttinneume anakausuonk wekit Jehovah, kah ann8náog masonsoh, kah carpentersoh onchteauunat Jehovah wek: kah wame neg anakausuetunkig missehchuog kah brasse, onchteauunat wek Jehovah.
E.24.12 And the king and Jehoiada gave it to such as did the work of the service of the house of the LORD, and hired masons and carpenters to repair the house of the LORD, and also such as wrought iron and brass to mend the house of the LORD.

α.24.13 Neit anakausuitcheg anakausuog, kah anakausuonk wunnehteauun nashpe nag; kah wunnehteauog wek God, kah ummenuhkehtineau.
E.24.13 So the workmen wrought, and the work was perfected by them, and they set the house of God in his state, and strengthened it.

α.24.14 Kah kesteauhettit, nag paudtóog teaguash nish asqsheunkish, ut anaquabhettit ketass8t, kah Jehojada, ne wunnashpe ayimuneau wishquash wutch wekit Jehovah, wuttinneumuhkausue auwohteaongash, kah mag8e auwohteaongash, kah kenamóog, kah golde kah silvere auwohteaongash, kah nag mag8og chikohtae mag8ongash ut wekit Jehovah nagwutteáeu, nisahkepomontog Jehojada.
E.24.14 And when they had finished it, they brought the rest of the money before the king and Jehoiada, whereof were made vessels for the house of the LORD, even vessels to minister, and to offer withal, and spoons, and vessels of gold and silver. And they offered burnt offerings in the house of the LORD continually all the days of Jehoiada.

α.24.15 Qut Jehojada nano kechisu8, kah numwohteau kesukodtumash napuk; nequt pasuk8, kah nishwinchage kodtumwohkom ne nápuk.
E.24.15 But Jehoiada waxed old, and was full of days when he died; an hundred and thirty years old was he when he died.

α.24.16 Kah upposekinóuh ukkeitotanat David, ut kenugke ketass8tamwéhtu, newutche wunnesu ut Israel, na neeswe en nogque Godut, kah nogque en wekit.
E.24.16 And they buried him in the city of David among the kings, because he had done good in Israel, both toward God, and toward his house.

α.24.17 Kah mahche nupuk Jehojada, Judae sontimóog peyaog, kah wonkumáog ketass8tamwoh, neit ketass8t nah ukkehkitauoh.
E.24.17 Now after the death of Jehoiada came the princes of Judah, and made obeisance to the king. Then the king hearkened unto them.

α.24.18 Kah nag nukkodtumwog wek Jehovah 8sh8oh um-Manitt8m8uh, kah nag wuttinneumuhkontamwog kuppahtuash kah nunneukontunkoh: kah musquanittam8onk nuhkuhkonk Judah, kah Jerusalem, newutche yeu ummatcheseongan8.
E.24.18 And they left the house of the LORD God of their fathers, and served groves and idols: and wrath came upon Judah and Jerusalem for this their trespass.

α.24.19 Qut onch na wuttin ann8non quoshoadumwaénuh, wonk nah uppas8wónaóont Jehovahut: kah wutayeuuhkonittue 8wauwonáuh: qut matta kukkeitamóog.
E.24.19 Yet he sent prophets to them, to bring them again unto the LORD; and they testified against them: but they would not give ear.

α.24.20 Kah wunnashauanitt8moh God, nuhkuhkau Zachariahoh, wunnaumonuh Jehojada sephausuen, noh ánunkompau8mont missinninnúh, kah wuttinuh, yeu wussin God, tohwaj pannesehtamóg wutann8team8ongash Jehovah, newaj matta wunniyeóg? newutche kenukonomw8 Jehovah noh wonk kenukonukou.
E.24.20 And the Spirit of God came upon Zechariah the son of Jehoiada the priest, which stood above the people, and said unto them, Thus saith God, Why transgress ye the commandments of the LORD, that ye cannot prosper? because ye have forsaken the LORD, he hath also forsaken you.

α.24.21 Kah 8nombeukonóuh, kah ukqussukquantahwhouh, an8teamwit ketass8t ut chippinneutonganit wekit Jehovah.
E.24.21 And they conspired against him, and stoned him with stones at the commandment of the king in the court of the house of the LORD.

α.24.22 Yeu in Joash matta mehquontam8 womoausuonk, ne Jehojadahoh 8shoh anhukquneup, qut wunnehtauuh wunnaumonuh: kah nappuk, n8wau, Jehovah mononeaj, kah wutchimmuaj.
E.24.22 Thus Joash the king remembered not the kindness which Jehoiada his father had done to him, but slew his son. And when he died, he said, The LORD look upon it, and require it.

α.24.23 Kah n$niyeup, adt mahtshunkkodtum8 Syriae chippan8onk ukkuhkuhquehtunkoh: kah peyaog Judah, kah Jerusalem, kah nushauog wame wussontimom8uh missinninnúog, wutche kenugke missinninnúut, kah negonshhuau Damaskuse ketass8t wame sequttahham8ongan8oash.
E.24.23 And it came to pass at the end of the year, that the host of Syria came up against him: and they came to Judah and Jerusalem, and destroyed all the princes of the people from among the people, and sent all the spoil of them unto the king of Damascus.

α.24.24 Newutche Syrianse ayeuhteaog, oggushisháog, kah Jehovah mag8 mishe ayeuteuh en wunnutchegan8óut, newutche ahquanumáog Jehovah 8sh8oh um-Manitt8m8uh: neit unneheáog Joashoh wussittumóonk.
E.24.24 For the army of the Syrians came with a small company of men, and the LORD delivered a very great host into their hand, because they had forsaken the LORD God of their fathers. So they executed judgment against Joash.

α.24.25 Kah nogkonáhettit (newutche wunnukonóuh ut mishe mahchinaonganehtu) nehenwonche wuttinneumoh wunnombeukonuk, wutche 8sqheonk wunnaumonuh Jehojada sephausuen, kah wunnushóuh ut wutapinneat, kah nupp8: kah upposekinóuh wutotanat David, qut matta nah upposekinóuh ut ketass8tamwe weenohkit.
E.24.25 And when they were departed from him, (for they left him in great diseases,) his own servants conspired against him for the blood of the sons of Jehoiada the priest, and slew him on his bed, and he died: and they buried him in the city of David, but they buried him not in the sepulchres of the kings.

α.24.26 Kah yeug nag wanambeukonácheg, Zabad wunnaumonuh Shimeath, wut-Amonitesse, kah Jehozabad wunnaumonuh Shimrith um-Moabitesse.
E.24.26 And these are they that conspired against him; Zabad the son of Shimeath an Ammonitess, and Jehozabad the son of Shimrith a Moabitess.

α.24.27 Kah papaume wunnaumonuh, kah mógagish wéanash nish upponamauonáoash; kah onchteóonk wek God, kusséh nash wussukwhosuash, ut wutaunchem8kae b8k8wóut ketass8tamwog: kah Amaziahoh wunnaumonuh wunnompass8tamómukquoh.
E.24.27 Now concerning his sons, and the greatness of the burdens laid upon him, and the repairing of the house of God, behold, they are written in the story of the book of the kings. And Amaziah his son reigned in his stead.

α.25.1 AMaziah nesnehchage kah napanna tahshe kodtomwohkom n8che ketass8tam8it, kah ketass8tam88 ut Jerusalem, nesnehchage kah pask8gun kodtumwae, kah ohkassoh ussowesuoh Jehoadan, wutch Jerusalem.
E.25.1 Amaziah was twenty and five years old when he began to reign, and he reigned twenty and nine years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Jehoaddan of Jerusalem.

α.25.2 Kah ussu ne sampwag ut anaquabit Jehovah, qut matta nashpe pannuppée metah.
E.25.2 And he did that which was right in the sight of the LORD, but not with a perfect heart.

α.25.3 Kah n$niyeup, wutass8tam8onk manuhkag, nushau wuttinneumoh neg nashompanneg 8shoh ketass8t.
E.25.3 Now it came to pass, when the kingdom was established to him, that he slew his servants that had killed the king his father.

α.25.4 Qut matta nushóou wunneechan8oh neansukwhosik ut naumatue up-b8kumut Moses, uttoh adt Jehovah ann8teamwop, n8wop, wut8shineunk matta pish nupp8og wutche wunneechan8oh, asuh matta pish mukkiog nupp8og wutch 8sh8óuh: qut nish$noh pasuk pish nupp8 wutch nehenwonche ummatcheseonk.
E.25.4 But he slew not their children, but did as it is written in the law in the book of Moses, where the LORD commanded, saying, The fathers shall not die for the children, neither shall the children die for the fathers, but every man shall die for his own sin.

α.25.5 Kah wonk Amaziah miyanau Judahoh, kah wutáyeuoh muttannongane mugquompuh, kah pasuk8e mugquompuh, neaunak 8sh8oh wek8óash pannuppe wame Judah kah Benjamin: kah nah wutogkemuh wutch wunnesnechage kodtumwohkomununeat kah paámeu, kah nah wunnamheuh, nishwudt pasuk8e muttannonganogkussuoh pepenauutcheg, sohhamunat en ayeuwuttinneat, neg nohtónukeg qunuhtug kah ogqunneg.
E.25.5 Moreover Amaziah gathered Judah together, and made them captains over thousands, and captains over hundreds, according to the houses of their fathers, throughout all Judah and Benjamin: and he numbered them from twenty years old and above, and found them three hundred thousand choice men, able to go forth to war, that could handle spear and shield.

α.25.6 Kah wonk onkquttauau nequt pasuk8e muttannonganog kussuoh menuhkesuenúog wutch Israel, wutche nequt pasuk8e silvere talentsash.
E.25.6 He hired also an hundred thousand mighty men of valour out of Israel for an hundred talents of silver.

α.25.7 Qut Manittowompuh peyaonuh, n8wau, woi ketass8t, Israelle kenauwameonk ahque weechógqush: newutche Jehovah matta weetomau Israeloh, wame wunneechanoh Ephraim.
E.25.7 But there came a man of God to him, saying, O king, let not the army of Israel go with thee; for the LORD is not with Israel, to wit, with all the children of Ephraim.

α.25.8 Qut kod weetaan ussish, menuhkesish wutch ayeuwuttineat: God pish kukkepshahuk anaquabhettit matwáog: newutch God ummenuhkesuonganuen wutanóhsineat, kah ukkepuhkausuonat.
E.25.8 But if thou wilt go, do it; be strong for the battle: God shall make thee fall before the enemy: for God hath power to help, and to cast down.

α.25.9 Kah Amaziah unnau Manittowompuh, qut toh pish nuttinteo nequt pasuk8e talentsu8, ne anumauóg Israelle kenauwameonk? kah Manittowomp namp8ham, Jehovah tapenum kutánue yeu tahshe aninnumukqunat.
E.25.9 And Amaziah said to the man of God, But what shall we do for the hundred talents which I have given to the army of Israel? And the man of God answered, The LORD is able to give thee much more than this.

α.25.10 Neit Amaziah nah wutchippinuh, ne kenauwameonk páuhonukqunat wutch Ephraimut, wonk ummonchenaóut: newaj ummusquanittam8ongan8 ayeuuhkonittue mishe nashquneau Judah, kah nag qushqueog nashpe mishe musquanittam8onk.
E.25.10 Then Amaziah separated them, to wit, the army that was come to him out of Ephraim, to go home again: wherefore their anger was greatly kindled against Judah, and they returned home in great anger.

α.25.11 Kah Amaziah menehkheau wuhhogkuh, kah sohwhe sagkompagunau ummissinninneumoh, kah au salte 8nokoiyeuut kah togtannonganogkussuog.
E.25.11 And Amaziah strengthened himself, and led forth his people, and went to the valley of salt, and smote of the children of Seir ten thousand.

α.25.12 Kah piogque muttannonganogkussuoh keteáe tohqunau, kah wunnaumonuh Judah ummissináe monchanóuh, kah uppas8óuh kodtompskôag: kah wunn8kuhkonut wutch woskeche-pisk, newaj wame sokqsinhettit.
E.25.12 And other ten thousand left alive did the children of Judah carry away captive, and brought them unto the top of the rock, and cast them down from the top of the rock, that they all were broken in pieces.

α.25.13 Qut chippan8wongane matwàoh neh Amaziah quoshkeáheoncheh, matta 8weechógk8unat en ayeuwuttinneat, nag quentamwog Judae keitotanash, wutch Samaria wéhque Beth-horon, kah togkomáog nishwudt muttannonganogkussuoh, kah amaunumwog m8cheke sequttahhamóonk.
E.25.13 But the soldiers of the army which Amaziah sent back, that they should not go with him to battle, fell upon the cities of Judah, from Samaria even unto Bethhoron, and smote three thousand of them, and took much spoil.

α.25.14 Kah n$niyeup Amaziah mahche 8k uppaguanonat Edomitsoh pas8au um-manitt8m8uh wunnaumonuh Seir, kah upponuh 8manitt8muneuh, kah nah wunnauwaéhtauoh, kah wutchikossumau wetemungquok.
E.25.14 Now it came to pass, after that Amaziah was come from the slaughter of the Edomites, that he brought the gods of the children of Seir, and set them up to be his gods, and bowed down himself before them, and burned incense unto them.

α.25.15 Newaj ummusquantamóonk Jehovah nashqunaeitunkqut Amaziah: kah noh wuttin ann8non quoshodtumwaenúh, neh ánukqutcheh, toh wutch natinnewhadt ummanitt8m8oh missinninnúog, neg matta pohquohwhunukig ummissinninneumoh wutch kenutcheganit?
E.25.15 Wherefore the anger of the LORD was kindled against Amaziah, and he sent unto him a prophet, which said unto him, Why hast thou sought after the gods of the people, which could not deliver their own people out of thine hand?

α.25.16 Kah n$niyeup, keket8hkauont, wuttinuh, sun ken pasuk ketass8t ukken8nuwaéneumoh? netohshúash, tohwutch woh togkomunumuk, neit quoshodtumwaen, ne wutteashuon, kah n8wau, n8wahteoh God pakodtantam kuttoúskkoméhtóhukqunat, newutche yeu kutussen, kah matta kukkéihketám8h nukken8suaonk.
E.25.16 And it came to pass, as he talked with him, that the king said unto him, Art thou made of the king's counsel? forbear; why shouldest thou be smitten? Then the prophet forbare, and said, I know that God hath determined to destroy thee, because thou hast done this, and hast not hearkened unto my counsel.

α.25.17 Neit Amaziah Judae ketass8t, nemunum ken8nittuonk, kah ann8team8 en Joashut, wunnaumonuh Jehoahaz wunnaumonuh Jehu, Israelle ketass8t, n8wau, peyaush, natitteuh.
E.25.17 Then Amaziah king of Judah took advice, and sent to Joash, the son of Jehoahaz, the son of Jehu, king of Israel, saying, Come, let us see one another in the face.

α.25.18 Kah Joash Israelle ketass8t ann8team8 en Amaziahut Judae ketass8t, n8wau, kôgkôunogkohquohhou, ne ut Lebanon, ann8team8 en Cedarut ne ut Lebanon, n8wau, nunnaumon ummittamwositch kuttaunoh; kah na pomushon touohkomukque puppinushim, ut Lebanon, kah taskuhkauau, kôgkôunogkohquohhouoh.
E.25.18 And Joash king of Israel sent to Amaziah king of Judah, saying, The thistle that was in Lebanon sent to the cedar that was in Lebanon, saying, Give thy daughter to my son to wife: and there passed by a wild beast that was in Lebanon, and trode down the thistle.

α.25.19 Kussim, kusseh, nuttogkom Edomitsog, kah kuttah kutashinuk woweenoónat: yeuyeu apsh kekit, tohwutch woh weogkekeadt, wutch k8woskhitteáonk, woh kuppenushonat, ken kah Judah weeche ken?
E.25.19 Thou sayest, Lo, thou hast smitten the Edomites; and thine heart lifteth thee up to boast: abide now at home; why shouldest thou meddle to thine hurt, that thou shouldest fall, even thou, and Judah with thee?

α.25.20 Qut Amaziah matta n8tam8, newutche 8m88 Godut, nah woh uppononat ut wunnutcheganit, newutche natinneahwhaog Edome manitt8h.
E.25.20 But Amaziah would not hear; for it came of God, that he might deliver them into the hand of their enemies, because they sought after the gods of Edom.

α.25.21 Neit Joash Israelle ketass8t kuhkuhqueu, kah naettúog ut wuskesuk8óut, nagum kah Amaziah Judae ketass8t, en Bethshemesh ne wadchiik Judah.
E.25.21 So Joash the king of Israel went up; and they saw one another in the face, both he and Amaziah king of Judah, at Bethshemesh, which belongeth to Judah.

α.25.22 Kah Judah togkomau ut anaquabit Israel, kah uspuhh8waog nish$noh pasuk en wekit.
E.25.22 And Judah was put to the worse before Israel, and they fled every man to his tent.

α.25.23 Kah Joash Israelle ketass8t, tohqunau Amaziahoh Judae ketass8t, wunnaumonuh Joash, wunnaumonuh Joahaz, ut Bethshemesh, kah uppas8oh Jerusalem, kah touwutchathamwog Jerusaleme pum̃eneutunk, wutch Ephraime squontamut, en p8chekehégane squontamut, yaue pasuk8e ishquonogkodtash.
E.25.23 And Joash the king of Israel took Amaziah king of Judah, the son of Joash, the son of Jehoahaz, at Bethshemesh, and brought him to Jerusalem, and brake down the wall of Jerusalem from the gate of Ephraim to the corner gate, four hundred cubits.

α.25.24 Kah wame gold kah silver, kah wame wishquash, nish nampteomukish ut wekit God, wadchanukish Obed-Edom; kah nompak8unash ketass8t wekit, kah kônohtohsimukeg wonk, kah qushkeu en Samaria
E.25.24 And he took all the gold and the silver, and all the vessels that were found in the house of God with Obededom, and the treasures of the king's house, the hostages also, and returned to Samaria.

α.25.25 Kah Amaziah wunnaumonuh Joash Judae ketass8t, noh asukoue pomontam, mahche nupuk Joash, wunnaumonuh Jehoahaz Israelle ketass8t, nabo napanna tahshe kodtumwae.
E.25.25 And Amaziah the son of Joash king of Judah lived after the death of Joash son of Jehoahaz king of Israel fifteen years.

α.25.26 Kah onkatogish wutusseongash Amaziah negonne kah maumachish, sunnummatta wussukwhosinash ut up-b8kum8óut Israelle, kah Judae ketass8tamwog.
E.25.26 Now the rest of the acts of Amaziah, first and last, behold, are they not written in the book of the kings of Judah and Israel?

α.25.27 Kah mahche Amaziah qushkeit wutch asuhkauónat Lord, 8nambeukonóuh ut Jerusalem, kah uspuhh8au Lachish; qut ann8team8og Lachish asuhkaue, kah na wuttit nushoneau.
E.25.27 Now after the time that Amaziah did turn away from following the LORD they made a conspiracy against him in Jerusalem; and he fled to Lachish: but they sent to Lachish after him, and slew him there.

α.25.28 Kah uppas8ó ut woskeche horsesut, kah upposekinóuh kenugke 8shut ut Judae keitotanat.
E.25.28 And they brought him upon horses, and buried him with his fathers in the city of Judah.

α.26.1 NEit wame Judae missinninnuog neemunaog Uzziahoh, noh nabo nequtta adtahshe kodtumwohkog, kah wunnompe kehtass8tamuhkonauh 8shoh Amaziah.
E.26.1 Then all the people of Judah took Uzziah, who was sixteen years old, and made him king in the room of his father Amaziah.

α.26.2 Ayim Eloth, kah wunnompenumun en Judah, mahche ketass8t weesequom8mont 8shoh.
E.26.2 He built Eloth, and restored it to Judah, after that the king slept with his fathers.

α.26.3 Nabo nequtta tahshe kodtumwohkom Uzziah n8che ketass8tam8it, kah ketass8tam88 napan[n]a tahshinchage kodtumwae kah nees, ut Jerusalem: wonk ohkasoh uss8wesuoh Jecoliah wutch Jerusalem.
E.26.3 Sixteen years old was Uzziah when he began to reign, and he reigned fifty and two years in Jerusalem. His mother's name also was Jecoliah of Jerusalem.

α.26.4 Kah usseu ne an sampwag ut anaquabit Jehovah, wame ne 8shoh Amaziahoh aseneup.
E.26.4 And he did that which was right in the sight of the LORD, according to all that his father Amaziah did.

α.26.5 Kah natinnewhau Godoh pomontog Zechariah, noh wohwohtam8wontog Manitt8e monomonsinn8wongash, kah nisahke natinnewhout Jehovah, God 8niehheuh.
E.26.5 And he sought God in the days of Zechariah, who had understanding in the visions of God: and as long as he sought the LORD, God made him to prosper.

α.26.6 Kah sohham, ayeuuhkonau Philistiansoh, kah touwutchahtham Gathe pummeneutunk, kah Jabneheh pummeneutunk, kah Ashdode pummeneutuk, kah ayim keitototanash, kishke Ashdod, kah kenugké Philistiansut.
E.26.6 And he went forth and warred against the Philistines, and brake down the wall of Gath, and the wall of Jabneh, and the wall of Ashdod, and built cities about Ashdod, and among the Philistines.

α.26.7 Kah God wutannumauoh ayeuuhkonittue Philistiansoh, kah ayeuuhkonittue Arabiansoh, neg ayitcheg ut Gur-Baal, kah Mehunimsog.
E.26.7 And God helped him against the Philistines, and against the Arabians that dwelt in Gurbaal, and the Mehunims.

α.26.8 Kah Ammonitsog aninnumauog mag8ongash, Uzziahoh, kah 8wesuonk sepakem8 wehque ahhut petutteamuk Egypt, newutche mishe menehkheau wuhhogkuh.
E.26.8 And the Ammonites gave gifts to Uzziah: and his name spread abroad even to the entering in of Egypt; for he strengthened himself exceedingly.

α.26.9 Kah wonk Uzziah ayim wonkon8sinash ut Jersualem, ut p8chekuhhegane squontamut, kah ut 8nouhkoiyeue squontamut, kah adt quttukqushunk, kah ummenuhkehteauunash.
E.26.9 Moreover Uzziah built towers in Jerusalem at the corner gate, and at the valley gate, and at the turning of the wall, and fortified them.

α.26.10 Wonk ayim wonkan8sinash ut touohkomuk, kah m8cheke wutahamunganehteau newutche m8naoh wunneetasseumoh, naneeswe 8nouhkoiyeue ohkeit, kah mukoshqutuhtu, kah ohkehteaenuog, kah weenominneohketeaenuog, ut wadchuuhkontu, kah ut Carmél, newutche womontam ohkehteaenuin.
E.26.10 Also he built towers in the desert, and digged many wells: for he had much cattle, both in the low country, and in the plains: husbandmen also, and vine dressers in the mountains, and in Carmel: for he loved husbandry.

α.26.11 Wonk Uzziah wutayeuwehteaenumu, neg chadchabpanuongane sohhogig ayeuuhkonat, nean ogkemut, nashpe wuñutcheganit Jehiel wus$scribe: kah Maasiah nanánuénin, ut agwe wunnutcheganit Hananiah, noh pasuk8 ketass8t ummummugquompomuh.
E.26.11 Moreover Uzziah had an host of fighting men, that went out to war by bands, according to the number of their account by the hand of Jeiel the scribe and Maaseiah the ruler, under the hand of Hananiah, one of the king's captains.

α.26.12 Mamusse nean ogkemut, kehche wut8shinneunk ut menuhkesuenuut, neese muttannunganog kussuog, kah nequtta tahshe pasuk88og.
E.26.12 The whole number of the chief of the fathers of the mighty men of valour were two thousand and six hundred.

α.26.13 Kah agwe wunnutchegan8out, kenauwameonganu8, nishwudt pasuk8e muttannonganog kussuog, kah nesausuk tahshe muttannonganogkussuog, kah napanna tahshe pasuk88og, yeu menuhkayeuhteaog, weech8humonat ketass8t ayeuuhkonittue matwáoh.
E.26.13 And under their hand was an army, three hundred thousand and seven thousand and five hundred, that made war with mighty power, to help the king against the enemy.

α.26.14 Kah Uzziah nah ukquagquoshwuñumauoh pannuppe wame kenauwameonganehtu ogqunegash, kah qunuhtukquash, kah uppuhkukqut ahhohtagish, kah habergeonsash kah ohtampeh, kah s8wompagenehegash.
E.26.14 And Uzziah prepared for them throughout all the host shields, and spears, and helmets, and habergeons, and bows, and slings to cast stones.

α.26.15 Kah ayim ut Jerusalem, awohteaongash nish ayimohetticheh wunnummoeu usseaenuog, ohtaut wonkon8sinit, kah ut pummeneutonganehtu , kôuhquodtash puminneat, kah mogge qussukquanash: kah 8wesuonk nôadtut in sepakem8, newutche noh monchanatamwe aninnumauau, nô pajeh menuhkesinneat.
E.26.15 And he made in Jerusalem engines, invented by cunning men, to be on the towers and upon the bulwarks, to shoot arrows and great stones withal. And his name spread far abroad; for he was marvellously helped, till he was strong.

α.26.16 Manuhkesit, wuttah tahshem8 en wutonkapunnaonganit: newutche panneussehtauau Jehovah um-Manitt8moh, kah petutteau wuttemplumut Jehovah, chikossumunat weetemungquok, ut weetemungquokque Altarut.
E.26.16 But when he was strong, his heart was lifted up to his destruction: for he transgressed against the LORD his God, and went into the temple of the LORD to burn incense upon the altar of incense.

α.26.17 Kah Azariah sephausuen wutasukaue petutteam8, kah weechog shwosuk tahshinchag kussuoh wussephausueneumoh Jehovah, neg menuhkesuenuog.
E.26.17 And Azariah the priest went in after him, and with him fourscore priests of the LORD, that were valiant men:

α.26.18 Kah nag wutamehheaag Uzziahhoh ketass8toh, kah wuttinouh, matta wutchiin8h kuhhogkat, Uzziah, chikohsumauonat weetemungquok Jehovah, qut sephausuenuut wunnaumonuh Aaron, neg waneetupanatamwahitcheg wutchikohsumunnaoont weetemungquok, sohhash wutch Sanctuary newutche kuppanneussem, kah matta pish ne k8quehtianumukqussein, wutch Jehovah Manitt8ut.
E.26.18 And they withstood Uzziah the king, and said unto him, It appertaineth not unto thee, Uzziah, to burn incense unto the LORD, but to the priests the sons of Aaron, that are consecrated to burn incense: go out of the sanctuary; for thou hast trespassed; neither shall it be for thine honour from the LORD God.

α.26.19 Neit Uzziah musquantam, kah censer ohteau wunnutcheganit chikohsumunat weetemungquok: kah musquanumont sephausuenuh, wutchek8onk waapem8 ut wuskodtukqut ut anaquabhettit sephausuenuog, ut wekit Lord wutch kishke wetemungquoke Altarut.
E.26.19 Then Uzziah was wroth, and had a censer in his hand to burn incense: and while he was wroth with the priests, the leprosy even rose up in his forehead before the priests in the house of the LORD, from beside the incense altar.

α.26.20 Kah Azariah kehche sephausuen, kah wame sephausuenuog, ukkehkeneauouh, kah kusseh, wutchek8 ut wuskodtukqut, kah na wutch sohwohkoneau, nux, nagum wonk kenuppe sohham, newutche Jehovah wuttogkomau.
E.26.20 And Azariah the chief priest, and all the priests, looked upon him, and, behold, he was leprous in his forehead, and they thrust him out from thence; yea, himself hasted also to go out, because the LORD had smitten him.

α.26.21 Kah Uzzia ketass8t wutchek8 pajeh wunnupunat, kah chippitteau newutche wutchek8 newutche tummetahwhau wutch wekit Jehovah, kah Jothan wunnaumonuh nanawunnum ketass8t wek, wussumau missinninnuh ut ohkeit.
E.26.21 And Uzziah the king was a leper unto the day of his death, and dwelt in a several house, being a leper; for he was cut off from the house of the LORD: and Jotham his son was over the king's house, judging the people of the land.

α.26.22 Kah onkatogish wutusseongash Uzziah negonne kah maumachish, Isayah qushodtumwaen wunnaumonuh Amoz, 8sukuhkumunash.
E.26.22 Now the rest of the acts of Uzziah, first and last, did Isaiah the prophet, the son of Amoz, write.

α.26.23 Neit Uzziah weesequom8mau 8shoh, kah upposekinouh weeche 8shoh, kah upposekinnittue ahkeyeuout ketass8tamwoh: newutche nag n8waog, noh wutchek8: kah Jothamoh wunnaumonuh wunnompass8tamomukquoh.
E.26.23 So Uzziah slept with his fathers, and they buried him with his fathers in the field of the burial which belonged to the kings; for they said, He is a leper: and Jotham his son reigned in his stead.

α.27.1 IOtham nesnehchage kah napanna tahshe kodtumwohkom n8che ketass8tam8it, kah nabo nequtta tahshe kodtumwae ketass8tam88 ut Jerusalem, wonk ohkasoh ussowesuoh Jerushah wuttaunoh Zadok.
E.27.1 Jotham was twenty and five years old when he began to reign, and he reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem. His mother's name also was Jerushah, the daughter of Zadok.

α.27.2 Kah ussu ne sampwagk ut anaquabit Jehovah, neaunak wame ne aseneup Uzziahoh 8shoh: qut matta petutteou wut-templeumut Jehovah. Kah missinninnúog ashpume aninnue usseog.
E.27.2 And he did that which was right in the sight of the LORD, according to all that his father Uzziah did: howbeit he entered not into the temple of the LORD. And the people did yet corruptly.

α.27.3 Ayim qunuhque ushquont wekit Jehovah, kah ut Ophelle pummeneutunkanit, m8cheke ayim.
E.27.3 He built the high gate of the house of the LORD, and on the wall of Ophel he built much.

α.27.4 Wonk ayim keitotanash ut Judae wádchuuhkontu, kah ut touohkomukqut ayim wonkon8sinush kah qunúhquikomukquash.
E.27.4 Moreover he built cities in the mountains of Judah, and in the forests he built castles and towers.

α.27.5 Wonk ayeuuhkonau Ammonitse keitass8tamwoh, kah wussohkauuh, kah wunnaumonuh Ammon nenan kodtumuk nequt pasuk88ash silvere talentsash, kah piogque muttannongane quttuhwhosuash wheatash, kah piogque muttannongane, barlyhash, ne wutteashe ôadtuhkauoneau wunnaumonuh Ammon nahohtôeu kodtum8, kah nashwunnu8.
E.27.5 He fought also with the king of the Ammonites, and prevailed against them. And the children of Ammon gave him the same year an hundred talents of silver, and ten thousand measures of wheat, and ten thousand of barley. So much did the children of Ammon pay unto him, both the second year, and the third.

α.27.6 Nemehkuh Jotham nano missugken, newutche quogquashwehtam ummayash ut anaquabit Jehovah um-Manitt8moh.
E.27.6 So Jotham became mighty, because he prepared his ways before the LORD his God.

α.27.7 Kah onkatogish wutusseongash Jotham kah wame wutáyeuwehteaongash, kah ummayash, kusseh, wussukwhosuash ut 8sukuhwhosuongan8óut Israelle, kah Judae ketass8tamwog.
E.27.7 Now the rest of the acts of Jotham, and all his wars, and his ways, lo, they are written in the book of the kings of Israel and Judah.

α.27.8 Nog nesnehchage kah napanna tahshe kodtumwohkom n8che ketass8tam8it, kah nabo nequtta tahshe kodtumwae ketass8tam88 ut Jerusalem.
E.27.8 He was five and twenty years old when he began to reign, and reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem.

α.27.9 Kah Jotham weesequom8mau 8shoh, kah upposekinóuh ut ukkeitotanat David, kah Ahaz wunnaumonuh wunnompass8tamomukquoh.
E.27.9 And Jotham slept with his fathers, and they buried him in the city of David: and Ahaz his son reigned in his stead.

α.28.1 AHaz nesnehchage kodtumwohkom n8che ketass8tam8it, kah nabo nequtta tahshe kodtumwae ketass8tam88 ut Jerusalem: qut matta ussu ne sampwagk ut anaquabit Jehovah, onatuh David 8shoh.
E.28.1 Ahaz was twenty years old when he began to reign, and he reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem: but he did not that which was right in the sight of the LORD, like David his father:

α.28.2 Newutche pomushau ut ummayut Israelle ketass8tamwog, wonk ayimauau sabasumwe nunneukontungoh Baalimoh.
E.28.2 For he walked in the ways of the kings of Israel, and made also molten images for Baalim.

α.28.3 Wonk, chikohsum wetemungquok ut wut8nôuhkóiyeumut wunnaumonuh Hinnom, kah chikoswau wunneechanoh ut n8taut: neaunak wunnishkeneunkquott8m8 pen8wohteáog, neh Jehovah sohwohteompuh ut anaquabhettit wunnaumonuh Israel.
E.28.3 Moreover he burnt incense in the valley of the son of Hinnom, and burnt his children in the fire, after the abominations of the heathen whom the LORD had cast out before the children of Israel.

α.28.4 Wonk sephausu, kah chikohsue weetemungquok ut qunuhqui ayeuonganehtu, kah wadchuuhkontu, kah ut agwe nish$noh ashkunkquamut.
E.28.4 He sacrificed also and burnt incense in the high places, and on the hills, and under every green tree.

α.28.5 Newaj Jehovah um-Manitt8moh upponuh ut wunnutcheganit Syriae ketass8t, kah nah wuttogkomóuh, kah monchanáog monaoh missinoh, kah uppas8ouh Damaskus, kah wonk magunáh ut wunnutcheganit Israelle ketass8t, noh wuttogkomuh nashpe mishe paguanittuonk.
E.28.5 Wherefore the LORD his God delivered him into the hand of the king of Syria; and they smote him, and carried away a great multitude of them captives, and brought them to Damascus. And he was also delivered into the hand of the king of Israel, who smote him with a great slaughter.

α.28.6 Newutche Pekah wunnaumonuh Remaliah nushehteau ut Judah nequt pasuk8e muttannonganogkussuog, kah nesnehchage muttannonganogkussuog, pasuk kesuk, neg wame menuhkesuénuog, newutche ohquánumóag Jehovah 8sh8oh um-Manitt8m8oh.
E.28.6 For Pekah the son of Remaliah slew in Judah an hundred and twenty thousand in one day, which were all valiant men; because they had forsaken the LORD God of their fathers.

α.28.7 Kah Zichri Ephraimme menuhkesuen, nushau Maasejahoh wunnaumonuh ketass8t, kah Azrikam nánawunnúen ut wetuómut, kah Elkanah noh asukauont ketass8t.
E.28.7 And Zichri, a mighty man of Ephraim, slew Maaseiah the king's son, and Azrikam the governor of the house, and Elkanah that was next to the king.

α.28.8 Kah wunnaumonuh Israel missinwohteáog weemat8oh neese pasuk8e muttannonganogkussuoh, mittamwussissoh, wunnaumoniinneuh, kah wuttôninneuh, kah wonk wutamaunumauoh m8cheke sequttahham8ongash, kah paudtóog sequttahham8ongash en Samariah.
E.28.8 And the children of Israel carried away captive of their brethren two hundred thousand, women, sons, and daughters, and took also away much spoil from them, and brought the spoil to Samaria.

α.28.9 Qut ukquoshodtumwaenumoh Jehovah na wutappinah, noh ussowesu Oded: kah sohham en anaquabenit kenauwameonguh, neg paoncheg Samaria, kah nah wuttinuh, kusseh, newutche Jehovah um-Manitt8m8oh k8sh8óog musquanumau Judahoh, nah upponuh kenutchegan8óut, kah nag kenushôóog, nashpe musquantam8onk ne masiṣshik kesukqut.
E.28.9 But a prophet of the LORD was there, whose name was Oded: and he went out before the host that came to Samaria, and said unto them, Behold, because the LORD God of your fathers was wroth with Judah, he hath delivered them into your hand, and ye have slain them in a rage that reacheth up unto heaven.

α.28.10 Kah yeuyeu kuppogkodtantumumw8 agwe pononaóont Judah kah Jerusalem wunnaumonuh, wutche k8missinnominneaóont: sunnummatta kenugke kenaau, nux kenaau, matche neheoncheg Jehovahoh kum-Manitt8m8uh?
E.28.10 And now ye purpose to keep under the children of Judah and Jerusalem for bondmen and bondwomen unto you: but are there not with you, even with you, sins against the LORD your God?

α.28.11 Newutche yeuyeu n8tiegk, kah wonk moncheáheuk missináog, neg masinóhteágig wutch kematt8óut, newutche ummishe musquanittam8onk God ketapehtunkumw8.
E.28.11 Now hear me therefore, and deliver the captives again, which ye have taken captive of your brethren: for the fierce wrath of the LORD is upon you.

α.28.12 Neit nawhutch wabuhkuhk8itcheg wutch wunnaumonat Ephraim, Azariah wunnaumonuh Johanan, Berechiah wunnaumonuh Meshillemoth, kah Jehizkiah wunnaumonuh Shallum, kah Amasa wunnaumonuh Hadlai; wutayeuuhkonittue neepauwehtauóuh, neg wagig ayeuwuttinneat.
E.28.12 Then certain of the heads of the children of Ephraim, Azariah the son of Johanan, Berechiah the son of Meshillemoth, and Jehizkiah the son of Shallum, and Amasa the son of Hadlai, stood up against them that came from the war,

α.28.13 Kah nag wuttinuh, matta pish yeu kuppas8óuneau missinóog, newutche mahche matcheneheogkut Jehovah, kukkod k8tnehteomw8 nummatcheseonganunonash, kah nuppaneseonganunonash, newutche nummatcheseonk missi, kah mishe musquanittam8onk ayeuuhkonau Israeloh.
E.28.13 And said unto them, Ye shall not bring in the captives hither: for whereas we have offended against the LORD already, ye intend to add more to our sins and to our trespass: for our trespass is great, and there is fierce wrath against Israel.

α.28.14 Kah kenauwameog nukkonáog missinuh, kah sequttahham8onk anaquabhettit sontimóog, kah wame mukkinneonk.
E.28.14 So the armed men left the captives and the spoil before the princes and all the congregation.

α.28.15 Kah wosketompaog neg másawhutcheg, neep8og, kah neemunáog missinuh, kah nashpe sequttahham8onk, wuthogquonóneau, wame poskissinitcheh ut kenugke nag, kah wuthogquanóuh, kah 8mokussinuhkauóuh, kah wuttinnumauóuh metsuonk kah wuttattam8on, kah wussusséqunóuh, kah wame n8chumwesinutcheh ukquenashóuh assesut, kah uppas8óuh Jericho; palmuhtugque keitotan, en weematt8óuh; kah nag qushkeog en Samaria.
E.28.15 And the men which were expressed by name rose up, and took the captives, and with the spoil clothed all that were naked among them, and arrayed them, and shod them, and gave them to eat and to drink, and anointed them, and carried all the feeble of them upon asses, and brought them to Jericho, the city of palm trees, to their brethren: then they returned to Samaria.

α.28.16 Na ahquompak Ahaz ketass8t, ann8team8 en Assyriae ketass8tamut wuttannumauunat.
E.28.16 At that time did king Ahaz send unto the kings of Assyria to help him.

α.28.17 Newutche wonk Edomitsog peyaog, kah togkodtamwog Judah, & missinóhteáog.
E.28.17 For again the Edomites had come and smitten Judah, and carried away captives.

α.28.18 Wonk Philistiansog sohkomwog w8muhkôáge keitotanash, kah sowaniyeuut Judah, kah sohkomwog Bethshemesh, kah Ajalon, Gederoth, kah Shocho, nashpe nish 8tanamesash, wonk Timnah nashpe nish 8tanamesash Gimzo nashpe nish 8tanamesash; kah na wuttaiinneau.
E.28.18 The Philistines also had invaded the cities of the low country, and of the south of Judah, and had taken Bethshemesh, and Ajalon, and Gederoth, and Shocho with the villages thereof, and Timnah with the villages thereof, Gimzo also and the villages thereof: and they dwelt there.

α.28.19 Newutche Jehovah tiahquonkheau Judahoh, newutche Ahaz Israelle ketass8t: newutche Judahoh poskisseheau, kah mishe matcheneheau Jehovahoh.
E.28.19 For the LORD brought Judah low because of Ahaz king of Israel; for he made Judah naked, and transgressed sore against the LORD.

α.28.20 Kah Tilgath-Pilneser Assyriae ketass8t uppeyaonuh, wutunkquanumwéheuh, qut matta ummenuhkeheuh.
E.28.20 And Tilgathpilneser king of Assyria came unto him, and distressed him, but strengthened him not.

α.28.21 Newutche Ahaz amaunum wutchippiyeumun wutch wekit Jehovah, kah wutch wekit ketass8t, kah wutch sontimóog, kah wuttinnumauóneau Assyriae ketass8toh, qut matta wuttannumauuh.
E.28.21 For Ahaz took away a portion out of the house of the LORD, and out of the house of the king, and of the princes, and gave it unto the king of Assyria: but he helped him not.

α.28.22 Kah ut wutonkapunnaonganit, wonk m8cheke panneussehtauau Jehovahoh: noh yeuoh ketass8t Ahaz.
E.28.22 And in the time of his distress did he trespass yet more against the LORD: this is that king Ahaz.

α.28.23 Newutche sephamauau Damaskusse manitt8h noh togkomont: kah n8wau, newutche Assyriae ketass8tamwog, ummanitt8m8oh nah wutannumunk8uh, newaj nag sephamauog, onk woh nag nuttannumunkquog: qut nah wutch paguanónuh, kah wame Israel.
E.28.23 For he sacrificed unto the gods of Damascus, which smote him: and he said, Because the gods of the kings of Syria help them, therefore will I sacrifice to them, that they may help me. But they were the ruin of him, and of all Israel.

α.28.24 Kah Ahaz mukkinnum auwohteaongash ut wekit God, kah wussukqussamunáoash auwohteaongash wekit God, kah yanittanum 8squontamash wekit Jehovah, kah wutaltaruhkauoh nish$noh ut p8chekeheganit ut Jerusalem.
E.28.24 And Ahaz gathered together the vessels of the house of God, and cut in pieces the vessels of the house of God, and shut up the doors of the house of the LORD, and he made him altars in every corner of Jerusalem.

α.28.25 Kah nishnoh ut Judae keitotanat áyim qunuhqui ayeuongash, chikossumau[ô]nat wetemungquok onkatogig manitt8oh, kah m8m8skqheau Jehovahoh um-Manitt8m8oh 8sh8oh.
E.28.25 And in every several city of Judah he made high places to burn incense unto other gods, and provoked to anger the LORD God of his fathers.

α.28.26 Kah onkatogish wutusseongash, kah wame ummayash nequt kah machish, kusseh, wussukwhosuash ut 8sukuhwhonganit Judae kah Israelle ketass8tamwog.
E.28.26 Now the rest of his acts and of all his ways, first and last, behold, they are written in the book of the kings of Judah and Israel.

α.28.27 Kah Ahaz weesequom8mau 8shoh, kah upposekinóuh otanat ut Jerusalem: qut matta uppas8óuh ut 8weenohkeyeuóut Israelle ketass8tamwog, kah Hezekiahoh wunnaumonuh wunnompass8tamomukquoh.
E.28.27 And Ahaz slept with his fathers, and they buried him in the city, even in Jerusalem: but they brought him not into the sepulchres of the kings of Israel: and Hezekiah his son reigned in his stead.

α.29.1 Hezechiah n8che ketass8tam8it nesnehchage kah napanna adtahshe kodtumwohkog, kah nesnehchage kah pask8gun tahshe kodtum8ash ketass8tam88 ut Jerusalem kah ohkasoh ussowesuoh Abijah wuttaunoh Zechariah
E.29.1 Hezekiah began to reign when he was five and twenty years old, and he reigned nine and twenty years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Abijah, the daughter of Zechariah.

α.29.2 Kah ussu ne sampwag ut anaquabit Jehovah, neaunak wame ne David asit.
E.29.2 And he did that which was right in the sight of the LORD, according to all that David his father had done.

α.29.3 Nagum, negonohtàg ukketass8tamwe kodtum8, negonne nepauz, woshwunum wutushquontamash ut wekit Jehovah, kah wutonchteauunash.
E.29.3 He in the first year of his reign, in the first month, opened the doors of the house of the LORD, and repaired them.

α.29.4 Kah petukonau sephausuenuh kah Levitsoh, kah nah ummiyanuh, en wutchepwoae toumaogquehtu.
E.29.4 And he brought in the priests and the Levites, and gathered them together into the east street,

α.29.5 Kah nah wuttinuh n8tiegk kenaau Levitsog, yeuyeu wunneetupanatamwahuk, kuhhogkaóog, káh wunnetupanatamwáhteo8k wek Jehovah um-Manitt8m8uh k8sh8óog kah sohh8wuttau8k nishkeneunkquok wutch wunneetupanatamwe ayeuonganit.
E.29.5 And said unto them, Hear me, ye Levites, sanctify now yourselves, and sanctify the house of the LORD God of your fathers, and carry forth the filthiness out of the holy place.

α.29.6 Newutche n8shunonog panneseupanneg kah usseog ne machuk ut wuskesukqut Jehovah, num-Manitt8mun, kah wutohquanumouh, kah qunnuppenumwog wuskesuk8ash wutch wutayeuonganit Jehovah, kah quinnuppenumwog uppusquanoash.
E.29.6 For our fathers have trespassed, and done that which was evil in the eyes of the LORD our God, and have forsaken him, and have turned away their faces from the habitation of the LORD, and turned their backs.

α.29.7 Wonk kuppuhhamwog Porche squontamash, kah onthamwog lampsash, kah matta chikohsumóog wetemungquok, & matta mag8og chikohtae mag8ongash ut wunneetupanatamwe ayeuonganit en ummanitt8m8out Israel.
E.29.7 Also they have shut up the doors of the porch, and put out the lamps, and have not burned incense nor offered burnt offerings in the holy place unto the God of Israel.

α.29.8 Newaj ummusquanittam8onk Jehovah nuhkuhkok Judah, kah Jerusalem, kah nah upponuh wuttamehpunaonganit, chepshaonganit, kah mishananumonat, neane naumog ut kuksesuk8out.
E.29.8 Wherefore the wrath of the LORD was upon Judah and Jerusalem, and he hath delivered them to trouble, to astonishment, and to hissing, as ye see with your eyes.

α.29.9 Newutche kusseh n8shunonog pénushaog nashpe togkodteg kah nunnaumonónog, kah nuttaununonog, kah nummittamwussinnonog, neg yeu 8tch missinnainneau.
E.29.9 For, lo, our fathers have fallen by the sword, and our sons and our daughters and our wives are in captivity for this.

α.29.10 Yeuyeu ohteau ut nuttahut n8n8wonanonut um-Manitt8moh Israel, onk woh ummishe musquanittam8onk nukqushkinnumunkqunan.
E.29.10 Now it is in mine heart to make a covenant with the LORD God of Israel, that his fierce wrath may turn away from us.

α.29.11 Nunnaumonunk, yeuyeu ahque mehshane ussek: newutche Jehovah kuppepenunkou neepauinneat ut anaquabit, wuttinneumuhkauonat, kah woh k8wowussumonaóont kah chikohsumunat weetemungquok.
E.29.11 My sons, be not now negligent: for the LORD hath chosen you to stand before him, to serve him, and that ye should minister unto him, and burn incense.

α.29.12 Neit Levitsog neepóog, Mahath wunnaumonuh Amasai, kah Joel wunnaumonuh Azariah wutch wunnaumonat Kohathitsog, kah wutch wunnaumonat Merari, Kish wunnaumonuh Abdi, kah Azariah wunnaumonuh Jahalelel: kah wutch Gershonitsog, Joah wunnaumonuh Zimmah, kah Eden wunnaumonuh Joah.
E.29.12 Then the Levites arose, Mahath the son of Amasai, and Joel the son of Azariah, of the sons of the Kohathites: and of the sons of Merari, Kish the son of Abdi, and Azariah the son of Jehalelel: and of the Gershonites; Joah the son of Zimmah, and Eden the son of Joah:

α.29.13 Kah wutch wunnaumonuh Elizaphan, Shimri, kah Jehiel: kah wutch wunnaumonuh Asaph, Zechariah, kah Mattaniah.
E.29.13 And of the sons of Elizaphan; Shimri, and Jeiel: and of the sons of Asaph; Zechariah, and Mattaniah:

α.29.14 Kah wutch wunnaumonuh Heman, Jehiel, kah Shimei: kah wutch wunnaumonuh Jeduthiun, Shemajah, kah Uzziel.
E.29.14 And of the sons of Heman; Jehiel, and Shimei: and of the sons of Jeduthun; Shemaiah, and Uzziel.

α.29.15 Kah miyanáog wematt8oh kah wunnetupanatamwaheàog wuhhogkáuh, kah peyaog neaunak wuttinn8waonk ketass8t, nashpe wuttinn8waongash Jehovah, pahketeauunat wek Jehovah.
E.29.15 And they gathered their brethren, and sanctified themselves, and came, according to the commandment of the king, by the words of the LORD, to cleanse the house of the LORD.

α.29.16 Kah sephausuen petutteau en anómiye ut wekit Jehovah, pahketeauunat, kah soh8wuttóog wame nishkeneunkquok, ne nampteaumuk ut wut-templeumut Jehovah, en chippinneutunkanit wekit Jehovah, kah Levitsog wunnemunnumuneau sohh8wuttauunat, en poquadchit, en Kidrone sepuissut
E.29.16 And the priests went into the inner part of the house of the LORD, to cleanse it, and brought out all the uncleanness that they found in the temple of the LORD into the court of the house of the LORD. And the Levites took it, to carry it out abroad into the brook Kidron.

α.29.17 Kah n8che wunnetupanatamwahuwaog, ut negonne kesukok, ut negonne nepauzsaut, kah ut shwosuk tahshikquinogkodtut, peyaog porchumut Jehovah, neit wunnetupanatamwahteauog wek Jehovah, en shwosuk tahshikquinogkodtut, kah nabo nequtta adtahshikquinahog negonne nepauz uppogkodche usseneau.
E.29.17 Now they began on the first day of the first month to sanctify, and on the eighth day of the month came they to the porch of the LORD: so they sanctified the house of the LORD in eight days; and in the sixteenth day of the first month they made an end.

α.29.18 Néit petutteáog en Hezekiah$ut ketass8tamut, kah nag n8waog, nuppahketeomun wame wek Jehovah, kah chikohtae mag8ongane altar, kah nish wame auwohteaongash, kah nahtitteae petukqunnongane table, kah nish wame auwohteaongash.
E.29.18 Then they went in to Hezekiah the king, and said, We have cleansed all the house of the LORD, and the altar of burnt offering, with all the vessels thereof, and the shewbread table, with all the vessels thereof.

α.29.19 Wonk wame auwohteaongash, nish ketass8t Ahaz kohtass8tam8it, pagkeetogupash, panneusseit, nummahche quagquashwehtamumun, kah n8neetupanatamwahteauunan, kah kusseh, nish ut anaquohtag wut-altarum Jehovah.
E.29.19 Moreover all the vessels, which king Ahaz in his reign did cast away in his transgression, have we prepared and sanctified, and, behold, they are before the altar of the LORD.

α.29.20 Neit Hezekiah ketass8t nompoáe neepau, kah miyanau keitotanáe nanawunnuénuog, kah kuhkuhqueu en wekit Jehovah.
E.29.20 Then Hezekiah the king rose early, and gathered the rulers of the city, and went up to the house of the LORD.

α.29.21 Kah nag pas8waog nesausuk tahsuog oxenog, kah nesausuk tahsuog ramsog, kah nesausuk tahsuog lambsog, kah nesausuk tahsuog nomposhimwe goatsog, wutche matcheseongane mag8onk, wutche ass8tam8onk: kah wutche Sanctuary, kah wutche Judah; kah ann8nau sephausuénuh, wunnaumonuh Aaron sephausineat ut wut-altarumut Jehovah.
E.29.21 And they brought seven bullocks, and seven rams, and seven lambs, and seven he goats, for a sin offering for the kingdom, and for the sanctuary, and for Judah. And he commanded the priests the sons of Aaron to offer them on the altar of the LORD.

α.29.22 Neit nushaog oxenoh, kah sephausuenuog attumunumwog wusqueheonk, kah seauhkonau ut Altarut: wonk nasháhettit ramsoh, nag seáhhamwog wusqueheonk ut Altarut: wonk nushaog lambsoh, kah seahhamwog wusqueheonk ut Altarut.
E.29.22 So they killed the bullocks, and the priests received the blood, and sprinkled it on the altar: likewise, when they had killed the rams, they sprinkled the blood upon the altar: they killed also the lambs, and they sprinkled the blood upon the altar.

α.29.23 Kah pas8óog nomposhimwe goatsoh, wutche matcheseongane mag8ongash, ut anaquabit ketass8t, kah mukkinneonk, kah upponamauóuh wunnutchegan8óash.
E.29.23 And they brought forth the he goats for the sin offering before the king and the congregation; and they laid their hands upon them:

α.29.24 Kah sephausuénuog wunnushóuh, kah wunóhteahuwahtóog nashpe wusqueheonk, ut altarut 8nóhteahuwanshonaóont wame Israeloh: newutche ketass8t ann8team8, ne chikohtáe mag8onk, kah ne matcheseáe mag8onk, mag8wanshinash wame Israel.
E.29.24 And the priests killed them, and they made reconciliation with their blood upon the altar, to make an atonement for all Israel: for the king commanded that the burnt offering and the sin offering should be made for all Israel.

α.29.25 Kah ponau Levitsoh wekit Jehovah, nashpe cymbalsash, psalterisash, kah harpsash, neaunak wutann8team8onk David, kah Gad ketass8t wunnaumaéneumoh, kah Nathan quoshodtumwaen: newutche ne wuttin ann8teamun Jehovah, nashpe ukquoshodtumwaéneumoh.
E.29.25 And he set the Levites in the house of the LORD with cymbals, with psalteries, and with harps, according to the commandment of David, and of Gad the king's seer, and Nathan the prophet: for so was the commandment of the LORD by his prophets.

α.29.26 Kah Levitsog neepóog nashpe wutauwohteaongash David, kah sephausuénuog nashpe monopuhpequonash.
E.29.26 And the Levites stood with the instruments of David, and the priests with the trumpets.

α.29.27 Kah Hezekiah ann8team8 magunat chikohtáe mag8ongash ut Altarut: kah chikohtáe mag8ongash n8cheyeu88k, ket8homauáonk Jehovah wonk n8tshin, nashpe puhpequanash, kah nashpe auwohteaongash, nish kohquttukupash David Israelle ketass8t.
E.29.27 And Hezekiah commanded to offer the burnt offering upon the altar. And when the burnt offering began, the song of the LORD began also with the trumpets, and with the instruments ordained by David king of Israel.

α.29.28 Kah wame mukkinneonk wowussummuwaog ket8hamaénuog ket8ham8og, kah monópuhpéqunaenúog puhpequáog: wame, nô pajeh chikohtáe mag8onk pakodche ussemuk.
E.29.28 And all the congregation worshipped, and the singers sang, and the trumpeters sounded: and all this continued until the burnt offering was finished.

α.29.29 Kah mahche maghettit, ketass8t, kah wame neh weetomukqutcheh, nauwaéog, kah wowussumáog.
E.29.29 And when they had made an end of offering, the king and all that were present with him bowed themselves, and worshipped.

α.29.30 Wonk, Hezekiah ketass8t, kah sontimóog, nag ann8náog Levitsoh, 8weenomáe ket8hamauónat Jehovah, nashpe wuttinn8waongash David, kah Asaph naumwáen: kah nag wekontamwe wowénómu8hamáog, kah nauwanumwog uppuhkuk8oash, kah wowussumáog.
E.29.30 Moreover Hezekiah the king and the princes commanded the Levites to sing praise unto the LORD with the words of David, and of Asaph the seer. And they sang praises with gladness, and they bowed their heads and worshipped.

α.29.31 Neit Hezekiah naɱph8ham, kah n8wau, yeuyeu k8neetupanatamwaheómw8 kuhhogka[ò]og en Jehovah$ut, pas8tshagk, kah paudtau8k sephausuongash, kah tabattantam8e mag8ongash en wekit Jehovah: kah mukkinneonk paudtauog sephausuongash, kah tabuttantamóe mag8ongash kah neadtahshe nanóuwutteahahettit, chikohtáe mag8ongash.
E.29.31 Then Hezekiah answered and said, Now ye have consecrated yourselves unto the LORD, come near and bring sacrifices and thank offerings into the house of the LORD. And the congregation brought in sacrifices and thank offerings; and as many as were of a free heart burnt offerings.

α.29.32 Kah ne adtahshik chikohtáe mag8ongash, nish mukkinneonk paudtunkish: nequtta tahshinchag kussuog oxenog, kah nequt pasuk8e ramsog, neese pasuk88og lambsog: wame yeug wutch chikohtáe mag8onk en Jehovahut.
E.29.32 And the number of the burnt offerings, which the congregation brought, was threescore and ten bullocks, an hundred rams, and two hundred lambs: all these were for a burnt offering to the LORD.

α.29.33 Kah waneettupanatamweyeuugish, nequtta tahshe pasuk88og oxenog, kah nishwe muttannonganog kussuog shepsog.
E.29.33 And the consecrated things were six hundred oxen and three thousand sheep.

α.29.34 Qut sephausuénuog wussaum ogguhsuog, newaj n8náhettit wunnushonaóont wame chikohtáe mag8ongash: newaj wematt8oh Levitsoh aninnumungqhettit, noh pajeh anakausuonk kesteauunat, kah noh pajeh onkatoganog sephausuenuog wunneetupanatamwaheonaóont wuhhogkuh, newutche Levitsog, ánue sampweteáhaog wunneetupanatamwaheonaóont wuhhogkáuh, onk neg sephausuénuog.
E.29.34 But the priests were too few, so that they could not flay all the burnt offerings: wherefore their brethren the Levites did help them, till the work was ended, and until the other priests had sanctified themselves: for the Levites were more upright in heart to sanctify themselves than the priests.

α.29.35 Kah wonk chikohtáe mag8ongash monatash, weeche wunohteáe sephausue wes, kah wuttatam8e mag8ongash ut nish$noh chikohtáe mag8onk: neit wowussumóonk ut wekit Jehovah wunohtausu.
E.29.35 And also the burnt offerings were in abundance, with the fat of the peace offerings, and the drink offerings for every burnt offering. So the service of the house of the LORD was set in order.

α.29.36 Kah Hezekiah wekontam, kah wame missinninnúog, newutche God quagquoshwunau missinninnùh; newutche ne tiadche n$niyeup.
E.29.36 And Hezekiah rejoiced, and all the people, that God had prepared the people: for the thing was done suddenly.

α.30.1 KAh Hezekiah ann8team8 en wame Israelut kah Judahut, kah wonk wussuk[ham]auau Ephraimoh, kah Manassehoh, nag woh uppeyáunaóut wekit Jehovah ut Jerusalem, wunnanawéhtinneaóont paumukôadtuonk, en Lordut um-Manitt8moh Israel.
E.30.1 And Hezekiah sent to all Israel and Judah, and wrote letters also to Ephraim and Manasseh, that they should come to the house of the LORD at Jerusalem, to keep the passover unto the LORD God of Israel.

α.30.2 Newutche ketass8t nemunumup ken8nittuonk, kah wussontimósimoh, kah wame mukkinneonk ut Jerusalem, nanawéhtineat paumukôadtuonk ut nahohtôe nepâuzsaut.
E.30.2 For the king had taken counsel, and his princes, and all the congregation in Jerusalem, to keep the passover in the second month.

α.30.3 Newutche n8nanum8og nanawehtinneat na ahquompak, newutche sephausuénuog asquam pannuppe wunnetupanatamwáheau8og wuhhogkauh, asuh asquam missinninnuog miyaéog ut Jerusalem.
E.30.3 For they could not keep it at that time, because the priests had not sanctified themselves sufficiently, neither had the people gathered themselves together to Jerusalem.

α.30.4 Kah ne wutapeneamun ketass8t, kah wame mukkinneonk.
E.30.4 And the thing pleased the king and all the congregation.

α.30.5 Neit menehkehteóog kukquttumóonk, wahteauwahuwonat pa$pannuppe wame Israel, wutch Beersheba wehque Dan, nag woh uppeyonaóont, wunnanawehtinneaóont paumukôadtuonk, en Jehovah$ut um-Manitt8moh Israel, ut Jerusalem: newutche nag matta wutusseneau sepe, neansukwhosik.
E.30.5 So they established a decree to make proclamation throughout all Israel, from Beersheba even to Dan, that they should come to keep the passover unto the LORD God of Israel at Jerusalem: for they had not done it of a long time in such sort as it was written.

α.30.6 Neit konupwushacheg, kenunnumwog lettersash wutch wunnutcheganit ketass8t, kah wussontimósumoh, pannuppe wame Israelut kah Judahut, kah neaunak wutann8team8onk ketass8t, n8waog, kenaau wunnaumonuh Israel, qushkek wonk en Lord um-Manitt8mit Abraham, Isaak, kah Israel, kah noh pish qushkeu en kenaau sequtteáógish, kah tom8ógish, wutch wunnutcheganit Assyriae ketass8t.
E.30.6 So the posts went with the letters from the king and his princes throughout all Israel and Judah, and according to the commandment of the king, saying, Ye children of Israel, turn again unto the LORD God of Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, and he will return to the remnant of you, that are escaped out of the hand of the kings of Assyria.

α.30.7 Kah ahque tatuppeyauek k8sh8óog, kah kematt8oog neg pannesehtauoncheg Jehovah 8sh8oh um-Manitt8m8oh, newaj maguk en touushinit, neane naum8k.
E.30.7 And be not ye like your fathers, and like your brethren, which trespassed against the LORD God of their fathers, who therefore gave them up to desolation, as ye see.

α.30.8 Yeuyeu chetauussittipukanuhteogk, neasehetteup k8sh8woog: aninnumok kenutchegan8 Jehovah, kah petutteag wussanctuariumut, ne micheme waneetupanatamwahteunk: kah wowussumok Jehóvah kum-Manitt8mw8, onk woh ummishe musquanittam8onk kutamaetunkquneau.
E.30.8 Now be ye not stiffnecked, as your fathers were, but yield yourselves unto the LORD, and enter into his sanctuary, which he hath sanctified for ever: and serve the LORD your God, that the fierceness of his wrath may turn away from you.

α.30.9 Newutche quinnuppeog en Jehóvahut, kematt8óog kah keneechan8oog, pish namehteóog kiteamonteanittuonk ut anaquabenit neh sagkompagunukqutcheh en missinnainneat, neit wonk pish yeu peyoneau ohkeit: newutche Jehovah kum-Manitt8mw8 kittemonteanitteau, kah monanitteau, kah matta quinnuppenum8 wuksesuk wutch kuhhogkaout, nóh en qushkeog.
E.30.9 For if ye turn again unto the LORD, your brethren and your children shall find compassion before them that lead them captive, so that they shall come again into this land: for the LORD your God is gracious and merciful, and will not turn away his face from you, if ye return unto him.

α.30.10 Neit konupshoncheg papamshaog keitotanash, pannuppe Ephraimme wutohtimoineat kah Manasseh, kah Zebulun: qut ummamanauontamwe hahanehtauouh.
E.30.10 So the posts passed from city to city through the country of Ephraim and Manasseh even unto Zebulun: but they laughed them to scorn, and mocked them.

α.30.11 Qut monaog wutch Asher, kah Manasseh, kah Zebulun, nag hohpaheaog wuhhogkauh, kah peyaog J[u]rusalem.
E.30.11 Nevertheless divers of Asher and Manasseh and of Zebulun humbled themselves, and came to Jerusalem.

α.30.12 Wonk ut Judah, ne wunnutcheg God wunnequttutteahohkauáonk, ussenat wutann8team8onk ketass8t kah sontimóog, nashpe wuttinn8waonk Jehovah.
E.30.12 Also in Judah the hand of God was to give them one heart to do the commandment of the king and of the princes, by the word of the LORD.

α.30.13 Kah na wuttit moenau monaog missinninnuog ut Jerusalem, nanauwehtinneat mat seane petukqunegane mishadtup8onk, ut nahohtoeu nepauzsaut, ahche mishe mukkinneunk.
E.30.13 And there assembled at Jerusalem much people to keep the feast of unleavened bread in the second month, a very great congregation.

α.30.14 Kah neepoog kah amaunaog Altarsoh nish ut Jerusalem, kah wame weetemungquokeh Altaroh wutamaunauh kah uttinuhkonouh en Cidrone sepuesut.
E.30.14 And they arose and took away the altars that were in Jerusalem, and all the altars for incense took they away, and cast them into the brook Kidron.

α.30.15 Neit nehtóog paumukoadtuonk nabo yeuquinohhog nahohtôeu nepauz, kah sephausuenuog kah Levitsog akodchuog, kah nag wunneetupanatamwaheaog wuhhogkauh, kah petukodtoog chikohtae mag8ongash en wekit Jehovah.
E.30.15 Then they killed the passover on the fourteenth day of the second month: and the priests and the Levites were ashamed, and sanctified themselves, and brought in the burnt offerings into the house of the LORD.

α.30.16 Kah nag neep8og ut wutayeuongan8out, ne asehettit, neaunak wuttinnaumatuonk Moses Manittowomp: sephausuenuog seáohteaog wusquehéonk, wutch wunnutchegan8out Levits[o]g.
E.30.16 And they stood in their place after their manner, according to the law of Moses the man of God: the priests sprinkled the blood, which they received of the hand of the Levites.

α.30.17 Newutche monaog ut mukkinneonganit neg mátta waneetupanatamwaheoncheg: newutche Levitsog ahtoog meechumuhkonittuonk wunnehtauwonshonat paumukóadtuonk, nish$noh howan mat pahkeseg, nah 8neetupanatamwaheonat en Jehovah$ut.
E.30.17 For there were many in the congregation that were not sanctified: therefore the Levites had the charge of the killing of the passovers for every one that was not clean, to sanctify them unto the LORD.

α.30.18 Newutche mataánukeg missinninnuog, monaog wutch Ephraim, kah Manasseh, Ishachar kah Zebulun, matta pahkheauog wuhhogkauh, qut meechuog paumukoadtuonk, panneonk neansukwhosik, qut Hezechiah uppeantamwanshuh, n8wau: noh wunneetou Lord ahquontamauonch nish$noh pasuk8,
E.30.18 For a multitude of the people, even many of Ephraim, and Manasseh, Issachar, and Zebulun, had not cleansed themselves, yet did they eat the passover otherwise than it was written. But Hezekiah prayed for them, saying, The good LORD pardon every one

α.30.19 Quagquoshwunuk wuttah natinneawhonat God, Jehovah um-Manitt8m8oh 8sh8oh, toh$kónogque matta wuttinne pahkesein, Sánctuarie pahkesuonk.
E.30.19 That prepareth his heart to seek God, the LORD God of his fathers, though he be not cleansed according to the purification of the sanctuary.

α.30.20 Kah Jehovah n8tauau Hezechiahoh, kah netskeheau missinninnuh.
E.30.20 And the LORD hearkened to Hezekiah, and healed the people.

α.30.21 Kah wunnáumonuh Israel, neg apitcheg Jerusalem, nag nanawehteauog mat seane petukqunnegane mishadtup8onk, nesausuk tahshikquinne, nashpe mishe weekontamóonk, kah Levitsog kah sephausuenuog, woweenomaog Jehovahoh asekesukokish, nashpe mishont8wâe aúwohteaongásh en Jehovah$ut.
E.30.21 And the children of Israel that were present at Jerusalem kept the feast of unleavened bread seven days with great gladness: and the Levites and the priests praised the LORD day by day, singing with loud instruments unto the LORD.

α.30.22 Kah Hezechiah wunneetahhae ken8nau wame Levitsoh neg kohk8tomwehteacheg wunne kuhk8tomwehteaonk Jehovah: kah nag meetsuog, pannuppe wame mishadtupp8ongash nesausuk tahshikquinne, maghettit wunohteae mag8ongash, & sompuahettit, Jehovahoh 8sh8oh um-Manitt8m8uh.
E.30.22 And Hezekiah spake comfortably unto all the Levites that taught the good knowledge of the LORD: and they did eat throughout the feast seven days, offering peace offerings, and making confession to the LORD God of their fathers.

α.30.23 Kah mamusse mukkinneonk ken8nittuog nanawehtinneat, onkatogish nesausuk tahshikquinogkodtash: kah nanawehteaog onkatogish nesausuk tahshikquinogkodtash nashpe wekontamoonk.
E.30.23 And the whole assembly took counsel to keep other seven days: and they kept other seven days with gladness.

α.30.24 Newutche Hezechiàh Judae ketass8t aninnumauau mukkinneongoh nequt muttannonganogkussuoh oxinoh, kah nesausuk tahshe muttannonganogkussuog shepsoh: kah Sontim[ô]og aninnumauaog mukkiñeongh, nequt muttannonganogkussuoh oxinoh, & piogque muttannonganogkussuoh shepsoh, kah monaóg sephausuenuog wunnetupanatamwaheog wuhhogkauh.
E.30.24 For Hezekiah king of Judah did give to the congregation a thousand bullocks and seven thousand sheep; and the princes gave to the congregation a thousand bullocks and ten thousand sheep: and a great number of priests sanctified themselves.

α.30.25 Kah wame Judae mukkinneonk weeche sephausuenuog kah Levitsog, kah wame mukkinneonk neg sohhogig wutch Israel, kah pen8wohteaog neg sohhogig wutch ohkit Israel kah nag apitcheg Judah, weekontamwog.
E.30.25 And all the congregation of Judah, with the priests and the Levites, and all the congregation that came out of Israel, and the strangers that came out of the land of Israel, and that dwelt in Judah, rejoiced.

α.30.26 Neit missi wekontamóonk ut Jerusalem, newutche nadteoh pomontog Solomon wunnaumonuh David Israelle ketass8t, wanne wuttinnauouh ut Jerusalem.
E.30.26 So there was great joy in Jerusalem: for since the time of Solomon the son of David king of Israel there was not the like in Jerusalem.

α.30.27 Neit sephausuenuog kah Levitsog nepauog & wunnanumaog missinninnuh: kah wuttauatonkquodt n8tunkquodt: & uppeantam8ongan8 kuhkuhquem8 ut 8neetupanatamwe ayeuonganit, en kesukqut.
E.30.27 Then the priests the Levites arose and blessed the people: and their voice was heard, and their prayer came up to his holy dwelling place, even unto heaven.

α.31.1 KAh yeu wame pakodjteomuk, wame Israel neg na apitcheg, sohhamwog en Judae keitotanáhtu, kah sohquttahwhaog nunneukontunkoh, & m8sittahhamwog kuppiyeuash, kah n8konteáog qunuhqui ayeuongash, kah altarsash wutch Judah, kah Benjain, kah wonk ut Ephraim kah Manasseh; nô pajeh uppapaquanne ushkoméhtinneaóont: neit wame wunnaumonuh Israel qushkeog, nish$noh wosketomp en wutoht[ó]onganit, en nehenwonche wutotanaóont.
E.31.1 Now when all this was finished, all Israel that were present went out to the cities of Judah, and brake the images in pieces, and cut down the groves, and threw down the high places and the altars out of all Judah and Benjamin, in Ephraim also and Manasseh, until they had utterly destroyed them all. Then all the children of Israel returned, every man to his possession, into their own cities.

α.31.2 Kah Hezekiah kuhquttum, 8nappuongan8oash sephausuenuog, kah Levitsog neaunak 8nappuongan8oash, nishnoh wosketomp neaunak wutannunôsuonk, sephausuénuog, kah Levitsog, wutche chikohtáe mag8ongash, kah wutche wunohteáe mag8ongash, wuttinneumuhkausinneat, kah tabuttantamunat, kah wowenomuwónat, ut weeke squontamut Jehovah.
E.31.2 And Hezekiah appointed the courses of the priests and the Levites after their courses, every man according to his service, the priests and Levites for burnt offerings and for peace offerings, to minister, and to give thanks, and to praise in the gates of the tents of the LORD.

α.31.3 Kah wonk ketass8t wutchippiyeum wutch ummaumachiit wutch chikohtáe mag8onk, wutch nompoáe kah wunnonkquae chikohtáe mag8onk, kah Sabath$daye chikohtáe mag8ongash, kah wutch wuske nepâuzsahtu, kah wutch kukquttum8e mishadtupp8ongash, neansukwhosik ut wuttinnaumatuonganit Jehovah.
E.31.3 He appointed also the king's portion of his substance for the burnt offerings, to wit, for the morning and evening burnt offerings, and the burnt offerings for the sabbaths, and for the new moons, and for the set feasts, as it is written in the law of the LORD.

α.31.4 Kah wonk ann8nau missinninnúh neg wadohkitcheg Jerusalem, aninnumauónat wutchippiyeum8 sephausuénuog kah Levitsog, onk woh wutt8anatamwog ut wuttinnaumatuonganit Jehovah.
E.31.4 Moreover he commanded the people that dwelt in Jerusalem to give the portion of the priests and the Levites, that they might be encouraged in the law of the LORD.

α.31.5 Kah ann8team8onk quenau sohweem8uk, wunnaumonuh Israel m8cheke paudtauoh, kakeneumunne weatchiminneash, wine, kah oyle, kah hony, kah nish$noh teag piogqu[é] chippáe m8cheke petakodtóog.
E.31.5 And as soon as the commandment came abroad, the children of Israel brought in abundance the firstfruits of corn, wine, and oil, and honey, and of all the increase of the field; and the tithe of all things brought they in abundantly.

α.31.6 Kah papaume wunnaumonuh Israel kah Judah, neg wadohkitcheg Judae keitotanahtu: nag wonk petakodtóog uppapiogque chippissuongan8óash oxenog, kah shepsog, kah piogque chippágish waneetupanatamweyeu8gish, nis hwaneetupanatamwahteomukish en Jehovah$ut um-Manitt8m8óut, kah wunannomwunkquottauunaóash.
E.31.6 And concerning the children of Israel and Judah, that dwelt in the cities of Judah, they also brought in the tithe of oxen and sheep, and the tithe of holy things which were consecrated unto the LORD their God, and laid them by heaps.

α.31.7 Ut nash8it nepâuz n8che ponamwog newaj kutungquag, kah uppakodche usseneau ut nesausuk adtahs8it nepâuz.
E.31.7 In the third month they began to lay the foundation of the heaps, and finished them in the seventh month.

α.31.8 Kah Hezekiah, kah sontimóog paáhettit, kah naumohettit numwonkquâu, nag wunnanumáog Jehovahoh, kah ummissinninneumoh Israeloh.
E.31.8 And when Hezekiah and the princes came and saw the heaps, they blessed the LORD, and his people Israel.

α.31.9 Neit Hezekiah nat8tomauau sephausuénúh & Levitsoh papaume nomwonkquagish.
E.31.9 Then Hezekiah questioned with the priests and the Levites concerning the heaps.

α.31.10 Kah Azariah kehche sephausuénin, wutch wekit Zadok wunnamp8hamauoh kah n8wau, nadteuh n8che paudtauéhettit mag8ongash ut wekit Jehovah, wamat nummetsuonganun, kah numm8cheke sequtteamumun: newutche Jehovah wunnanumau ummissinninneumoh, kah ne sequtteamuk, yeu monak.
E.31.10 And Azariah the chief priest of the house of Zadok answered him, and said, Since the people began to bring the offerings into the house of the LORD, we have had enough to eat, and have left plenty: for the LORD hath blessed his people; and that which is left is this great store.

α.31.11 Neit Hezekiah ann8teamo quagquashwunnumunat chambersash ut wekit Jehovah, kah nag quagquashwunnumunáoash.
E.31.11 Then Hezekiah commanded to prepare chambers in the house of the LORD; and they prepared them,

α.31.12 Kah petukodtóog mag8ongash kah piogque chippagish, kah wunnetupanatamwéyeu8gish, pabuhtánumwe: kah Cononiah wul-Levit yeu nanawunuk, kah Shimeioh weematoh wutasukunkquoh.
E.31.12 And brought in the offerings and the tithes and the dedicated things faithfully: over which Cononiah the Levite was ruler, and Shimei his brother was the next.

α.31.13 Kah Jehiel, kah Azasiah, kah Nahath, kah Asahel, kah Jerimoth, kah Jozabad, kah Eliel, kah Ismachiah, kah Mahath, kah Benajah, aninnohsuénuog ut wunnutcheganit Cononiah, kah Shemeioh weematoh, nean ann8teamwit Hezekiah ketass8t, kah Azariah nanánuwáen ut wekit God.
E.31.13 And Jehiel, and Azaziah, and Nahath, and Asahel, and Jerimoth, and Jozabad, and Eliel, and Ismachiah, and Mahath, and Benaiah, were overseers under the hand of Cononiah and Shimei his brother, at the commandment of Hezekiah the king, and Azariah the ruler of the house of God.

α.31.14 Kah Kore wunnaumonuh Im[m]ah wul-Levit, nanausquontamwáen nogque en wutchepwoiyeu, nánawunnum nano[u]we mag8ongash en Godut, wutchadchabenumunat mag8ongash en Jehovahut, kah ánue wunneetupanatamweyeu8gish.
E.31.14 And Kore the son of Imnah the Levite, the porter toward the east, was over the freewill offerings of God, to distribute the oblations of the LORD, and the most holy things.

α.31.15 Kah asuhkunk, Edenoh, kah Minjamin, kah Jeshua, kah Shemajah, Amariah, kah Shechaniah, ut wut8tanaóut sephausueénuog, ut kukquttumóe anninnohsuonganit, wuttinnumauonaóont weemat8óuh, ut wutchadchepuongan8óut, naneese matikenutche, kah papeissisinitcheh.
E.31.15 And next him were Eden, and Miniamin, and Jeshua, and Shemaiah, Amariah, and Shecaniah, in the cities of the priests, in their set office, to give to their brethren by courses, as well to the great as to the small:

α.31.16 Chaubokish mukkachukqussueu ontseongash, wutch nishwe kodtumwohkumunat, kah piáme, wehque nish$noh pasuk noh petutteadt ut wekit Jehovah, kesukodtae wutchippiyeum, wutche wuttinneumuhkausuonk, ut meechumuhkónaongan8óut, neaunak 8nappuongan8óash.
E.31.16 Beside their genealogy of males, from three years old and upward, even unto every one that entereth into the house of the LORD, his daily portion for their service in their charges according to their courses;

α.31.17 Na$neswe ut wutontseongan8óut sephausuénuog, nashpe wek8oash 8sh8oh, kah ut Levitsut, wutch nesnehchage kodtumwohkomunat, kah piáme, ut 8nappuongan8 ut meechumuhkonaongan8óut.
E.31.17 Both to the genealogy of the priests by the house of their fathers, and the Levites from twenty years old and upward, in their charges by their courses;

α.31.18 Kah ut wutontseongan8óut wame uppeississum8uh, ummittamwuss8uh, kah wunnaumonáut, kah wuttaun8oh, pannuppe wame mukkinneonganit: newutche ut ummeechumuhkonaonganon8óut, wunneetupanatamwaheáog ut wunneetupanatam8onganit.
E.31.18 And to the genealogy of all their little ones, their wives, and their sons, and their daughters, through all the congregation: for in their set office they sanctified themselves in holiness:

α.31.19 Kah wonk wunnuamonuh Aaron, sephausuénuog, neg ut ohteuhkonehtu sussippoiyeue otanat, ut nishnoh chippe keitotanat[,] [w]osketompaog neg wesuongane agkemutcheg, aninnumauónat wutchippiyeumash, wame nompaésuog ut kenugke sephausuenúut, kah en wame nag agkemutcheg ut wutontseongan8óut Levitsog.
E.31.19 Also of the sons of Aaron the priests, which were in the fields of the suburbs of their cities, in every several city, the men that were expressed by name, to give portions to all the males among the priests, and to all that were reckoned by genealogies among the Levites.

α.31.20 Kah yeu wutussen Hezekiah pannuppu[-] wame Judah, kah usseu ne wanegik kah sampwagk, kah wanumuhkuteyeu8k ut anaquabit Jehovah um-Manitt8moh.
E.31.20 And thus did Hezekiah throughout all Judah, and wrought that which was good and right and truth before the LORD his God.

α.31.21 Kah ut nishnoh anakausuonganit ne n8che usseit, wutche wuttinneumuhkausuonk ut wekit God: kah ut [en]naumatuonganit, kah ut ann8team8onganit wunnátinnewhonat um-Manitt8moh, wutussen nashpe mamusse wuttah, kah wunniyeu.
E.31.21 And in every work that he began in the service of the house of God, and in the law, and in the commandments, to seek his God, he did it with all his heart, and prospered.

α.32.1 MAhche yeush nnag, kah manuhkehteomuk Senakrip Assiyriae ketass8t, peyau, kah petutteau Judah, kah ayeuuhkonittue tuppuksinn8wontam pummeneutausué keitotanash, kah unnantam nag nussohkomonunk.
E.32.1 After these things, and the establishment thereof, Sennacherib king of Assyria came, and entered into Judah, and encamped against the fenced cities, and thought to win them for himself.

α.32.2 Kah Hezekiah nag* Sinakrib mahche peyau, kah pakodtantam wutayeuuhkontamunat Jerusalem.
E.32.2 And when Hezekiah saw that Sennacherib was come, and that he was purposed to fight against Jerusalem,

α.32.3 Nagum kah wussontimosimoh, kah ummenuhkesueneumoh ken8nittuog, kah kuppuhhamunat wuttahhamongash, nish poquodchu otani: kah nag wutannumauouh.
E.32.3 He took counsel with his princes and his mighty men to stop the waters of the fountains which were without the city: and they did help him.

α.32.4 Newaj monaog missinninnuog miyaehettit, neg kobhogeg wame wuttahhamongash, kah sepuiṡ ne panupushonk nashaue ohkekontu, n8waog Assyriae ketass8tamwog paáhettit, toh$wutch woh nemehteauahettit monat nippe.
E.32.4 So there was gathered much people together, who stopped all the fountains, and the brook that ran through the midst of the land, saying, Why should the kings of Assyria come, and find much water?

α.32.5 Kah wonk menehkheau wuhhogkuh, kah onchehteau wame pummenutunk, ne tauwutchashonkup, kah ukqunuhqutteauun wehque wonkon8sinut, kah onkatog pummeneutunk poquadchit, kah onchehteao Millo ut wutotanat David, kah ayim dartsash kah ogqunegash monatash.
E.32.5 Also he strengthened himself, and built up all the wall that was broken, and raised it up to the towers, and another wall without, and repaired Millo in the city of David, and made darts and shields in abundance.

α.32.6 Kah kehtimau ayeuteae mugquompuh ut missinninnutu, kah ummianumauonuh, ut squontamwe toumaogwehtu ut otanat, kah 8nanakumoh, n8wau.
E.32.6 And he set captains of war over the people, and gathered them together to him in the street of the gate of the city, and spake comfortably to them, saying,

α.32.7 Menuhkesek, kah wutt8anatam8k, wabesehtok asuh chepshuhteok, wutche Assyriae ketass8t, asuh wutch mataanutcheh neh weechogqutcheh: newutche monaog k8weech8humukumun, onk neh weetomukqutcheh.
E.32.7 Be strong and courageous, be not afraid nor dismayed for the king of Assyria, nor for all the multitude that is with him: for there be more with us than with him:

α.32.8 Noh weechayeumuk weyausue muhpit, qut k8wetomukumun Jehovah num-Manitt8mun kuttannumunkqunnanonut, & wutayeuuhkonat kutayeuwehteaonganunonut, kah missinninnuog anwôsinnawontamwog ukkutt8wongash Hezekiah Judae ketass8t.
E.32.8 With him is an arm of flesh; but with us is the LORD our God to help us, and to fight our battles. And the people rested themselves upon the words of Hezekiah king of Judah.

α.32.9 Mahche yeu nag, Senakrib Assyriae ketass8t ann8nau wuttinneumoh en Jerusalem (qut nagum ayeuuhkontam Lachish, kah wame ummenuhkesuonk weechog,) en Hezekiah ut Judae ketass8t, kah en wame Judah, neg apitcheg Jerusalem, n8wau.
E.32.9 After this did Sennacherib king of Assyria send his servants to Jerusalem, (but he himself laid siege against Lachish, and all his power with him,) unto Hezekiah king of Judah, and unto all Judah that were at Jerusalem, saying,

α.32.10 Yeu wussin Synakreb Assyriae ketass8t teaguas kuppabahtantamumw8, waj chequnehtamog weenuhkoadtuonk ut Jerusalem?
E.32.10 Thus saith Sennacherib king of Assyria, Whereon do ye trust, that ye abide in the siege in Jerusalem?

α.32.11 Sunnummatta Hezekiah kenupweshanukw8, magunat kuhhogkaoog en mashagqunneae kah kuhkutt8n8e nuppunat, an8wadt, Jehovah num-Manitt8mun pish kuttomhukqun wutch wunnutcheganit Assyriae ketass8t?
E.32.11 Doth not Hezekiah persuade you to give over yourselves to die by famine and by thirst, saying, The LORD our God shall deliver us out of the hand of the king of Assyria?

α.32.12 Sunnummatta nenan Hezekiah amaunum8 ukqunniyeuongash, kah wut-Altarumash, kah ann8nau Judahhoh kah Jerusalemoh, n8wau, pish k8wowussummuwom8 ut anaquohtag pasuk Altar, kah pish kuttit chikossumuneau wetemungquok.
E.32.12 Hath not the same Hezekiah taken away his high places and his altars, and commanded Judah and Jerusalem, saying, Ye shall worship before one altar, and burn incense upon it?

α.32.13 Sunnummatta k8wahteomw8 uttoh n8sh kah neen anheogkut wame wutohtimoinne missinninnuog: sunnum$Manitt8m8oh yeug wutohtimoneunk, tapenumwussahhaneg wuttomwutteauunnaóont wutch nunnutcheganit.
E.32.13 Know ye not what I and my fathers have done unto all the people of other lands? were the gods of the nations of those lands any ways able to deliver their lands out of mine hand?

α.32.14 Howan kenugke wame Manitt8og, ut yeush wutohtimoneash, nish n8sh ôshkomehtuhhogkupash, noh woh tomheont ummissinninneumoh, wutch nunnutcheganit, newaj woh kum-Manitt8mw8 tapenuk kuttomhukqunnaoont wutch nunnutcheganit.
E.32.14 Who was there among all the gods of those nations that my fathers utterly destroyed, that could deliver his people out of mine hand, that your God should be able to deliver you out of mine hand?

α.32.15 Newutche yeuyeu, ahque Hezekiah as8kekomuk8k, asuh yeu$in nupweshanuk8k, asuh ahque wunnamptok: newutche matta howae Manit ut ne teague wutohtimoineat, asuh ass8tam8onganit, tapenum8 wuttomheonat ummissinninneumoh wutch nunnutcheganit, kah wutch wunnutcehganit n8sh, uttoh an woh ogguhse, kum-Manitt8mw8 kuppohquohwhunukquneau wutch nunnutcheganit?
E.32.15 Now therefore let not Hezekiah deceive you, nor persuade you on this manner, neither yet believe him: for no god of any nation or kingdom was able to deliver his people out of mine hand, and out of the hand of my fathers: how much less shall your God deliver you out of mine hand?

α.32.16 Kah wonk nano wuttinneumoh matcheunnaog Jehovahoh Manitt8h, kah wuttinneumoh Hezekiahoh.
E.32.16 And his servants spake yet more against the LORD God, and against his servant Hezekiah.

α.32.17 Kah wonk wussukhum mamatcheunnonat Jehovah um-Manitt8m8oh Israel, kah ummamatcheunnonat, n8waog, neane onkatogish wutohtimoneash um-Manitt8m8uh matta tomwehheo8og ummissinninneum8uh wutch nunnutcheganit, netatuppe Hezekiah um-Manitt8moh matta woh tomweheunk ummissinninneumoh wutch nunnutcheganit.
E.32.17 He wrote also letters to rail on the LORD God of Israel, and to speak against him, saying, As the gods of the nations of other lands have not delivered their people out of mine hand, so shall not the God of Hezekiah deliver his people out of mine hand.

α.32.18 Neit mishont8wae ann8tauwahtauwaog Jewsont8waonk Jerusalem missinninnuh, neg apitcheg woskeche neutunganit, wussiaskishononaoont kah 8tamehheonaoont, woh wussohkomunaóont kitotan.
E.32.18 Then they cried with a loud voice in the Jews' speech unto the people of Jerusalem that were on the wall, to affright them, and to trouble them; that they might take the city.

α.32.19 Kah matche unnaog Jerusaleme Manitto, neane matcheunahettit wutohtimoinne Manitto, neh wunnutchegane anakausuonk wosketomp.
E.32.19 And they spake against the God of Jerusalem, as against the gods of the people of the earth, which were the work of the hands of man.

α.32.20 Newaj Hezekiah ketass8t, kah quoshodtumwaen Isaiah, wunnaumonuh Amoz, peantamwog, kah móog en kesukqut.
E.32.20 And for this cause Hezekiah the king, and the prophet Isaiah the son of Amoz, prayed and cried to heaven.

α.32.21 Kah Jehovah ann8nau Angeloh, noh tametahwhont wame menuhkesuenunnuh: kah negonshanutcheh, kah mugquompuh ut wuttuppukkussinn8onganit ketass8t ut Assyria, neit akodchuwuskesukquae qushkeu en nehenwonche wutohkit, kah petutteadt um-Manitt8moh wekit, nah sohhamunutcheh wutch nehenwonche wunnohkussit, nawuttit nushoneau nashpe togkodteg.
E.32.21 And the LORD sent an angel, which cut off all the mighty men of valour, and the leaders and captains in the camp of the king of Assyria. So he returned with shame of face to his own land. And when he was come into the house of his god, they that came forth of his own bowels slew him there with the sword.

α.32.22 Yeu wuttinne Jehovah tomheon Hezekiahoh, kah wadohkitcheg Jerusalem, wutch wunnutcheganit Senakerib Assyria ketass8t, kah wutch wame wunnutchegan8out, kah wutuss8unuh waeenu.
E.32.22 Thus the LORD saved Hezekiah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem from the hand of Sennacherib the king of Assyria, and from the hand of all other, and guided them on every side.

α.32.23 Kah monaog paudtoog mag8ongash en Jerusalemut, kah mag8ongash en Hezekiah ut Judae ketáss8tamut: newaj misheheont ut anaquohtag wame wutohtimoneash, newutch n8che.
E.32.23 And many brought gifts unto the LORD to Jerusalem, and presents to Hezekiah king of Judah: so that he was magnified in the sight of all nations from thenceforth.

α.32.24 Yeush kesukodtash nupp8e mahchinau Hezekiah, kah peantamauau Jehováhoh, kah ukken8nuh, kah ukkehkenasukauoh.
E.32.24 In those days Hezekiah was sick to the death, and prayed unto the LORD: and he spake unto him, and he gave him a sign.

α.32.25 Qut Hezekiah matta nompoadtehtea8 neaunak wuteiyeuongash nish aseanshitcheh, newutche wuttah tahshem8, newaj musquanumit, kah ut Judah, kah ut Jerusalem.
E.32.25 But Hezekiah rendered not again according to the benefit done unto him; for his heart was lifted up: therefore there was wrath upon him, and upon Judah and Jerusalem.

α.32.26 Qut Hezekiah hohpaheau wuhhogkuh, wutche wuttah pittuanumóonk (naneeswe nagum kah wadokitcheg Jerusalem) newaj ummusquantamòonk Jehovah matta nuhkuhkunk8og ashpomontog Hezekiah.
E.32.26 Notwithstanding Hezekiah humbled himself for the pride of his heart, both he and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, so that the wrath of the LORD came not upon them in the days of Hezekiah.

α.32.27 Kah Hezekiah mishenauwetu, kah quttianumukqussu: kah ayimauau wuhhogkuh nompakouune ahhohtagish, ohtaut Silver, kah Gold, kah magoadtikish qussukquanash, kah Spicash, kag ogqunegash, kah wame eiyane tapenunkquotte nompakouunash
E.32.27 And Hezekiah had exceeding much riches and honour: and he made himself treasuries for silver, and for gold, and for precious stones, and for spices, and for shields, and for all manner of pleasant jewels;

α.32.28 Kah wonk meechumikkomukquash ponamunat nano neekinee weatchiminneash, kah wine, kah pumme kah stalsash wutch wame eiyane puppinashimwog kah flockse kommukquash.
E.32.28 Storehouses also for the increase of corn, and wine, and oil; and stalls for all manner of beasts, and cotes for flocks.

α.32.29 Nano quohquashwehtamun keitotanash kah flockse, kah heardse ahtoongash m8cheke: newutch God wuttinnumau monatash maumachiash.
E.32.29 Moreover he provided him cities, and possessions of flocks and herds in abundance: for God had given him substance very much.

α.32.30 Ne nan wonk Hezekiah kuppuhham onk[ó]ue anohtag Giheone sepuemes, kah uppiuhsuke w8mussuuttauun, wutcheksueiyeu wutotanat David, kah Hezekiah wunniyeum8ash wame wutanakausuongash
E.32.30 This same Hezekiah also stopped the upper watercourse of Gihon, and brought it straight down to the west side of the city of David. And Hezekiah prospered in all his works.

α.32.31 Qut ne ut, papaume wutan8naeneumoh Bab[a]lone sontimóog, neh noh ain ann8nahetticheh, nat8tamuhkonat ne monchanatam8onk, aunak ne ohkeit, God wunnukkonuh, ukqutchheonat, woh 8wahteauunat wame ne wuttahhut.
E.32.31 Howbeit in the business of the ambassadors of the princes of Babylon, who sent unto him to enquire of the wonder that was done in the land, God left him, to try him, that he might know all that was in his heart.

α.32.32 Kah onkatogish wutusseongash Hezechiah, kah 8nneseonk, kusseh, nish wussukwhosuash, ut ummonomonsuonganit Isayah quoshodtumwaen wunnaumonuh Amoz, kah 8sukuhwhongan8out Judae kah Israelle ketass8tamwog.
E.32.32 Now the rest of the acts of Hezekiah, and his goodness, behold, they are written in the vision of Isaiah the prophet, the son of Amoz, and in the book of the kings of Judah and Israel.

α.32.33 Kah Hezekiah weesequom8mau 8sh8oh, kah nah upposekinouh, ut kehcheu weenohkeit wunnaumonuh David: kah wame Judah, kah wadohkitcheg Jerusalem, ukquehtianumouh, kah napunit, kah Manassehoh wunnaumonuh wunnompass8tamomukquoh.
E.32.33 And Hezekiah slept with his fathers, and they buried him in the chiefest of the sepulchres of the sons of David: and all Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem did him honour at his death. And Manasseh his son reigned in his stead.

α.33.1 MAnasseh nabo neese kodtumwohkomup n8che ketass8tam8it, kah napanna tahshinchage kah napanna tahshe kodtum8 ketass8tam88 ut Jerusalem,
E.33.1 Manasseh was twelve years old when he began to reign, and he reigned fifty and five years in Jerusalem:

α.33.2 Qut usseu ne machuk ut anaquabit Jehovah, neaunak wannishkeneunkquott8m8ash penuohteáog, neh Jehovah pagkenoncheh ut anaquabhettit wunnaumonuh Israel.
E.33.2 But did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD, like unto the abominations of the heathen, whom the LORD had cast out before the children of Israel.

α.33.3 Newutche wonk ayim qunuhqui ayeuongash nish 8shoh Hezekiah n8ketahhamineupash; kah ayima[u]au altarsash Baalim, kah ayim kuppiyeuash, kah wowussumau wame kesukque kenauwameonk, kah nah 8tinninneumuhkauoh.
E.33.3 For he built again the high places which Hezekiah his father had broken down, and he reared up altars for Baalim, and made groves, and worshipped all the host of heaven, and served them.

α.33.4 Wonk ayim altarsash ut wekit Jehovah, ne papaume Jehovah n8wop, ut Jerusalem pish n8wesuonk ohtau micheme.
E.33.4 Also he built altars in the house of the LORD, whereof the LORD had said, In Jerusalem shall my name be for ever.

α.33.5 Kah ayimauau altarsash wame kesukque kenauwameonk, ut neese chippinneutunkanit, wekit Jehovah.
E.33.5 And he built altars for all the host of heaven in the two courts of the house of the LORD.

α.33.6 Kah pannupwusháheau wunneechanoh n8táut ut 8nóuhkoiyeuut wunnaumonuh Hinnon: kahwonk kuhkinneasu utt8cheyeu8ash, kah auwohteau pauwauwongash, kah auwohteau mamontamó8onk, kah auwohteau matche nashauonk, kah kôsikquomoh: usseu ne m8cheke machuk ut anaquabit Jehovah, m8mosqheónat.
E.33.6 And he caused his children to pass through the fire in the valley of the son of Hinnom: also he observed times, and used enchantments, and used witchcraft, and dealt with a familiar spirit, and with wizards: he wrought much evil in the sight of the LORD, to provoke him to anger.

α.33.7 Ponau kogoximwe nunneukontungoh (nunneukontunkoh ne kezheumpoh) ut wekit God, ne papaume God anomp Davidoh, kah Solomonoh wunnaumonuh, yeuut wetuómut, kah ut Jerusalem, ne pepenamomp ánue onk wame wutchippan8ongash Israel, ne nummicheme ponamun n8wesuonk.
E.33.7 And he set a carved image, the idol which he had made, in the house of God, of which God had said to David and to Solomon his son, In this house, and in Jerusalem, which I have chosen before all the tribes of Israel, will I put my name for ever:

α.33.8 Kah matta wonk nutontahtóou wusseet Israel, wutch ohkeit ne kahtimog k8sh8óut: nunnukqussehettit wame nean ann8nog, neanussit mamusse naumatuonk, kah kuhkinnum8ongash kah kuhk8waongash náshpe wunnutcheganit Moses.
E.33.8 Neither will I any more remove the foot of Israel from out of the land which I have appointed for your fathers; so that they will take heed to do all that I have commanded them, according to the whole law and the statutes and the ordinances by the hand of Moses.

α.33.9 Kah Manasse uppanneusseáheuh Judah kah neg wadohkitcheg Jerusalem, kah ánue matcheseumónat penuwohteáog, neh Jehovah ushkomehtahwhoncheh wutch anaquabhettit wunnaumonuh Israel.
E.33.9 So Manasseh made Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem to err, and to do worse than the heathen, whom the LORD had destroyed before the children of Israel.

α.33.10 Kah Jehovah ken8nau Manassehoh, kah ummissinninneumoh, qut nag matta n8tam8og.
E.33.10 And the LORD spake to Manasseh, and to his people: but they would not hearken.

α.33.11 Newaj Jehovah nukkuhkauwáheont Assyriae ketass8t ukkenauwamée mugquomp8moh, neg tohqunoncheg Manasseh, ut kenugke assinnekôussehtu, kah wutohtogkupinóuh nashpe chainsash, kah wutuss8unóuh Babylon.
E.33.11 Wherefore the LORD brought upon them the captains of the host of the king of Assyria, which took Manasseh among the thorns, and bound him with fetters, and carried him to Babylon.

α.33.12 Kah onkquanumwit, nanompassumau Lord um-Manitt8moh, kah mishe hohpaheau wuhhogkuh anaquabenit um-Manitt8moh 8sh8oh.
E.33.12 And when he was in affliction, he besought the LORD his God, and humbled himself greatly before the God of his fathers,

α.33.13 Kah uppeantamauoh, kah wussohkukquoh, kah wunn8tamauoh 8wéhquetumóonk, kah wonk uppas8oh Jerusalem, en wutass8tam8onganit, neit Manasseh wahteoh, Jehovah noh Manit.
E.33.13 And prayed unto him: and he was intreated of him, and heard his supplication, and brought him again to Jerusalem into his kingdom. Then Manasseh knew that the LORD he was God.

α.33.14 Kah mahche yeu nnag ayim pummeneutunk ut poquadche wutotanat David, wutcheksuiyeu Gihon, ut 8nouhkóiyeuut wehque ahhut petutteamuk namohse squontamut, kah woweenúhsheau Ophel, kah ukqunuhqueteauun, kah ayeuteae mugquompuh upponuh ut wame Judae pummeneutausue keitotanahtu.
E.33.14 Now after this he built a wall without the city of David, on the west side of Gihon, in the valley, even to the entering in at the fish gate, and compassed about Ophel, and raised it up a very great height, and put captains of war in all the fenced cities of Judah.

α.33.15 Kah amaunau pen8e manitt8h, kah nunneukontunk wutch wekit Jehovah, kah wame altarsash nish ayikupash, ut wadchuut wekit Jehovah, kah ut Jerusalem, kah wussohw[a]uhkonuh wutch otanat.
E.33.15 And he took away the strange gods, and the idol out of the house of the LORD, and all the altars that he had built in the mount of the house of the LORD, and in Jerusalem, and cast them out of the city.

α.33.16 Kah onchteau wut-altarum Lord, kah na wuttit sephausin wunohteáe sephausuongash, kah tabuttantamóe mag8ongash, kah ann8nau Jodahoh wowussumónat Jehovah um-Manitt8moh Israel.
E.33.16 And he repaired the altar of the LORD, and sacrificed thereon peace offerings and thank offerings, and commanded Judah to serve the LORD God of Israel.

α.33.17 Qut missinninnuog ashpummeu sephausuog ut qunuhqui ayeuonganit, qut webe en Jehovahut um-Manitt8m8uh.
E.33.17 Nevertheless the people did sacrifice still in the high places, yet unto the LORD their God only.

α.33.18 Kah onkatogish wutusseongash Manasseh, kah uppeantamóonk en um-Manitt8mut, kah ukkutt8wongash naumwaenúog neg kônono[n]cheg ut 8wesuonganit Jehovah um-Manitt8moh Israel, kusseh nish ut up-b8kum8óut Israelle ketass8tamwog.
E.33.18 Now the rest of the acts of Manasseh, and his prayer unto his God, and the words of the seers that spake to him in the name of the LORD God of Israel, behold, they are written in the book of the kings of Israel.

α.33.19 Uppeantamóonk wonk, kah uttoh an God nashpe nupweshanómukup, kah wame ummatcheseonk, kah uppanneusseonk, kah ayeuongash ne adt ayikup qunuhqui ayeuongash, kah ponukup kuppiyeuash, kah kogoxumwe nunneukontunkoh, [a]sq ohhohpog: kusseh nish wussekwhosuash ut kenugke ukkutt8wongan8ut naumwaenúog.
E.33.19 His prayer also, and how God was intreated of him, and all his sins, and his trespass, and the places wherein he built high places, and set up groves and graven images, before he was humbled: behold, they are written among the sayings of the seers.

α.33.20 Neit Manasseh weesequom8mau 8shoh, kah upposekinóuh ut nehenwonche wekit: kah Ammonoh wunnaumonuh wunnompass8tamomukquoh.
E.33.20 So Manasseh slept with his fathers, and they buried him in his own house: and Amon his son reigned in his stead.

α.33.21 Amon nesnehchage & neese kodtumwohkom n8che ketass8tam8it, kah neese kodtumwáe ketass8tam88 ut Jerusalem.
E.33.21 Amon was two and twenty years old when he began to reign, and reigned two years in Jerusalem.

α.33.22 Qut usseu ne machuk ut anaquabit Jehovah, ne aseneup Manassehoh 8shoh, newutche Ammon sephamauau wame kogoxumwe nunneukontunkoh, nish Manasseh 8shoh ayimuneupash, kah nah 8tinneumuhkauoh.
E.33.22 But he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD, as did Manasseh his father: for Amon sacrificed unto all the carved images which Manasseh his father had made, and served them;

α.33.23 Kah matta hohpahéoou wuhhogkuh ut anaquabit Lord, neane 8shoh Manassehoh hohpaheoneup wuhhogkuh: qut Ammon nano panneussu.
E.33.23 And humbled not himself before the LORD, as Manasseh his father had humbled himself; but Amon trespassed more and more.

α.33.24 Kah wuttinneumoh wunnombeukonuk, kah wunnushóuh ut nehenwonche wekit.
E.33.24 And his servants conspired against him, and slew him in his own house.

α.33.25 Kah missinnin[n]úog ohkeit nusháog wame neg wanombeukononcheg ketass8t Ammon, kah missinninnúog ne ohkeit nompe ketass8tamwehteáog Josiahoh wunnaumonuh.
E.33.25 But the people of the land slew all them that had conspired against king Amon; and the people of the land made Josiah his son king in his stead.

α.34.1 IOsiah shwosuk tahshe kodtumwohkom n8che ketass8tam8it, kah ketass8tam88 ut Jerusalem nishwinchage kah nequtte kodtumwáe.
E.34.1 Josiah was eight years old when he began to reign, and he reigned in Jerusalem one and thirty years.

α.34.2 Kah usseu ne sampwag ut anaquabit Jehovah, kah pomushau ummayut Davidoh 8shoh, kah matta panneau en wuttinohkôuneiyeu, asuh menadcheuneiyeu.
E.34.2 And he did that which was right in the sight of the LORD, and walked in the ways of David his father, and declined neither to the right hand, nor to the left.

α.34.3 Newutche shwosuk adtahshik kodtumwae ketass8tam8it, ash peississit, n8che natinneahwhau um-Manitt8moh 8shoh David, kah nabo neese kodtum8k, n8che pahkehteau Judah kah Jerusalem wutch qunuhqui ayeuonganéhtu, kah kuppahtu, kah kogoxumwe nunneukontunkoh, kah sabassumwe nunneukontunkoh.
E.34.3 For in the eighth year of his reign, while he was yet young, he began to seek after the God of David his father: and in the twelfth year he began to purge Judah and Jerusalem from the high places, and the groves, and the carved images, and the molten images.

α.34.4 Kah pohquetahwau wut-altarumash Baalim ut anaquabit, kah nunneukontunkoh waabappéhtunkqhetticheh, wuttummetahwhoh, kah kuppiyeuash, kah kogoxumwe nunneukontunkoh, kah sabassumwe nunneukontunkoh, wussóquttahwhoh, kah uppuppissiyeuhkonuh, kah wusseauhkon ut woskeche 8weenohkeóont neg sephama[n]oncheg.
E.34.4 And they brake down the altars of Baalim in his presence; and the images, that were on high above them, he cut down; and the groves, and the carved images, and the molten images, he brake in pieces, and made dust of them, and strowed it upon the graves of them that had sacrificed unto them.

α.34.5 Chikossum wuskonn8ash sephausuénuog, ut wut-altarum8ôut, kah pahketeo Judah kah Jerusalem.
E.34.5 And he burnt the bones of the priests upon their altars, and cleansed Judah and Jerusalem.

α.34.6 Kah ukkeitotanáhtu Manasseh kah Ephraim, kah Simeon, wehque Naphtali, nashpe ummattokum8uh waéenu.
E.34.6 And so did he in the cities of Manasseh, and Ephraim, and Simeon, even unto Naphtali, with their mattocks round about.

α.34.7 
E.34.7 And when he had broken down the altars and the groves, and had beaten the graven images into powder, and cut down all the idols throughout all the land of Israel, he returned to Jerusalem.

α.34.8 
E.34.8 Now in the eighteenth year of his reign, when he had purged the land, and the house, he sent Shaphan the son of Azaliah, and Maaseiah the governor of the city, and Joah the son of Joahaz the recorder, to repair the house of the LORD his God.

α.34.9 
E.34.9 And when they came to Hilkiah the high priest, they delivered the money that was brought into the house of God, which the Levites that kept the doors had gathered of the hand of Manasseh and Ephraim, and of all the remnant of Israel, and of all Judah and Benjamin; and they returned to Jerusalem.

α.34.10 
E.34.10 And they put it in the hand of the workmen that had the oversight of the house of the LORD, and they gave it to the workmen that wrought in the house of the LORD, to repair and amend the house:

α.34.11 
E.34.11 Even to the artificers and builders gave they it, to buy hewn stone, and timber for couplings, and to floor the houses which the kings of Judah had destroyed.

α.34.12 
E.34.12 And the men did the work faithfully: and the overseers of them were Jahath and Obadiah, the Levites, of the sons of Merari; and Zechariah and Meshullam, of the sons of the Kohathites, to set it forward; and other of the Levites, all that could skill of instruments of musick.

α.34.13 
E.34.13 Also they were over the bearers of burdens, and were overseers of all that wrought the work in any manner of service: and of the Levites there were scribes, and officers, and porters.

α.34.14 
E.34.14 And when they brought out the money that was brought into the house of the LORD, Hilkiah the priest found a book of the law of the LORD given by Moses.

α.34.15 
E.34.15 And Hilkiah answered and said to Shaphan the scribe, I have found the book of the law in the house of the LORD. And Hilkiah delivered the book to Shaphan.

α.34.16 
E.34.16 And Shaphan carried the book to the king, and brought the king word back again, saying, All that was committed to thy servants, they do it.

α.34.17 
E.34.17 And they have gathered together the money that was found in the house of the LORD, and have delivered it into the hand of the overseers, and to the hand of the workmen.

α.34.18 
E.34.18 Then Shaphan the scribe told the king, saying, Hilkiah the priest hath given me a book. And Shaphan read it before the king.

α.34.19 
E.34.19 And it came to pass, when the king had heard the words of the law, that he rent his clothes.

α.34.20 
E.34.20 And the king commanded Hilkiah, and Ahikam the son of Shaphan, and Abdon the son of Micah, and Shaphan the scribe, and Asaiah a servant of the king's, saying,

α.34.21 
E.34.21 Go, enquire of the LORD for me, and for them that are left in Israel and in Judah, concerning the words of the book that is found: for great is the wrath of the LORD that is poured out upon us, because our fathers have not kept the word of the LORD, to do after all that is written in this book.

α.34.22 
E.34.22 And Hilkiah, and they that the king had appointed, went to Huldah the prophetess, the wife of Shallum the son of Tikvath, the son of Hasrah, keeper of the wardrobe; (now she dwelt in Jerusalem in the college:) and they spake to her to that effect.

α.34.23 
E.34.23 And she answered them, Thus saith the LORD God of Israel, Tell ye the man that sent you to me,

α.34.24 
E.34.24 Thus saith the LORD, Behold, I will bring evil upon this place, and upon the inhabitants thereof, even all the curses that are written in the book which they have read before the king of Judah:

α.34.25 
E.34.25 Because they have forsaken me, and have burned incense unto other gods, that they might provoke me to anger with all the works of their hands; therefore my wrath shall be poured out upon this place, and shall not be quenched.

α.34.26 
E.34.26 And as for the king of Judah, who sent you to enquire of the LORD, so shall ye say unto him, Thus saith the LORD God of Israel concerning the words which thou hast heard;

α.34.27 
E.34.27 Because thine heart was tender, and thou didst humble thyself before God, when thou heardest his words against this place, and against the inhabitants thereof, and humbledst thyself before me, and didst rend thy clothes, and weep before me; I have even heard thee also, saith the LORD.

α.34.28 
E.34.28 Behold, I will gather thee to thy fathers, and thou shalt be gathered to thy grave in peace, neither shall thine eyes see all the evil that I will bring upon this place, and upon the inhabitants of the same. So they brought the king word again.

α.34.29 
E.34.29 Then the king sent and gathered together all the elders of Judah and Jerusalem.

α.34.30 
E.34.30 And the king went up into the house of the LORD, and all the men of Judah, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and the priests, and the Levites, and all the people, great and small: and he read in their ears all the words of the book of the covenant that was found in the house of the LORD.

α.34.31 
E.34.31 And the king stood in his place, and made a covenant before the LORD, to walk after the LORD, and to keep his commandments, and his testimonies, and his statutes, with all his heart, and with all his soul, to perform the words of the covenant which are written in this book.

α.34.32 
E.34.32 And he caused all that were present in Jerusalem and Benjamin to stand to it. And the inhabitants of Jerusalem did according to the covenant of God, the God of their fathers.

α.34.33 
E.34.33 And Josiah took away all the abominations out of all the countries that pertained to the children of Israel, and made all that were present in Israel to serve, even to serve the LORD their God. And all his days they departed not from following the LORD, the God of their fathers.

α.35.1 
E.35.1 Moreover Josiah kept a passover unto the LORD in Jerusalem: and they killed the passover on the fourteenth day of the first month.

α.35.2 
E.35.2 And he set the priests in their charges, and encouraged them to the service of the house of the LORD,

α.35.3 
E.35.3 And said unto the Levites that taught all Israel, which were holy unto the LORD, Put the holy ark in the house which Solomon the son of David king of Israel did build; it shall not be a burden upon your shoulders: serve now the LORD your God, and his people Israel,

α.35.4 
E.35.4 And prepare yourselves by the houses of your fathers, after your courses, according to the writing of David king of Israel, and according to the writing of Solomon his son.

α.35.5 
E.35.5 And stand in the holy place according to the divisions of the families of the fathers of your brethren the people, and after the division of the families of the Levites.

α.35.6 
E.35.6 So kill the passover, and sanctify yourselves, and prepare your brethren, that they may do according to the word of the LORD by the hand of Moses.

α.35.7 
E.35.7 And Josiah gave to the people, of the flock, lambs and kids, all for the passover offerings, for all that were present, to the number of thirty thousand, and three thousand bullocks: these were of the king's substance.

α.35.8 
E.35.8 And his princes gave willingly unto the people, to the priests, and to the Levites: Hilkiah and Zechariah and Jehiel, rulers of the house of God, gave unto the priests for the passover offerings two thousand and six hundred small cattle and three hundred oxen.

α.35.9 
E.35.9 Conaniah also, and Shemaiah and Nethaneel, his brethren, and Hashabiah and Jeiel and Jozabad, chief of the Levites, gave unto the Levites for passover offerings five thousand small cattle, and five hundred oxen.

α.35.10 
E.35.10 So the service was prepared, and the priests stood in their place, and the Levites in their courses, according to the king's commandment.

α.35.11 
E.35.11 And they killed the passover, and the priests sprinkled the blood from their hands, and the Levites flayed them.

α.35.12 
E.35.12 And they removed the burnt offerings, that they might give according to the divisions of the families of the people, to offer unto the LORD, as it is written in the book of Moses. And so did they with the oxen.

α.35.13 
E.35.13 And they roasted the passover with fire according to the ordinance: but the other holy offerings sod they in pots, and in caldrons, and in pans, and divided them speedily among all the people.

α.35.14 
E.35.14 And afterward they made ready for themselves, and for the priests: because the priests the sons of Aaron were busied in offering of burnt offerings and the fat until night; therefore the Levites prepared for themselves, and for the priests the sons of Aaron.

α.35.15 
E.35.15 And the singers the sons of Asaph were in their place, according to the commandment of David, and Asaph, and Heman, and Jeduthun the king's seer; and the porters waited at every gate; they might not depart from their service; for their brethren the Levites prepared for them.

α.35.16 
E.35.16 So all the service of the LORD was prepared the same day, to keep the passover, and to offer burnt offerings upon the altar of the LORD, according to the commandment of king Josiah.

α.35.17 
E.35.17 And the children of Israel that were present kept the passover at that time, and the feast of unleavened bread seven days.

α.35.18 
E.35.18 And there was no passover like to that kept in Israel from the days of Samuel the prophet; neither did all the kings of Israel keep such a passover as Josiah kept, and the priests, and the Levites, and all Judah and Israel that were present, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem.

α.35.19 
E.35.19 In the eighteenth year of the reign of Josiah was this passover kept.

α.35.20 
E.35.20 After all this, when Josiah had prepared the temple, Necho king of Egypt came up to fight against Charchemish by Euphrates: and Josiah went out against him.

α.35.21 
E.35.21 But he sent ambassadors to him, saying, What have I to do with thee, thou king of Judah? I come not against thee this day, but against the house wherewith I have war: for God commanded me to make haste: forbear thee from meddling with God, who is with me, that he destroy thee not.

α.35.22 
E.35.22 Nevertheless Josiah would not turn his face from him, but disguised himself, that he might fight with him, and hearkened not unto the words of Necho from the mouth of God, and came to fight in the valley of Megiddo.

α.35.23 
E.35.23 And the archers shot at king Josiah; and the king said to his servants, Have me away; for I am sore wounded.

α.35.24 
E.35.24 His servants therefore took him out of that chariot, and put him in the second chariot that he had; and they brought him to Jerusalem, and he died, and was buried in one of the sepulchres of his fathers. And all Judah and Jerusalem mourned for Josiah.

α.35.25 
E.35.25 And Jeremiah lamented for Josiah: and all the singing men and the singing women spake of Josiah in their lamentations to this day, and made them an ordinance in Israel: and, behold, they are written in the lamentations.

α.35.26 
E.35.26 Now the rest of the acts of Josiah, and his goodness, according to that which was written in the law of the LORD,

α.35.27 
E.35.27 And his deeds, first and last, behold, they are written in the book of the kings of Israel and Judah.

α.36.1 NEit missinninnuog ne ohkeit nemunaog Jehoahazoh wunnaumonuh Josiah, kah wunnompe ketass8tamuhkonouh ut Jerusalem.
E.36.1 Then the people of the land took Jehoahaz the son of Josiah, and made him king in his father's stead in Jerusalem.

α.36.2 Kah Jehoahaz nesnehchage kodtumwohkom kah nish, n8che ketass8tam8it, kah nishuoh nepáuzoh ketass8tam88 ut Jerusalem.
E.36.2 Jehoahaz was twenty and three years old when he began to reign, and he reigned three months in Jerusalem.

α.36.3 Kah [E]gypte ketass8t wutontsapheuh ut Jerusalem, kah ôadtehteaheau ne ohke nequt pasuk8e silvere talentsash, kah pasuk golde talent.
E.36.3 And the king of Egypt put him down at Jerusalem, and condemned the land in an hundred talents of silver and a talent of gold.

α.36.4 Kah [E]gypte ketass8t Eliakimoh wematoh ketass8tamwaheau ut Judah kah Jerusalem, káh wutôs8wunnaumauoh 8wesuonk Jehojakim, kah Necho nemunau Jehoahazoh wematoh, kah wutuss8wunuh Egypt.
E.36.4 And the king of Egypt made Eliakim his brother king over Judah and Jerusalem, and turned his name to Jehoiakim. And Necho took Jehoahaz his brother, and carried him to Egypt.

α.36.5 Jehojakim noh nesnechage kodtumwohkom, kah napanna n8che ketass8tam8it, kah nabo nequtte kodtumwae ketass8tam88 ut Jerusalem, kah ussu ne machuk ut anaquabit Jehovahoh ummanitt8moh.
E.36.5 Jehoiakim was twenty and five years old when he began to reign, and he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem: and he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD his God.

α.36.6 Nebuchadnezzar Babiloné ketass8t wutayeuuhkonuh, kah wuttohtogkupunoh, fettersash, kah wutuss8wunuh Babilon.
E.36.6 Against him came up Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, and bound him in fetters, to carry him to Babylon.

α.36.7 Nebuchadnezzar wonk monchadtoou nawutch auwohteaongash wutch wekit Jehovah en Babilon, kah upponamunash wuttemplumut ut Babilon.
E.36.7 Nebuchadnezzar also carried of the vessels of the house of the LORD to Babylon, and put them in his temple at Babylon.

α.36.8 Kah onkatogish wutusseongash Jehojakim, kah wunnishkeneunkquott8mash nish aseipash, kah ne namehteauit, kusseh nish wussukwhosuash ut up-b8kum8out Israelle kah Judae ketass8twamwog kah Jehojakinoh wunnaumonuh wunnompass8tamomukquoh.
E.36.8 Now the rest of the acts of Jehoiakim, and his abominations which he did, and that which was found in him, behold, they are written in the book of the kings of Israel and Judah: and Jehoiachin his son reigned in his stead.

α.36.9 Jehoiachin shwosuk tahshe kodtumwohkomup n8che ketass8tam8it, kah ketass8tam88 nishuoh nepauzoh, jah piogkuk[-]kesukquae ut Jerusalem, kah usseu ne machut ut anaquabit Jehovah.
E.36.9 Jehoiachin was eight years old when he began to reign, and he reigned three months and ten days in Jerusalem: and he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD.

α.36.10 Kah kodtum8 mahtshunk, Nebuchadnezzar ketass8t, wunnegont8ónuh, kah uppas8óuh Babylon nashpe tapeneunkquotte wishquash ut wekit Jehovah, kah Zedekiahoh wematoh ketass8tamwaheau ut Judah kah Jerusalem.
E.36.10 And when the year was expired, king Nebuchadnezzar sent, and brought him to Babylon, with the goodly vessels of the house of the LORD, and made Zedekiah his brother king over Judah and Jerusalem.

α.36.11 Zedekiah nesnechage kah nequtta kodtumwohkom n8che ketass8tam8it, kah nabo nequtta kodtumwáe ketass8tum88 ut Jerusalem,
E.36.11 Zedekiah was one and twenty years old when he began to reign, and reigned eleven years in Jerusalem.

α.36.12 Kah ussu ne machuk ut anaquabit Jehovah, um-Manitt8moh, matta hohpáheaou ut anaquabit Jeremiah quoshodtuk wutch wutt8nut Jehovah.
E.36.12 And he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD his God, and humbled not himself before Jeremiah the prophet speaking from the mouth of the LORD.

α.36.13 Wonk cheketauau Nebuchadnezzaroh neh chadchekeyeuwáhikqutcheh nashpe Godoh, qut chetauwèhteau wussittipuk, kah menehkéhteau wuttah, matta woh ukquinnuppeinat en Jehovahut um-Manitt8moh Isral.
E.36.13 And he also rebelled against king Nebuchadnezzar, who had made him swear by God: but he stiffened his neck, and hardened his heart from turning unto the LORD God of Israel.

α.36.14 Nano wame kehcheyeue sephausuén[u]og kah missinninnúog m8cheke panneusseog, neaunag wame wunnishkeneunkqott8m8ash penuwohteaog, kah nishketeauog wek Jehovah, ne waneetupanatamwahteunkup ut Jerusalem. 
E.36.14 Moreover all the chief of the priests, and the people, transgressed very much after all the abominations of the heathen; and polluted the house of the LORD which he had hallowed in Jerusalem.

α.36.15 Kah Jehovah 8sh8oh um-Manitt8m8oh n$noh wuttin ann8non nashpe wunnutchegan8out wutann8naénumoh, nompoáeu omohkeu, kah ann8team8 newutche kitteamonteanumau nummissinninneumoh, kah wutappuonganit.
E.36.15 And the LORD God of their fathers sent to them by his messengers, rising up betimes, and sending; because he had compassion on his people, and on his dwelling place:

α.36.16 Qut nag momonehtauaog wutann8naenumoh God, kah mishanantamwog wuttinn8waongash, kah onkquanumwehteaog ukquoshodtumwaeneumoh, nô pajeh umm8squanittam8onk Jehovah ayeuuhkonittue neepauwehtauau ummissinninneumoh, n[ó] pajeh wanne netskehettinneát.
E.36.16 But they mocked the messengers of God, and despised his words, and misused his prophets, until the wrath of the LORD arose against his people, till there was no remedy.

α.36.17 Newaj nukkuhkomwaheont Caldee ketass8t, noh nohtauont 8skeneumoh ut wunneetupanatamwe wetuomut, kah wanne kitteamonteanumoou wuskeniñuh, asuh nunksquaesoh, kehchiis, asuh noh mattauntog, wame ummagun ut wunnutcheganit.
E.36.17 Therefore he brought upon them the king of the Chaldees, who slew their young men with the sword in the house of their sanctuary, and had no compassion upon young man or maiden, old man, or him that stooped for age: he gave them all into his hand.

α.36.18 Káh wame auwohteaongash ut wekit God, magogish kah papeississinitcheh, kah nompak8unash wekit Jehovah, kah wunnompak8unash ketass8t, kah wussontimosumoh, wame yeush uppaudtauunash Babilon
E.36.18 And all the vessels of the house of God, great and small, and the treasures of the house of the LORD, and the treasures of the king, and of his princes; all these he brought to Babylon.

α.36.19 Kah chikkosumwog wek God, kah tauwutchahthamwog Jerusaleme pummeneutunk, kah chikosum wáme mishittae komukqutash nashpé n8tau, kah matchehteau wame tapeneunkquttue wishquash.
E.36.19 And they burnt the house of God, and brake down the wall of Jerusalem, and burnt all the palaces thereof with fire, and destroyed all the goodly vessels thereof.

α.36.20 Kah neh tomwuttamunutcheh togkodteg, wutuss8wunah Babilon: uttoh adt wuttinneumoh, kah wunnaumonuh, nó pajeh ketass8tam8it Persiae ketass8tamoonk.
E.36.20 And them that had escaped from the sword carried he away to Babylon; where they were servants to him and his sons until the reign of the kingdom of Persia:

α.36.21 Pak[o]dche ussenat wuttinn8waonk Jehovah nashpe wutt8n Jeremiah, nó pajeh ohke nanawehteomuk wussabbath8mash, newutché nisahke touwussik, nanawehteau wussabbat8mash, papogkodche nesausuk tahshinchage kodtumwae.
E.36.21 To fulfil the word of the LORD by the mouth of Jeremiah, until the land had enjoyed her sabbaths: for as long as she lay desolate she kept sabbath, to fulfil threescore and ten years.

α.36.22 Kah negonne kodtum8k Cyrus Persiae ketass8t (ne ukkutt8onk Jehovah ne an8wop wutt8n Jeremiah woh pakodche nnih) Jehovah wogkouunau wunnashauonguh Cyrus Persiae ketass8t: newaj wahteauwahuau papashpe wame wutass8tam8onganit, kah wonk 8sukuhhumun, n8wau,
E.36.22 Now in the first year of Cyrus king of Persia, that the word of the LORD spoken by the mouth of Jeremiah might be accomplished, the LORD stirred up the spirit of Cyrus king of Persia, that he made a proclamation throughout all his kingdom, and put it also in writing, saying,

α.36.23 Yeu wussin Cyrus Persiae ketass8t, wame ketass8tam8ongash ut ohkeit Jehovah kesukque Manit nuttinnumunkqunash, kah nummeechumuhkonuk n8wekuhkauonat, ut Jerusalem, ne ut Judah, howan noh, kenugke kenaau wame ummissinninneumoh: Jehovahoh um-Manitt8moh weetomukqutch, kah kuhkuhqueitch.
E.36.23 Thus saith Cyrus king of Persia, All the kingdoms of the earth hath the LORD God of heaven given me; and he hath charged me to build him an house in Jerusalem, which is in Judah. Who is there among you of all his people?  The LORD his God be with him, and let him go up.