
α.1.1 NEit Moab cheketauáog [J]sraeloh mahche nupuk Ahab.
E.1.1 Then Moab rebelled against Israel after the death of Ahab.

α.1.2 Kah Ahazia penushau pannuppe kenogkeneganit, ut 8waabe chamberumut, ne ut Samaria, kah mahchinau, kah ann8nau ann8naénúh, kah nah wuttinuh, monchek nat8tomok Baal-zebub Ekrone Manit uttoh woh nutin k[é]kon wutch yeu mahchinaonk.
E.1.2 And Ahaziah fell down through a lattice in his upper chamber that was in Samaria, and was sick: and he sent messengers, and said unto them, Go, enquire of Baalzebub the god of Ekron whether I shall recover of this disease.

α.1.3 Qut wut-Angelumoh Jehovah unnau Elijahoh wutTishbit, néepaush kuhkuhquish nogkishkáuonat wutañ8naeneumoh ketass8t ut Samaria, kah nag us, sunnummatta newutche matta Manitt8un8 ut Israel kummonchenaóont nat8tomauonat Ekronne Manit.
E.1.3 But the angel of the LORD said to Elijah the Tishbite, Arise, go up to meet the messengers of the king of Samaria, and say unto them, Is it not because there is not a God in Israel, that ye go to enquire of Baalzebub the god of Ekron?

α.1.4 Newutche yeuyeu, yeu wussin Jehovah, matta pish k8womsuh wutch ne [a]pinneat, ne kohkukquean, qut pish wunnamuhkut kenup, kah Elijah amai.
E.1.4 Now therefore thus saith the LORD, Thou shalt not come down from that bed on which thou art gone up, but shalt surely die. And Elijah departed.

α.1.5 Kah ann8naenuh qushkehtunkquit nah wuttinuh, tohwutch yeuyeu qushkeog?
E.1.5 And when the messengers turned back unto him, he said unto them, Why are ye now turned back?

α.1.6 Kah nag wuttinouh, na wosketomp kuhkuhqueu nunnogskunkqun, kah nuttugqun, monchek, qushkek wonk en ketass8tamut noh ann8nukqueog, kah unnok, yeu wussin Jehovah, suñummatta newutche matta Manitt8an8h ut Israél, newaj a[ñ]8teamwean nat8tomauonat Baal-zebub Ekronne Manit; newajeh matta pish n8ke[a]n wutch appinneat, ne en kuhkuhquean, qut pish wunnamuhkut kenup.
E.1.6 And they said unto him, There came a man up to meet us, and said unto us, Go, turn again unto the king that sent you, and say unto him, Thus saith the LORD, Is it not because there is not a God in Israel, that thou sendest to enquire of Baalzebub the god of Ekron? therefore thou shalt not come down from that bed on which thou art gone up, but shalt surely die.

α.1.7 Kah nah wuttinuh toh unnussu noh kohkuhqut kenogskunkqunnaòont, kah yeush anukqueog kutt8wongash?
E.1.7 And he said unto them, What manner of man was he which came up to meet you, and told you these words?

α.1.8 Kah nag namp8hamwog, noh 8weshaginnúe wosketomp, puttukquobpissu mattagane puttukquobpus, ut wusseganohtukqut, kah n8wau noh Elijah wut-Tishbit,
E.1.8 And they answered him, He was an hairy man, and girt with a girdle of leather about his loins. And he said, It is Elijah the Tishbite.

α.1.9 Neit ketass8t ann8nau na en napanna tahshinchagkussue Mugquompoh, weech napaña wuteashinehchagkusseumoh: kah na en kuhkuhqueu (kah kusseh appeu kutôhkoiyeuut) kah ukken8nuh, ken Manittowomp, ketass8t n8wau, w8msish.
E.1.9 Then the king sent unto him a captain of fifty with his fifty. And he went up to him: and, behold, he sat on the top of an hill. And he spake unto him, Thou man of God, the king hath said, Come down.

α.1.10 Kah Elijah namp8ham, kah unnau, napanna tahshinchagkussue Mugquomp[u]h, nen Manittowompaeon, neit n8teau n8kem8itch wutch kesukqut, kah m[á]hchukishukquish, ken kah napanna kutteashenehchag kusseumog, kah ne ummahchekuswoh, kah napanna wutteashinnehchag kusseumoh.
E.1.10 And Elijah answered and said to the captain of fifty, If I be a man of God, then let fire come down from heaven, and consume thee and thy fifty. And there came down fire from heaven, and consumed him and his fifty.

α.1.11 Kah wonk na en ann8nau onkatoge napanna tahshinchagkussue Mugquompuh, weeche napanna wutteashinehchagkusseumoh, kah namp8ham kah wuttinuh woi Manittowomp, yeu wussin ketass8t, teanuk w8msish.
E.1.11 Again also he sent unto him another captain of fifty with his fifty. And he answered and said unto him, O man of God, thus hath the king said, Come down quickly.

α.1.12 Kah Elijah namp8ham, kah nah wuttinuh, nen manittowompáeon, n8teau n8kem8utch wutch kesukqut, kah mahcheku[sh]ikqu[i]sh ken kah napanna kutteashinehchagkusseum[ò]g, kah wunn8tom manit n8kemo wutch kesukqut, kah neh mahchekuswoh, kah napanna wutteashinehchag kusseumoh.
E.1.12 And Elijah answered and said unto them, If I be a man of God, let fire come down from heaven, and consume thee and thy fifty. And the fire of God came down from heaven, and consumed him and his fifty.

α.1.13 Kah wonk ann8nau mugquompoh: nash8initche napanna tahshinchagkussineat, kah napanna wutteashinne chagkussuemoh, kah nashuit mugquomp ut napanna tahshinchagkussinneat, kuhkuhqueu, kah peyau, kah nauwaeu [u]kkuttukqut ut anaqu[a]bit Elijah, kah wunnanompassumuh, kah wuttinuh, woi Manittowomp, k8wehquetumoush, nuppomantamóonk, kah uppomantam8ongan8 yeug napanna tahshinchagkodtog kittinneumog, mishôadtéhettich ut anaqu[â]bean.
E.1.13 And he sent again a captain of the third fifty with his fifty. And the third captain of fifty went up, and came and fell on his knees before Elijah, and besought him, and said unto him, O man of God, I pray thee, let my life, and the life of these fifty thy servants, be precious in thy sight.

α.1.14 Kusseh na wutch n8kem8 n8teau wutch kesukqut, kah mahchikkuswau nees8oh ummumugquompom8oh negonáe napanna ahattahshinehchagkussitcheg, kah napaña wutteashinéhchagkusseum8uh, ne wutche yeuyeu nuppomantam8onk mish[ô]adtich ut anaquabean.
E.1.14 Behold, there came fire down from heaven, and burnt up the two captains of the former fifties with their fifties: therefore let my life now be precious in thy sight.

α.1.15 Kah wutangelumoh Jehovah unnau Elijahoh, weeche w8mseum, kah ahque qush, kah neepau, kah 8weeche w8mseumoh en ketass8tamwut.
E.1.15 And the angel of the LORD said unto Elijah, Go down with him: be not afraid of him. And he arose, and went down with him unto the king.

α.1.16 Kah wuttinuh, yeu wussin Jehovah, newutche kutann8n ann8naéenuog, nat8tomauonat Baal-zebub Ekrone manit, sunnummatta newutche matta Manitt8un8 ut Israel, nat8tomuhkonat ut wuttinn8waonganit, newajeh matta pish womsean wutch apinneat, ne kohkuhquean, qut pish wunnamuhkut kenup.
E.1.16 And he said unto him, Thus saith the LORD, Forasmuch as thou hast sent messengers to enquire of Baalzebub the god of Ekron, is it not because there is no God in Israel to enquire of his word? therefore thou shalt not come down off that bed on which thou art gone up, but shalt surely die.

α.1.17 Neit nupp8, neaunak wuttinn8waonk Jehovah, ne Elijah an8wadt: kah Jehoram wunnompe ketass8tamo[m]ukquoh, nahohtoeu ukkodtum8m Jehoram, wunnaumonuh Jehoshaphat, ketass8t ut Judah, newutche matta wunnaumonieu.
E.1.17 So he died according to the word of the LORD which Elijah had spoken. And Jehoram reigned in his stead in the second year of Jehoram the son of Jehoshaphat king of Judah; because he had no son.

α.1.18 Kah onkatogish wutusseongash Ahaziah, nish aséchish, sunnummatta wussukwhosinóash ut Israelle ketass8tamwog ummequontamóe wussukwhosuongan8óut.
E.1.18 Now the rest of the acts of Ahaziah which he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?

α.2.1 KAh nnih, Jehovah kod neemunont Elijahoh en kesukqut nashpe pemsquoh, Elijah weechaau Elishahoh, wutch Gilgal.
E.2.1 And it came to pass, when the LORD would take up Elijah into heaven by a whirlwind, that Elijah went with Elisha from Gilgal.

α.2.2 Kah Elijah unnau Elishahoh, yeu apsh, k8wehquetumoush, newutche Jehovah nutann8nuk en Bethel: kah Elisha wuttinuh, pomontog Jehovah, kah pomontog kukketeahogkou: matta kenukkonunn8: neit w8msuog en Bethel
E.2.2 And Elijah said unto Elisha, Tarry here, I pray thee; for the LORD hath sent me to Bethel. And Elisha said unto him, As the LORD liveth, and as thy soul liveth, I will not leave thee. So they went down to Bethel.

α.2.3 Kah wunnaumon[a]uh quoshodtumwaenúog, neg ut Bethel, sohhamw[o]g en Elishaut, kah wuttinóuh, sun k8wahteoh Jehovah pish amaunau kussontimomoh wutch kuppuhkukqut, yeu kesukok? kah n8wau, nux, n8wahteoun, netohshuagk.
E.2.3 And the sons of the prophets that were at Bethel came forth to Elisha, and said unto him, Knowest thou that the LORD will take away thy master from thy head to day? And he said, Yea, I know it; hold ye your peace.

α.2.4 Kah Elijah wuttinuh, Elisha, yeu apsh, k8wehquetumoush, newutche Jehovah nutann8nuk en Jericho: kah n8wau pomontog Jehovah, kah pomontog kukketeahogkou matta kenukkonunn8: neit peyaog Jericho.
E.2.4 And Elijah said unto him, Elisha, tarry here, I pray thee; for the LORD hath sent me to Jericho. And he said, As the LORD liveth, and as thy soul liveth, I will not leave thee. So they came to Jericho.

α.2.5 Kah wunnaumonauh quoshodtumwaenuog neg ut Jericho, peyaonaog Elishahoh, kah wuttinóuh, sun k8wahteoh, Lord pish amaunau kussontimomoh, wutch kuppuhukqut, yeu kesuk? kah namp8ham, nux, n8wahteauun, netohshuagk,
E.2.5 And the sons of the prophets that were at Jericho came to Elisha, and said unto him, Knowest thou that the LORD will take away thy master from thy head to day? And he answered, Yea, I know it; hold ye your peace.

α.2.6 Kah Elijah wuttinuh, k8wehquetumoush, yeu apsh newutche Jehovah nutann8nuk en Jordan: kah n8wau, pomontog Jehovah, kah pomontog kukketeahogkou matta kenukon[ú]nn8, kah nag neeswe kutchittôusháog.
E.2.6 And Elijah said unto him, Tarry, I pray thee, here; for the LORD hath sent me to Jordan. And he said, As the LORD liveth, and as thy soul liveth, I will not leave thee. And they two went on.

α.2.7 Kah napanna tahshinchagkodtog wunnaumonáuh quoshodtumwaenúog, moncheog, kah nôadtit neepoog, kenauwompam[ó]nat: kah nag neeswe kehchekompóog Jordan.
E.2.7 And fifty men of the sons of the prophets went, and stood to view afar off: and they two stood by Jordan.

α.2.8 Kah Elijah neemunum ummonak, kah 8weeshqua[n]umun, kah togkodtam nippeash kah nish chippem8ash yeu nogque$in kah yâ$in, newaj neeswe qushkodteahettit, ut nabohteaiyeuut.
E.2.8 And Elijah took his mantle, and wrapped it together, and smote the waters, and they were divided hither and thither, so that they two went over on dry ground.

α.2.9 Kah n$nih, quoshkodteáhettit, Elijah unnau Elishahoh, wéhqu[t]ish toh woh áseanshin, asquam áammaneumukup wutch kuhhogkat. Kah Elisha n8wau, k8wehquetumoush, wonk neesit tahshe kenushaúanitt8m appehtunkquttei.
E.2.9 And it came to pass, when they were gone over, that Elijah said unto Elisha, Ask what I shall do for thee, before I be taken away from thee. And Elisha said, I pray thee, let a double portion of thy spirit be upon me.

α.2.10 Kah n8wau, k8wehquetum ne siohkog, qut naéean, amanimuk wutch kuhhogkat, pish kuttinhettean: qut matta n$nán8g, matta pish n$nano.
E.2.10 And he said, Thou hast asked a hard thing: nevertheless, if thou see me when I am taken from thee, it shall be so unto thee; but if not, it shall not be so.

α.2.11 Kah n$nih, ne an kutchittôusháhettit, kusseh, n8tae chariot, kah n8tàe horsesog, kah wutchippinukquneau, kah Elijah kuhkuhqueu, nashpe pemsquoh, en kesukqut.
E.2.11 And it came to pass, as they still went on, and talked, that, behold, there appeared a chariot of fire, and horses of fire, and parted them both asunder; and Elijah went up by a whirlwind into heaven.

α.2.12 Kah Elisha wunnaumun, kah mishont8wau, N8sh, n8sh, wutchariotum Israel, kah wut-horsmenumoh. Kah matta wonk wunnauuh: kah mussinnum nehenwonche wuthogk8onk, kah wunneesinneashadtauun.
E.2.12 And Elisha saw it, and he cried, My father, my father, the chariot of Israel, and the horsemen thereof. And he saw him no more: and he took hold of his own clothes, and rent them in two pieces.

α.2.13 Kah wonk neemunum umm8nak Elijah, ne wuhhogkat wutch n8kshunk, kah qushkeu, kah neepau wussápanuk Jordan.
E.2.13 He took up also the mantle of Elijah that fell from him, and went back, and stood by the bank of Jordan;

α.2.14 Kah neemunum ummonak Elijah ne panshunk, kah togkodtam nippe, kah n8wau, uttiyeuoh Jehovah um-Manitt8moh Elijah? kah wonk togkodtog nippeash, ne woshwem8, yeu$in kah yâ$in: kah Elisha qushkodteau.
E.2.14 And he took the mantle of Elijah that fell from him, and smote the waters, and said, Where is the LORD God of Elijah? and when he also had smitten the waters, they parted hither and thither: and Elisha went over.

α.2.15 K[â]h wunnaumonauh quoshodtumwaénuog, neg kônauwómpeuhpann[e]g ut Jericho, nauáhettit, n8waog, wunnashauanitt8moh Elijah, áppu Elishaut: kah peyaog nogushkauónat, kah nauwáéog ut anaquabenit en ohkekontu.
E.2.15 And when the sons of the prophets which were to view at Jericho saw him, they said, The spirit of Elijah doth rest on Elisha. And they came to meet him, and bowed themselves to the ground before him.

α.2.16 Kah nag wuttinóuh, kusseh, yeuyeu na weeche kittinneumog napanna tahshinchagkodtog menuhkesúenuog, monchehettich, k8wehquetumunumun, natinnéawhahettich kussontimomoh, ishkont páguodcheh wunnashauanitt8moh Jehovah, wuttahshinuh, kah upponuh woh toh wadchuut, asuh woh toh 8nouhkoiyeuut; kah n8wau, ahque ann8team8k.
E.2.16 And they said unto him, Behold now, there be with thy servants fifty strong men; let them go, we pray thee, and seek thy master: lest peradventure the Spirit of the LORD hath taken him up, and cast him upon some mountain, or into some valley. And he said, Ye shall not send.

α.2.17 Kah chekeimahettit nô pajeh wutakodchinat, n8wau, ann8team8k, newaj nag ann8nahettit napanna ta[g]shinchagkodtoh wosketompuh, kah natinahteaog nishikquinne, qut matta wunnamheuh,
E.2.17 And when they urged him till he was ashamed, he said, Send. They sent therefore fifty men; and they sought three days, but found him not.

α.2.18 Kah wonk paaonáhettit (newutche appu Jericho) wuttinuh, sunnummatta kuttinnunom8us, ahque monchek?
E.2.18 And when they came again to him, (for he tarried at Jericho,) he said unto them, Did I not say unto you, Go not?

α.2.19 Kah otanae wosketompaog unnaog Elishahoh, kusseh k8wehquetumunumun, ne otanae ayeuonk wunnegen, neane nag* nussontimomun, qut nippe matchit, kah ohke mat neekittea8mun8.
E.2.19 And the men of the city said unto Elisha, Behold, I pray thee, the situation of this city is pleasant, as my lord seeth: but the water is naught, and the ground barren.

α.2.20 Kah n8wau, paudtiek wuske wisq, kah ne ponam8k Salt, kah uppaudtauoneau.
E.2.20 And he said, Bring me a new cruse, and put salt therein. And they brought it to him.

α.2.21 Kah sohham en tohkekomuuttu kah ne wuttinuhkon Salt, kah n8wau, yeu wussin Jehovah,[,] nunneetskehteouh yeush nippeash, na matta pish wonk nupp8onk asuh me[h]cheyeuonk.
E.2.21 And he went forth unto the spring of the waters, and cast the salt in there, and said, Thus saith the LORD, I have healed these waters; there shall not be from thence any more death or barren land.

α.2.22 Neit nippeash neetskehteauunash pajeh yeu kesukok, neaunak wuttinn8waonk Elisha, ne an8wop.
E.2.22 So the waters were healed unto this day, according to the saying of Elisha which he spake.

α.2.23 Kah na wutch kuhkuhqueu en Bethel: kah kohkuhquit en mayut, na 8ch sohhamuneau keitotanat mukkiesog, kah wuttinouh, kuhkuhquish pompasuhkonkanontup, kuhkuhquish pompasuhkonkanontup.
E.2.23 And he went up from thence unto Bethel: and as he was going up by the way, there came forth little children out of the city, and mocked him, and said unto him, Go up, thou bald head; go up, thou bald head.

α.2.24 Kah ompamuhquaeu kah ummonunneauoh, kah nah ummattanumuh ut 8wesuonganit Jehovah: kah na 8ch sohhamuneau kuppahtu, ne[e]suog squoshimwe mashquog, kah na 8ch sokqshanoneau yauunchagkussuoh kah neesuoh mukkioh.
E.2.24 And he turned back, and looked on them, and cursed them in the name of the LORD. And there came forth two she bears out of the wood, and tare forty and two children of them.

α.2.25 Kah na 8mun en wadchuut Carmel, kah na 8ch qushken en Samaria.
E.2.25 And he went from thence to mount Carmel, and from thence he returned to Samaria.

α.3.1 KAh Jehoram wunnaumonuh Ahab n8che ketass8tam88 ut Israel, ut Samaria, nabo shwosuk wutteashe kodtum8mut Jehosophat ketass8t ut Judah, kah ketass8tam88 nabo neese kodtumwae.
E.3.1 Now Jehoram the son of Ahab began to reign over Israel in Samaria the eighteenth year of Jehoshaphat king of Judah, and reigned twelve years.

α.3.2 Kah matcheussu ut anaquabit Jehovah, qut matta neane 8shoh, kah neane ohkasoh: newutche amaunau Baalle nunneukontunkoh ne 8sh8 kezheoncheh.
E.3.2 And he wrought evil in the sight of the LORD; but not like his father, and like his mother: for he put away the image of Baal that his father had made.

α.3.3 Qut mósogquehtam ummatcheseongash Jeroboam wunnaumonuh Nebat, noh matcheseaheont Israelloh: matta nash wunnukkodtum8unash.
E.3.3 Nevertheless he cleaved unto the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, which made Israel to sin; he departed not therefrom.

α.3.4 Kah Mesha Moabe ketass8t, noh nanawunau, shepsoh, kah âadtuhkauau Israelle ketass8toh nequt pasuk8e muttannonganog kussuog Lambsog, kah nequt pasuk8e muttannonganog kussuog ramsog, nashpe 8w8lum8uh.
E.3.4 And Mesha king of Moab was a sheepmaster, and rendered unto the king of Israel an hundred thousand lambs, and an hundred thousand rams, with the wool.

α.3.5 Qut nnih, Ahab napuk, Moabe ketass8t cheketauau Israelle ketass8t.
E.3.5 But it came to pass, when Ahab was dead, that the king of Moab rebelled against the king of Israel.

α.3.6 Kah ketass8t Joram sohham wutch Samaria ne nan ahquompak: kah ogkemau wame Israel.
E.3.6 And king Jehoram went out of Samaria the same time, and numbered all Israel.

α.3.7 Kah monchu, kah negont8au Jehoshaphatoh ketass8t ut Judah n8wau, Moabe ketass8t nutayeuuhkonittue cheketeunk, k8weechaieh en ayeuwuttinneat ayeuuhkonittue Moab? kah n8wau nukkuhkuhquem, nen netatupe ken, nummissinninneumog neane kummissinninneumog, nuthorsesumog neane kuthorsesumoh.
E.3.7 And he went and sent to Jehoshaphat the king of Judah, saying, The king of Moab hath rebelled against me: wilt thou go with me against Moab to battle? And he said, I will go up: I am as thou art, my people as thy people, and my horses as thy horses.

α.3.8 Kah n8wau, uttoh nogque kuttin kuhkuhquen[á]n, kah namp8ham, may papashpishik Edome touohkomuk.
E.3.8 And he said, Which way shall we go up? And he answered, The way through the wilderness of Edom.

α.3.9 Neit Israelle ketass8t monchu, kah ketass8t ut Judah, kah Edome ketass8t: kah wowéeuhshaog nesausuk tahshikquinne pomushaonk ut touohkomukqut, kah na matta nippeno wutch ayeuhteáog, kah wutch netasuog neh asukkunkqhetticheh.
E.3.9 So the king of Israel went, and the king of Judah, and the king of Edom: and they fetched a compass of seven days' journey: and there was no water for the host, and for the cattle that followed them.

α.3.10 Kah Israelle ketass8t n8wau, kuttumunk! newutche Jehovah wehkomau yeuh nishwe ketass8toh moáeu, ummagunat en wunnutcheganit Moab.
E.3.10 And the king of Israel said, Alas! that the LORD hath called these three kings together, to deliver them into the hand of Moab!

α.3.11 Qut J[é]hoshaphat n8wau, sunnummatta yeu wutappein ukquoshodtumwaéneumoh Jehovah? onk woh kenat8tomauómun Jehovah noh nashpe kah pasuk Israelle ketass8t wuttineumoh namp8ham, kah n8wau, yeuoh Elisha wunnaumonuh Shaphat, noh sokenuk nippe wunnutcheganit Elijah.
E.3.11 But Jehoshaphat said, Is there not here a prophet of the LORD, that we may enquire of the LORD by him? And one of the king of Israel's servants answered and said, Here is Elisha the son of Shaphat, which poured water on the hands of Elijah.

α.3.12 Kah Jehoshaphat n8wau, wuttinnowaonk Jehovah weetomuk, neit Israel ketass8t, kah Jehoshaphat, kah Edome ketass8t, noh en w8mussuog.
E.3.12 And Jehoshaphat said, The word of the LORD is with him. So the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat and the king of Edom went down to him.

α.3.13 Kah Elisha unnau Israelle ketass8toh, toh kittin tupanumush? aush k8sh ukquoshodtumwaeneumoh, kah kokas ukquoshodtumwaéneumoh, kah Israelle ketass8t wuttinuh, matta newutche Jehovah moáe wehkomoh yeuh nishuoh ketass8tamwoh, ummagunat en wunnutcheganit Moab.
E.3.13 And Elisha said unto the king of Israel, What have I to do with thee?  get thee to the prophets of thy father, and to the prophets of thy mother. And the king of Israel said unto him, Nay: for the LORD hath called these three kings together, to deliver them into the hand of Moab.

α.3.14 Kah Elisha n8wau, pomantog Jehovah ayeuhteâanit, noh anaquabit neepauwe, wunnamuhkut, matta wutt8ontam8on wutappuonk Jehosophat, Judae ketass8t, matta nuttinuhqua8 kuhhogkat, asuh kenâunn8.
E.3.14 And Elisha said, As the LORD of hosts liveth, before whom I stand, surely, were it not that I regard the presence of Jehoshaphat the king of Judah, I would not look toward thee, nor see thee.

α.3.15 Qut yeuyeu padtiegk nohtumpuhpéquadt, kah nnih, nohtompuhpequod pahpéquodt. wunnutcheg Jehovah nuhkuhkunk.
E.3.15 But now bring me a minstrel. And it came to pass, when the minstrel played, that the hand of the LORD came upon him.

α.3.16 Kah n8wau, yeu wussin Jehovah, ayim8k yeu 8nouhkoi numwohta ut pasohtheganash.
E.3.16 And he said, Thus saith the LORD, Make this valley full of ditches.

α.3.17 Newutche yeu wussin Jehovah, matta pish kenaum8m8 mishehtashin, asuh matta pish kenaum8mw8 sokanon, qut ne 8nouhkoi pish numwâpâgod, onk woh k8tattamw8 naneeswe kenaau kah kenetaseum8og, kah kuppuppinashim8m8óog.
E.3.17 For thus saith the LORD, Ye shall not see wind, neither shall ye see rain; yet that valley shall be filled with water, that ye may drink, both ye, and your cattle, and your beasts.

α.3.18 Kah yeu peasin ut anaquabit Jehovah, kah noh wonk mag8 Moabitsog en kenutchegan8óut.
E.3.18 And this is but a light thing in the sight of the LORD: he will deliver the Moabites also into your hand.

α.3.19 Kah pish kuttogkodtamw8 nishnoh pummenùsue keitotan, kah nish$noh pepenamwe otan, kah pish kuttummetahhamumw8 nish$noh wunnuhtuk, kah pish kukkup[h]amw8 wame nippe wuttahhamongash, kah pish kummatchteomw8 nish$noh 8neohke nashpe qussukquanash
E.3.19 And ye shall smite every fenced city, and every choice city, and shall fell every good tree, and stop all wells of water, and mar every good piece of land with stones.

α.3.20 Kah nnih mo[h]tompog, meetsue mag8onk magumuk, kusseh, nippe na 8m88 nogque Edome mayut, kah ohke numwohta nippe.
E.3.20 And it came to pass in the morning, when the meat offering was offered, that, behold, there came water by the way of Edom, and the country was filled with water.

α.3.21 Kah wame Moabitsog n8tamwehettit ketass8tamwog peyaog wutayeuuhkonukqunnaóut, mukkináog wame neh tapenumunutche kenauwamein, kah matukénukeg, kah neepoog sussippoiyeuut.
E.3.21 And when all the Moabites heard that the kings were come up to fight against them, they gathered all that were able to put on armour, and upward, and stood in the border.

α.3.22 Kah nompoae omohkeog, kah nepauz pokodtúhsum nippeit, Moabitsog naumwog nippeash ogkomut unnummusqui wusqueheonganit.
E.3.22 And they rose up early in the morning, and the sun shone upon the water, and the Moabites saw the water on the other side as red as blood:

α.3.23 Kah nag n8waog, yeu musqueheonk, ketass8tamwog wunnamuhkut nushehteáog, kah tattogkodtuog, newutch yeuyeu Moab, en sequttahham8onganit.
E.3.23 And they said, This is blood: the kings are surely slain, and they have smitten one another: now therefore, Moab, to the spoil.

α.3.24 Kah paahettit wuttuppukkussinn8ongan8óut Israel, Israelitsog neepoog, kah togkomáog Moabitsoh, ne waj wussemohettit ut anaquabhettit, qut kutchittousháog togkommonat Moabitsog, ut nehenwonche wutohtuout.
E.3.24 And when they came to the camp of Israel, the Israelites rose up and smote the Moabites, so that they fled before them: but they went forward smiting the Moabites, even in their country.

α.3.25 Kah n8ketahhamwog keitotanash, kah nish$noh wunne ohke, na wuttinuhkón[é]au nish$noh wosketomp ukqussuk, kah wunnumwohteauuneau, kah kuppohhamwog wame wuttahhamongane nippeash, kah kowehthamwog wame wunnuhtukquash, webe ut Kirharaseth, sequnn[ú]mwog nish qussukquanash, qut s8wompagunahhamwaenuog, 8weog[g]ehtineau, kah wuttogkodtamuneau.
E.3.25 And they beat down the cities, and on every good piece of land cast every man his stone, and filled it; and they stopped all the wells of water, and felled all the good trees: only in Kirharaseth left they the stones thereof; howbeit the slingers went about it, and smote it.

α.3.26 Kah Moabe ketass8t nag* n8neuau ut ayeuwuttinneat, neemunau nesausuk tahshe pasuk88oh wosketompoh, neg kodtinnukeg togkodteg, cheékee pannupwushonat en Edome ketass8tamut; qut wunn8numun.
E.3.26 And when the king of Moab saw that the battle was too sore for him, he took with him seven hundred men that drew swords, to break through even unto the king of Edom: but they could not.

α.3.27 Neit neemunau mohtommegheoncheh, neh woh nompass8tamwómukuhpoh, kah sephausinneah en chikohtae sephausuonganit, ut woskeche pummeneutunkanit: kah na mishe ayeuuhkonittue jishanumaonk Israel: kah nag wutamaehtauoh, kah qushkeog en nehenwonche wutohkeóut.
E.3.27 Then he took his eldest son that should have reigned in his stead, and offered him for a burnt offering upon the wall. And there was great indignation against Israel: and they departed from him, and returned to their own land.

α.4.1 KAh pasuk mittamwossis, ummittamwussoh wunnaumonuh quoshodtumwaenin mishont8anum[a]ua[u] Elishahoh, n8wau, kittinneum nahsuki nupp8i, kah k8wahteoh kittinneum qushop Jehovah, kah n8namontuhquahhuaenin, noh peyau, wunnemunnon8t nees8oh nunnaumonuh ummissinn8hkonat.
E.4.1 Now there cried a certain woman of the wives of the sons of the prophets unto Elisha, saying, Thy servant my husband is dead; and thou knowest that thy servant did fear the LORD: and the creditor is come to take unto him my two sons to be bondmen.

α.4.2 Kah Elisha wuttinuh, toh kutusseaunshish, usseh, teag k8wadchanum ut kekit? kah n8wau, mittamwossisse kittinneum wanne teag wadchanum webe wishquie pummee.
E.4.2 And Elisha said unto her, What shall I do for thee? tell me, what hast thou in the house? And she said, Thine handmaid hath not any thing in the house, save a pot of oil.

α.4.3 Neit n8wau, namohkaush wishquash, wutch wame ketattéamunganit, machishquash, ahque ogguhse.
E.4.3 Then he said, Go, borrow thee vessels abroad of all thy neighbours, even empty vessels; borrow not a few.

α.4.4 Kah petutteaan, pish keánittanum, kah ut kenaumonat kah pish kussokanumun en wame yeu wishquahtu, kah pish kutchipohtoh ne nomwapogok.
E.4.4 And when thou art come in, thou shalt shut the door upon thee and upon thy sons, and shalt pour out into all those vessels, and thou shalt set aside that which is full.

α.4.5 Neit wunnukonuh, kah yanittánumauau wuhhogkuh, kah wunnaumonuh; neh uppaudtunkqunuh, kah noh wussokanumun.
E.4.5 So she went from him, and shut the door upon her and upon her sons, who brought the vessels to her; and she poured out.

α.4.6 Kah n$nih nomwapogok wishquash, unnau wunnaumonuh, paudti onkatok wisq, kah nah wuttinuh, matta wonk wisquano, neit pumme kuppitchuwosheau.
E.4.6 And it came to pass, when the vessels were full, that she said unto her son, Bring me yet a vessel. And he said unto her, There is not a vessel more. And the oil stayed.

α.4.7 Neit peyau kah wuttinnon Manittowompuh, kah n8wau, kodtauwompash pummee, kah ôadtuhkau n8namontuhquohukquean, kah ken kah keneechanog pomantamwohtau8k ne sequenuman.
E.4.7 Then she came and told the man of God. And he said, Go, sell the oil, and pay thy debt, and live thou and thy children of the rest.

α.4.8 Kah n$nih, ut kesukodtut, Elisha paumushau en Shunem, na mo mishe mittumwossis, kah wutchetimoh meechinat petukqunnunk, kah n$nih, ne ahhut tahshe ne paumashaumuk, na en petukon meechinat petukqunnunk.
E.4.8 And it fell on a day, that Elisha passed to Shunem, where was a great woman; and she constrained him to eat bread. And so it was, that as oft as he passed by, he turned in thither to eat bread.

α.4.9 Kah unnau wasukeh, kusseh yeuyeu, n8wahteoh yeuoh wunneetupanatamwe Manittowomp, noh nagwutteae paumuhkongqueog.
E.4.9 And she said unto her husband, Behold now, I perceive that this is an holy man of God, which passeth by us continually.

α.4.10 K8wehquetumoush ayimuttuh chamberemes, ut woskeche neutongan, kah na ponamauont[ú]h appin, kah Table, kah appappu, kah wequanauteganuhtuk, kah pish nnih, peyaonukqueog, na pish wuttinne petukon.
E.4.10 Let us make a little chamber, I pray thee, on the wall; and let us set for him there a bed, and a table, and a stool, and a candlestick: and it shall be, when he cometh to us, that he shall turn in thither.

α.4.11 Kah nniyeup na peyop, kah petutteau chamberut, kah na ukkouen.
E.4.11 And it fell on a day, that he came thither, and he turned into the chamber, and lay there.

α.4.12 Kah unnau Gehezeoh wuttinneumoh, wehkom yeuoh wus-Shunamite, kah wehkomont, nepau anaquabenit.
E.4.12 And he said to Gehazi his servant, Call this Shunammite. And when he had called her, she stood before him.

α.4.13 Kah wuttinuh, yeuyeu us, kummahche nanauanumimun náshpe wame yeu nanawanittuonk, toh kutusseaunshit, howan kod keket8aunshad en ketass8tamut, asuh en ayeuhteae um-Mugquompaut: kah n[o]h namp8ham, n8wetom kenugke n[e]henwonche nummissinninneumog.
E.4.13 And he said unto him, Say now unto her, Behold, thou hast been careful for us with all this care; what is to be done for thee? wouldest thou be spoken for to the king, or to the captain of the host? And she answered, I dwell among mine own people.

α.4.14 Neit n8wau, neit toh kodusseaunshau[?] kah Gehezi namp8ham, wunna[m]uhkut matta wunnechaneu, kah wessukeh kechisu8.
E.4.14 And he said, What then is to be done for her? And Gehazi answered, Verily she hath no child, and her husband is old.

α.4.15 Kah n8wau, wehkom, kah wehkomont noh neepau us[s]quont.
E.4.15 And he said, Call her. And when he had called her, she stood in the door.

α.4.16 Kah n8wau, papaume yeu adt kukquttumuk ahquompi, neaunak utt8che: adt pomantam8onganu8k, pish kukkuhkenap kenaumon. Kah n8wau, matta, nussontimom, manittowomp, ahque pann8wah mittamwussisse kittinneum.
E.4.16 And he said, About this season, according to the time of life, thou shalt embrace a son. And she said, Nay, my lord, thou man of God, do not lie unto thine handmaid.

α.4.17 Kah mittamwossis wompequau, ne an kukquttamukup ahquompi ne Elisha ánomp neaunak ahquompi adt pomantam8onganú8k.
E.4.17 And the woman conceived, and bare a son at that season that Elisha had said unto her, according to the time of life.

α.4.18 Kah múkkies masugke[ns]it, n$niyeup ut kesukodtut, sohham en 8shut en kepenumwáenúut.
E.4.18 And when the child was grown, it fell on a day, that he went out to his father to the reapers.

α.4.19 Kah unnau 8shoh, nuppuhkuk, nuppuhkuk, kah unnau wuskenúh, uss8us ohkasut.
E.4.19 And he said unto his father, My head, my head. And he said to a lad, Carry him to his mother.

α.4.20 Kah neemunont, kah uppas8oh ohkasut, appu ukkuttukqut pajeh puhshaquaut, kah nupp8.
E.4.20 And when he had taken him, and brought him to his mother, he sat on her knees till noon, and then died.

α.4.21 Kah noh kuhkuhqueu, kah upponuh wutapinneat manitt8womp, kah weyanittanumauoh, kah sohham.
E.4.21 And she went up, and laid him on the bed of the man of God, and shut the door upon him, and went out.

α.4.22 Kah wehkomau wessukeh, kah n8wau, k8wehquetumoush ann8s en nuhhogkat, pasuk wusken, kah pasuk asses, onk woh nutusishom manitt8wompaut, kah woh wonk nuppeyam.
E.4.22 And she called unto her husband, and said, Send me, I pray thee, one of the young men, and one of the asses, that I may run to the man of God, and come again.

α.4.23 Kah n8wau, tohwutch auonat yeu kesukok? matta wuske nepâuzsaun8 asuh Saboth dayun8. Kah n8wau, wunnegen.
E.4.23 And he said, Wherefore wilt thou go to him to day? it is neither new moon, nor sabbath. And she said, It shall be well.

α.4.24 Neit apappu[u]néheau assoh, kah unnau wuttinneumoh, kenupp8kau, kah kutchittôushauh, áhque manunushaush wutch nen, kuttummaunú[n]non.
E.4.24 Then she saddled an ass, and said to her servant, Drive, and go forward; slack not thy riding for me, except I bid thee.

α.4.25 Neit monchu, kah peyaonau manittowompuh ut wadchuut Carmel, kah n$nih, manittowomp nôadtit an nauont, unnau Gehazioh wuttinneumoh, kusseh, éyoh wus-Shunamite.
E.4.25 So she went and came unto the man of God to mount Carmel. And it came to pass, when the man of God saw her afar off, that he said to Gehazi his servant, Behold, yonder is that Shunammite:

α.4.26 Kogquish yeuyeu, k8wehquetumoush nogushk[o]uônat, kah us, k8ni? wunniyeu kahsuk? wunniyeu mukkies? kah noh namp8ham wunniyeu,
E.4.26 Run now, I pray thee, to meet her, and say unto her, Is it well with thee? is it well with thy husband? is it well with the child? And she answered, It is well:

α.4.27 Kah paoónont Manittowompuh wadchuut, wuttannuh wusseetutL qut Gehazi pas8tshau wutamaunónat, kah Manittowomp n8wau, mukk8nauh, newutche ukketeahogkôunoh wesogkinwoh ut wuttinnómiyeumut, kah Jehovah nutattahtonkqun, kah matta nuttuk8un.
E.4.27 And when she came to the man of God to the hill, she caught him by the feet: but Gehazi came near to thrust her away. And the man of God said, Let her alone; for her soul is vexed within her: and the LORD hath hid it from me, and hath not told me.

α.4.28 Neit n8wau, sun nukkodtanumómus wunnaumoniin, wutch nussontimómut? sun matta nusseup, ahque pann8wáheh.
E.4.28 Then she said, Did I desire a son of my lord? did I not say, Do not deceive me?

α.4.29 Neit unnau Geheziut, puttukquobpisish ut kusseganit, kah né[m]unush nutanwóhou ut kenutcheganit, kah monchish, howan nogkushkauadt, wonkomuhkon, howan wonkomukquean, namp8hamauûhkon wonk kah ponsh wutanwóhou mukkies wuskesukqut
E.4.29 Then he said to Gehazi, Gird up thy loins, and take my staff in thine hand, and go thy way: if thou meet any man, salute him not; and if any salute thee, answer him not again: and lay my staff upon the face of the child.

α.4.30 Kah ohkasoh mukkies n8wau, pomantog Lord, kah pomantog kukketeahogkou, matta kenukonun8. Kah neepau kah wutasukauoh.
E.4.30 And the mother of the child said, As the LORD liveth, and as thy soul liveth, I will not leave thee. And he arose, and followed her.

α.4.31 Kah Gehezi wunnegonuhkauoh, kah ponam anwohou mukkies wuskesukqut, qut matta wadtauatonkqussuonk, asuh n8tam8onk; newajeh wonk moncheit wunnogskauónat, kah wuttinnon, n8wau, mukkies matta t8hkéu.
E.4.31 And Gehazi passed on before them, and laid the staff upon the face of the child; but there was neither voice, nor hearing. Wherefore he went again to meet him, and told him, saying, The child is not awaked.

α.4.32 Kah Elisha petuttuttead wetuómut, kusseh, mukkies nupp8, kah sepsinno wutappinneat.
E.4.32 And when Elisha was come into the house, behold, the child was dead, and laid upon his bed.

α.4.33 Newaj petutteadt, kah yanittanum webe nagumau neeswe, kah peantamauau Jehovahoh.
E.4.33 He went in therefore, and shut the door upon them twain, and prayed unto the LORD.

α.4.34 Kah kuhkuhqueu, kah q[e]e[n]sum8ónan mukiesoh kah ponam wutt8n wutt8nit, kah wuskesukquash ut wuskesukqut, káh wunnutchegash ut wunnutcheganit, kah s[e]sepeu ut mukkiesut, kah mukkies 8weyaus nanunksappi.
E.4.34 And he went up, and lay upon the child, and put his mouth upon his mouth, and his eyes upon his eyes, and his hands upon his hands: and stretched himself upon the child; and the flesh of the child waxed warm.

α.4.35 Neit qushkeu, kah papaumshau wetuómut aúhsukque, kah kuhkuhqueu, kah wu[s]sesepehtauoh, kah mukkies nes[a]usuk tahshit wushik8 kah mukkies woshinum wuskesukquash.
E.4.35 Then he returned, and walked in the house to and fro; and went up, and stretched himself upon him: and the child sneezed seven times, and the child opened his eyes.

α.4.36 Kah wehkomau Gehezioh, káh n8wau wehkom wus-Shunamit, neit 8wehkomuh, káh noh páohonont, n8wau neemun kenaumon.
E.4.36 And he called Gehazi, and said, Call this Shunammite. So he called her. And when she was come in unto him, he said, Take up thy son.

α.4.37 Neit noh petutteau, kah penushau ut wusseetut, kah nauwaeu en ohkekontu, kah nemunau wunnaumonuh, kah sohham.
E.4.37 Then she went in, and fell at his feet, and bowed herself to the ground, and took up her son, and went out.

α.4.38 Kah Elisha wonk peyau Gilgal, kah na mo mashagquot ut ohkeit, kah wunnaumonáoh Manittowompaog, appuoh anaquabit. kah unnau wuttinneumoh, neepas mishe ohkuhk: kah neepataush sabaheg wutch wunnaumonáuh quoshodtumwaenuog.
E.4.38 And Elisha came again to Gilgal: and there was a dearth in the land; and the sons of the prophets were sitting before him: and he said unto his servant, Set on the great pot, and seethe pottage for the sons of the prophets.

α.4.39 Kah pasuk sohham en ohteuhkonit mukkinnumunat herbsash, kah namehte[o] touohkomukque quonuwohchippogkash weesquaniteau, kah peyau, kah wussukqussumunash en sabohhégane ahkuhqut: newutche matta 8wahteou8unáoash.
E.4.39 And one went out into the field to gather herbs, and found a wild vine, and gathered thereof wild gourds his lap full, and came and shred them into the pot of pottage: for they knew them not.

α.4.40 Neit wussokanumanóneau missinniñúh ummeechinnaóont: kah n$nih meechhettit sa[b]ahheg, mishont8waog, kah n8waog, woi ken Manittowomp, nupp8onk ohteau ohkuhqut, kah nag matta ummeechuuneau.
E.4.40 So they poured out for the men to eat. And it came to pass, as they were eating of the pottage, that they cried out, and said, O thou man of God, there is death in the pot. And they could not eat thereof.

α.4.41 Kah n8wau paudtauók n8khik, kah wuttinuhkon ohkuhqut: kah n8wau, sokanumau missiñinnúog, onk woh meetsuog, kah na matta woskehuwaonganunn8 ahkuhkqut,
E.4.41 But he said, Then bring meal. And he cast it into the pot; and he said, Pour out for the people, that they may eat. And there was no harm in the pot.

α.4.42 Kah na 8mun wosketomp Baal-Shalish[a] kah paudtauau Manittowompuh kikeneumune petukqunegash, nesnechagkodtash barlihe petukqunegash, kah kukkonashquáe missonkquaminneash, kah n8wau aninnumôk missinninnúog, onk woh meetsuog.
E.4.42 And there came a man from Baalshalisha, and brought the man of God bread of the firstfruits, twenty loaves of barley, and full ears of corn in the husk thereof. And he said, Give unto the people, that they may eat.

α.4.43 Kah wuttinneumoh n8wau, toh wutch woh yeush ponum anaquabhettit nequt pasuk88og wosketompaog? wonk n8wau, aninnumau missi[n]ninnûog onk woh meetsuog newutche yeu wussin Jehovah, nag pish meetsuog kah na pish wuttit sequtteamineau
E.4.43 And his servitor said, What, should I set this before an hundred men?  He said again, Give the people, that they may eat: for thus saith the LORD, They shall eat, and shall leave thereof.

α.4.44 Neit upponamun anaquabenit, kah nag meetsuog, kah sequtteamwog, neaunak wuttinn8waonk Jehovah.
E.4.44 So he set it before them, and they did eat, and left thereof, according to the word of the LORD.

α.5.1 KAH Naaman wutáyeuteae mum-Mugquompomoh, Syriae ketass8t, noh ke[ih]cheyeu8 ut anaquabenit wussontimomoh, kah quttianumukqussu, newutch noh nashpe, Jehovah pohquohwhunónuh Syriahoh: noh wonk menuhkésuénin, qut wutchek8.
E.5.1 Now Naaman, captain of the host of the king of Syria, was a great man with his master, and honourable, because by him the LORD had given deliverance unto Syria: he was also a mighty man in valour, but he was a leper.

α.5.2 Kah Syriansog chippan8e sasohhamuppanneg, kah pas8aog [mu]sinuh, wutch wutohtuout Israel, nunksquaes, kah noh wuttinneumuhkauau ummittamwussoh Naaman,
E.5.2 And the Syrians had gone out by companies, and had brought away captive out of the land of Israel a little maid; and she waited on Naaman's wife.

α.5.3 Kah wuttinuh sonksq napehnont nussontimom weetomont manittowompuh ut Samaria newutche woh wunneetskeheuh 8chék8onk.
E.5.3 And she said unto her mistress, Would God my lord were with the prophet that is in Samaria! for he would recover him of his leprosy.

α.5.4 Kah p[a]suk petutteau, kah wuttinnon wussontimomoh, n8wau, yeu kah yeu wussin Israelle nunksq.
E.5.4 And one went in, and told his lord, saying, Thus and thus said the maid that is of the land of Israel.

α.5.5 Kah Syriae ketass8t n8wau, wunnegen monchish, kah negonshhuam wussukwhonk, en Israelle ketass8tamut kah monchu, kah kenunnum piogque silver tallentsash, kah nequtta tashe muttanonganogkodtinneáyeuash gold; kah piogque ôhôs8e hogk8unash.
E.5.5 And the king of Syria said, Go to, go, and I will send a letter unto the king of Israel. And he departed, and took with him ten talents of silver, and six thousand pieces of gold, and ten changes of raiment.

α.5.6 Kah paudtauau wussukwhonk Israelle ketass8tamwoh, n8wau: yeuyeu, yeu wussukwhonk peyaónakquean, kusseh, nutann8n en kuhhogkat Naaman nuttinneum, onk woh kukkéteáh wutch 8chéqunneat.
E.5.6 And he brought the letter to the king of Israel, saying, Now when this letter is come unto thee, behold, I have therewith sent Naaman my servant to thee, that thou mayest recover him of his leprosy.

α.5.7 Kah n$nih, Israelle ketass8t agketog wussukwhonk, neh nékuhkom wuthogk8unash, kah n8wau, sun nen God, nunnusheukonat, kah keteahuónat, wutch yeuoh wosketomp wuttann8teamuneat neetskeheónat wosketomp, wutch 8chéqunneat? newutche natwontam8k, k8wehquetumauúnumw8, kah naum8k uttoh an yeuoh natinnehog penuánittuonk ayeuuhkone nen.
E.5.7 And it came to pass, when the king of Israel had read the letter, that he rent his clothes, and said, Am I God, to kill and to make alive, that this man doth send unto me to recover a man of his leprosy? wherefore consider, I pray you, and see how he seeketh a quarrel against me.

α.5.8 Kah n$nih Elisha manittowomp, n8tog Israelle ketass8t neh nekukom wuthogk8unash, negont8au en ketass8tamut, n8wau tohwhutch nehnekikoman kuthogk8unash? peyaausitch, kah pish wahteau quoshodtumwaenú8 ut Israel.
E.5.8 And it was so, when Elisha the man of God had heard that the king of Israel had rent his clothes, that he sent to the king, saying, Wherefore hast thou rent thy clothes? let him come now to me, and he shall know that there is a prophet in Israel.

α.5.9 Neit Naaman peyau nashpe wuthorsesumoh kah wutchariotsumash, kah neepóog 8squantamut wekit Elisha.
E.5.9 So Naaman came with his horses and with his chariot, and stood at the door of the house of Elisha.

α.5.10 Kah Elisha ann8nau na en ann8naénúh, n8wau monchish kah kutchissumwush ut Jordan nesausuk tahshit nompe, kah k8w[e]yaus pish wonk kuppeyogqun, kah pish kuppahkes.
E.5.10 And Elisha sent a messenger unto him, saying, Go and wash in Jordan seven times, and thy flesh shall come again to thee, and thou shalt be clean.

α.5.11 Qut Naaman musquantam, kah monchu, kah n8wau, kusseh, nuttenantamup, wunnamuhkut woh nussohwéhtunk, kah neepou, kah wehquetum 8wesuonk Lord um-Manitt8moh, kah wunnutcheg mu[ss]i[s]shin ne ohtag, kah neetskeheau wutchequoh.
E.5.11 But Naaman was wroth, and went away, and said, Behold, I thought, He will surely come out to me, and stand, and call on the name of the LORD his God, and strike his hand over the place, and recover the leper.

α.5.12 Sunnummatta Abana kah Pharpar Damaskusse sepuash, anue wunnegenin8ash onk wame Israelle nippeash? sunnum$matta woh nash kutchissum8unash kah neetskesein? neit qushau, kah musquanittamwe monchu.
E.5.12 Are not Abana and Pharpar, rivers of Damascus, better than all the waters of Israel? may I not wash in them, and be clean? So he turned and went away in a rage.

α.5.13 Kah wuttinneumoh pas8sukunk, kah ukken8nukquoh, n8waog, n8sh, manittowomp unnukquean ussish mohsag, sun woh mo kutusséin? uttoh en ánueyeu8 annukquean, kutchessumwush, kah pahkeish?
E.5.13 And his servants came near, and spake unto him, and said, My father, if the prophet had bid thee do some great thing, wouldest thou not have done it? how much rather then, when he saith to thee, Wash, and be clean?

α.5.14 Neit w8msu, kah nesausuk tahshit quogkéeu ut Jordan, ne an8wop Manitowomp: kah 8weyausum wonk peyaum8 onatuh mukkies 8weyausumut, kah pahkesu.
E.5.14 Then went he down, and dipped himself seven times in Jordan, according to the saying of the man of God: and his flesh came again like unto the flesh of a little child, and he was clean.

α.5.15 Kah qushkéu en manittowompaut, nàgum kah wame wutchippan8moh, kah peyau, kah neepau anaquabit, kah n8wau, kusseh, eyeu n8wahteoh, wanne Manitt8un8 wame ohkeit, qut webe ut Israel: newutche yeuyeu k8wehquetumoush neemunush wunanittuonk wutch kittinneumut,
E.5.15 And he returned to the man of God, he and all his company, and came, and stood before him: and he said, Behold, now I know that there is no God in all the earth, but in Israel: now therefore, I pray thee, take a blessing of thy servant.

α.5.16 Qut n8wau, pomantog Jehovah, noh neepauwee anaquabit, matta teag nuttattumunum8, kah wutchetimuh neemunumunat, qut wussekeneamun.
E.5.16 But he said, As the LORD liveth, before whom I stand, I will receive none. And he urged him to take it; but he refused.

α.5.17 Kah Naaman n8wau, k8wehquetumaush, sunnummatta woh aninnumauau kittinneum ohkée wunnees8aña8oash mulsog? newutche kittinneum, yeu wutche onk yaan; matta pish mag8 chikohtae mag8ongash asuh sephausuongash en howae pen8e Manitt8, qut webe Jehovah$noh.
E.5.17 And Naaman said, Shall there not then, I pray thee, be given to thy servant two mules' burden of earth? for thy servant will henceforth offer neither burnt offering nor sacrifice unto other gods, but unto the LORD.

α.5.18 Yeu$ut Jehovah ahquontamauonch kittinneum, nussontimom petutteadche wekit Rimmon na$ut waussum[u]ónat, kah ompatussuk nunnutcheganit, kah nauwaéanish ut wekit Rimmon; nauwaéanish ut wekit Rimmon, Jehovah ahquontamauonch kittinneumoh yeu$ut.
E.5.18 In this thing the LORD pardon thy servant, that when my master goeth into the house of Rimmon to worship there, and he leaneth on my hand, and I bow myself in the house of Rimmon: when I bow down myself in the house of Rimmon, the LORD pardon thy servant in this thing.

α.5.19 Kah wuttinuh, monchish wunohteaash, neit monchu pas8che,
E.5.19 And he said unto him, Go in peace. So he departed from him a little way.

α.5.20 Qut Gehezi wuttinneumoh Elisha Manittowomp, n8wau, kusseh, nussontimom m[o]innumauau Naamanoh yeuh wus-Syrianoh matta neemunnum8unat ut wunnutcheganit ne paudtunk, pomontog Jehovah n8nomatúhkau, kah ne teag neemunumau,
E.5.20 But Gehazi, the servant of Elisha the man of God, said, Behold, my master hath spared Naaman this Syrian, in not receiving at his hands that which he brought: but, as the LORD liveth, I will run after him, and take somewhat of him.

α.5.21 Neit Gehezi asuhkauau Naamanoh, kah Naaman nauont wutasukauau, n8keu wutch wutchariotumut wunnogskauónat, kah n8wau, wame wunnegen?
E.5.21 So Gehazi followed after Naaman. And when Naaman saw him running after him, he lighted down from the chariot to meet him, and said, Is all well?

α.5.22 Kah n8wau wame wunnegen: nussontimom nuttann8nuk n8wau, kusseh, kuttumma neesuog wuskenuog nuppeyogquog, wutch Ephraimme wadchuut, wunnaumon[á]uh quoshodtumwaénuog: k8wehquetumoush, nag aninnuma[u] silvere tallent, kah neesinash ô[s]8ogk8unash.
E.5.22 And he said, All is well. My master hath sent me, saying, Behold, even now there be come to me from mount Ephraim two young men of the sons of the prophets: give them, I pray thee, a talent of silver, and two changes of garments.

α.5.23 Kah Naaman n8wau, quenussish, neemunash neesinash tallentsash, kah wutchetimuh,  kishpinau nesinash tallentsash ut neese man8taut nashpe neesinash hogk8ongash, kah upponamunash nees8oh wuttinneumit, kah nag ukkinnunumunáoash en anaquashadt.
E.5.23 And Naaman said, Be content, take two talents. And he urged him, and bound two talents of silver in two bags, with two changes of garments, and laid them upon two of his servants; and they bare them before him.

α.5.24 Kah paont wonkan8sinut, nash wunnemunumunash wutch wunnutchegan8ôut, kah upponamunash wetuômut, kah moncheáheuh wosketompuh, kah nag moncheog.
E.5.24 And when he came to the tower, he took them from their hand, and bestowed them in the house: and he let the men go, and they departed.

α.5.25 Qut noh petutteau, kah neepau anaquabenit wussontimomoh: kah Elisha wuttinuh, t[ó]h k8mun Gehezi? kah n8wau kittinneum woh toh 8m8.
E.5.25 But he went in, and stood before his master. And Elisha said unto him, Whence comest thou, Gehazi? And he said, Thy servant went no whither.

α.5.26 Kah wuttinuh, sunnummatta nuttah k8weechóg8, wosketomp quashkit wutch wutchariotumut kenogskunkqunat? sun ahquompi ne ahhut attumunúmuk teaguash, kah attumunumunat hogk8ongash, kah olive chippinneutungash, kah weenominneohtekonash, kah shepsog, kah oxinog, kah wosketompae wuttinneumuneunk?
E.5.26 And he said unto him, Went not mine heart with thee, when the man turned again from his chariot to meet thee? Is it a time to receive money, and to receive garments, and oliveyards, and vineyards, and sheep, and oxen, and menservants, and maidservants?

α.5.27 Newutche 8chék8onk Naaman, pish kummosogquehtunk, kah en k8skannemun ut micheme? kah noh sohham wutch anaquabenit, kah wutchék8 onatuh k8nit.
E.5.27 The leprosy therefore of Naaman shall cleave unto thee, and unto thy seed for ever. And he went out from his presence a leper as white as snow.

α.6.1 KAH wunnaumonáuh quoshodtumwaenuog unnáog Elishahoh kusseh yeuyeu, ayeuonk uttôh adt weetomunog, wussaume pe[á]sin.
E.6.1 And the sons of the prophets said unto Elisha, Behold now, the place where we dwell with thee is too strait for us.

α.6.2 K8wehquetumauunumun, monchetuh, en Jordan, kah na wutch neemunumontuh nish$noh wosketomp pasuk beam, kah na$ut ayimontuh ayeuonk uttoh woh áyeog, kah namp8ham monchek,
E.6.2 Let us go, we pray thee, unto Jordan, and take thence every man a beam, and let us make us a place there, where we may dwell. And he answered, Go ye.

α.6.3 Kah pasuk n8wau, k8wehquetumauunumun, quenussish, kah weechau kittinneum[o]g, kah namp8ham, nummonchem,
E.6.3 And one said, Be content, I pray thee, and go with thy servants. And he answered, I will go.

α.6.4 Neit 8weechauuh: kah paáhettit Jordan, tummehthamwog wuttuhqunash.
E.6.4 So he went with them. And when they came to Jordan, they cut down wood.

α.6.5 Qut pasuk kôúhtahwhont beamoh, togkunganne uppuhkuk quogkusheau en nippekontu: kah mishont8au kah n8wau, tauw[á]nne nussontimom, newutche nogóhkauúnáh:
E.6.5 But as one was felling a beam, the axe head fell into the water: and he cried, and said, Alas, master! for it was borrowed.

α.6.6 Kah manittowomp n8wau, uttoh ut penusheau? kah ukkuhk8tomáu[o]n ayeuonk: kah tummehtham mehtúk8m, kah ne wuttinnuhkon, kah misséhchuog puhpuhkuhhan.
E.6.6 And the man of God said, Where fell it? And he shewed him the place. And he cut down a stick, and cast it in thither; and the iron did swim.

α.6.7 Newaj n8wadt, nemunush, kah summagunum wunnutcheg kah wunneemunnumun,
E.6.7 Therefore said he, Take it up to thee. And he put out his hand, and took it.

α.6.8 Neit Syriae ketass8t ayeuuhkonau Israeloh, kah ken8nau wuttinneumoh, n8wau, yeu kah yeu pish n[u]ttuppukkussinumun,
E.6.8 Then the king of Syria warred against Israel, and took counsel with his servants, saying, In such and such a place shall be my camp.

α.6.9 Kah manittowomp ann8nau en Israelle ketass8tamut n8wau, ôhkon ne ahhu[na]g ayèuonk, newutche na peyoneau wus$Syrianseog.
E.6.9 And the man of God sent unto the king of Israel, saying, Beware that thou pass not such a place; for thither the Syrians are come down.

α.6.10 Kah Israelle ketass8t, ann8teamo en ayeuonganit, ne manittowomp anomp, kah ne amómomp, kah na wuttit tomheon wuhhogkuh matta pasukqut asuh neesit.
E.6.10 And the king of Israel sent to the place which the man of God told him and warned him of, and saved himself there, not once nor twice.

α.6.11 Newajeh Syriae ketass8t wuttah wuttamohtag, yeu wutch, kah wehkomau wuttinneumoh, kah wuttinuh, sunnummatta woh kukkuhk8tomaiyeum8, howan kenawun wadsuk Israelle ketass8tamwut.
E.6.11 Therefore the heart of the king of Syria was sore troubled for this thing; and he called his servants, and said unto them, Will ye not shew me which of us is for the king of Israel?

α.6.12 Kah pasuk8 wuttinneumoh unn8wauh, wanne howan nussontimom ketass8t, qut Elisha quoshodtumwaen, noh apit Israel, unnau Israelle ketass8toh kukkutt8ongash nish nish án8wáanish ut kutappiñeáe chamberut.
E.6.12 And one of his servants said, None, my lord, O king: but Elisha, the prophet that is in Israel, telleth the king of Israel the words that thou speakest in thy bedchamber.

α.6.13 Kah n8wau monchek kah natauwaheuk uttoh ápit, onk woh nutann8team, kah woh neemskauoh; kah unnon n8wan, kusseh appu Dothan.
E.6.13 And he said, Go and spy where he is, that I may send and fetch him. And it was told him, saying, Behold, he is in Dothan.

α.6.14 Newaj na en ann8nont horsesoh, kah chariotsaash, kah mishe ayeuhteuh: kah peyaog nukkonaeu, kah wéenuhkomwog keitotan.
E.6.14 Therefore sent he thither horses, and chariots, and a great host: and they came by night, and compassed the city about.

α.6.15 Kah wuttinneumoh manittowomp nompoaeu amohkenit, kah sohhog, kusseh ayeuteaog quinnuppekomwog keitotan, naneeswe nashpe horsesog kah chariotsash, kah wuttinneumoh wuttukquoh, touwane nussontimom toh woh kutussenan?
E.6.15 And when the servant of the man of God was risen early, and gone forth, behold, an host compassed the city both with horses and chariots. And his servant said unto him, Alas, my master! how shall we do?

α.6.16 Kah namp8ham, wabesehkon, newutche nag wetomukqueagig ánue monaog onk noh wetomukquehetticheh,
E.6.16 And he answered, Fear not: for they that be with us are more than they that be with them.

α.6.17 Kah Elisha peantam kah n8wau, Jehovah k8wequetumoush wôshinumau wuskesukquash, onk woh naum, kah Jehovah woshinum w[o]skesukquash wuskenùh kah nâau: kah kusseh wadchu wunnumwapineau horsesoh kah n8tae chariotsash, quaquinnuppe Elishaut.
E.6.17 And Elisha prayed, and said, LORD, I pray thee, open his eyes, that he may see. And the LORD opened the eyes of the young man; and he saw: and, behold, the mountain was full of horses and chariots of fire round about Elisha.

α.6.18 W8mussinit en wuhhogkat, Elisha peantamauau Jehovahoh, kah n8wau, k8wehquetumoush, togkom pogkenumóonk yeug missinninnúog, kah noh wuttogkomuh pogkenumóonk, neaunak wuttinn8waonk Elisha.
E.6.18 And when they came down to him, Elisha prayed unto the LORD, and said, Smite this people, I pray thee, with blindness. And he smote them with blindness according to the word of Elisha.

α.6.19 Kah Elisha nah wuttinuh matta yeu may, asuh matta yeu keitotan, asuhkiek, kah kuppaudtauunumw8 wosketomp noh natinnewhok, qut nah wutuss8unuh en Samaria.
E.6.19 And Elisha said unto them, This is not the way, neither is this the city: follow me, and I will bring you to the man whom ye seek. But he led them to Samaria.

α.6.20 Kah n$nih, petutteahettit Samaria, Elisha n8wau, Lord wôshwunush wuskesuk88ash yeug wosketompáog, kah Jehovah woshwunum wuskesuk88ash, kah nag naumwog, kah kusseh nag appuog nôeu Samaria.
E.6.20 And it came to pass, when they were come into Samaria, that Elisha said, LORD, open the eyes of these men, that they may see. And the LORD opened their eyes, and they saw; and, behold, they were in the midst of Samaria.

α.6.21 Kah Israelle ketass8t unnau Elishahoh, neh nauont, n8sh, sunwoh nuttogkomòog, woh nuttogkomoog?
E.6.21 And the king of Israel said unto Elisha, when he saw them, My father, shall I smite them? shall I smite them?

α.6.22 Kah namp8ham matta woh kutog[8]móog, sun woh yeuh kuttogkomóog masun[ó]hte[á]aneg nashpe [o]kuttogkodteg, asuh nashpe kutohtom? ponsh petukqunneg kah nippe anaquabhettit, [ó]nk woh meetsuog, kah wutt[u]ttamwog, kah woh auog wussontimom8óut.
E.6.22 And he answered, Thou shalt not smite them: wouldest thou smite those whom thou hast taken captive with thy sword and with thy bow? set bread and water before them, that they may eat and drink, and go to their master.

α.6.23 Kah quagwashwéhtam mishe metsuonk, wutche nagoh, kah nag meetsehettit kah wadtattamhettit, ummoncheaheuh, kah auog wussontimom8[ó]ut, neit Syrianse wutchipa[a]m8ongash matta wonk peyaumon8ash ohkeit Israel.
E.6.23 And he prepared great provision for them: and when they had eaten and drunk, he sent them away, and they went to their master. So the bands of Syria came no more into the land of Israel.

α.6.24 Kah n$nih, mahche yeu n$nag, Benhadad Syriae ketass8t miyana[v] wame wutayeuwehteomoh, kah kuhkuhqueu, kah wéenuhkomwog Samaria.
E.6.24 And it came to pass after this, that Benhadad king of Syria gathered all his host, and went up, and besieged Samaria.

α.6.25 Kah na mo mishe mashagquodt ut Sam[á]ria: kah kusseh, 8wéenu[h]komuneau nô pajeh, asse uppuhkuk shwosuk tahshinchaginneaôadtik silver; kah yaue kabbe chippag wuskuhwhunnan umm8e anôadtik napanna tahshinne[a]i sil[u]er.
E.6.25 And there was a great famine in Samaria: and, behold, they besieged it, until an ass's head was sold for fourscore pieces of silver, and the fourth part of a cab of dove's dung for five pieces of silver.

α.6.26 Kah Israelle ketass8t pamwushadt woskeche pummeneutonganit, mittamwussis ummishont8[â]numauoh, n8wau, aninnumah woi nussontimom ketass8t.
E.6.26 And as the king of Israel was passing by upon the wall, there cried a woman unto him, saying, Help, my lord, O king.

α.6.27 Kah n8wau matta Jehovah aninnumungk8au, uttoh woh kuttin aninnumauunun? wutch ahhut pogkohhamuk, asuh wutch wine$pressut.
E.6.27 And he said, If the LORD do not help thee, whence shall I help thee?  out of the barnfloor, or out of the winepress?

α.6.28 Kah ketass8t wuttinuh, toh kutushpun[à]m? kah noh namp8ham, yeuoh mittamwossis nuttinuk, magish kenaumon onk woh kum8whóun yeu kesukok, kah pish kumm8whómun nunnaumon saup.
E.6.28 And the king said unto her, What aileth thee? And she answered, This woman said unto me, Give thy son, that we may eat him to day, and we will eat my son to morrow.

α.6.29 Neit nutchauóhpuhwhómun nunnaumon, k[à]h numm8wh[ô]unn[ó]nup, kah nuttinnop na wonk kesukok, magish kenaumon onk woh kumm8whoun, kah noh adtuhshau wunnaumonuh.
E.6.29 So we boiled my son, and did eat him: and I said unto her on the next day, Give thy son, that we may eat him: and she hath hid her son.

α.6.30 Kah nnih, ketass8t n8tog ukkutt8ongash mittamwossis, neh nekuhkom wuthogk8unash, kah paumushau pummeneutonganit kah missiñinnuog natauwompuog, kah kusseh man8tiónak ohtau wey[á]usut.
E.6.30 And it came to pass, when the king heard the words of the woman, that he rent his clothes; and he passed by upon the wall, and the people looked, and, behold, he had sackcloth within upon his flesh.

α.6.31 Neit n8wau, God ne unnèhitch kah wonk m8cheke, uppuhkuk Elisha wunnaumonuh Shaphat appehtunkqut ye[u] kesukok.
E.6.31 Then he said, God do so and more also to me, if the head of Elisha the son of Shaphat shall stand on him this day.

α.6.32 Qut Elisha appu wekit, (kah Eldersog 8weetapemouh,) kah ketass8t ann8nau wosketompuh wutch anaquabit: qut ash ann8naénin noh paonk, unnau Eldersoh, naum8k yeuoh wunnaumónuh nushehteaen, uttoh an ann8tea[m]it amaunumunat nuppuhkuk? n[ó]k peyont ann8naénin, yáu[n]tanum8k, kah menuhkin8k ut ushquont[am]ut: sunnummatta wusseetoe wuto[u]atonkqussuonk wussontimomoh uppisho[u]anit?
E.6.32 But Elisha sat in his house, and the elders sat with him; and the king sent a man from before him: but ere the messenger came to him, he said to the elders, See ye how this son of a murderer hath sent to take away mine head? look, when the messenger cometh, shut the door, and hold him fast at the door: is not the sound of his master's feet behind him?

α.6.33 Kah ash pa[m]e nah kéket8hkauont, ann8naénin uppeyaonuh, kah n8wau, kusseh yeu machuk wutch yeum8 Lordut, kah tohwaj woh nano pahtussuonog Lord.
E.6.33 And while he yet talked with them, behold, the messenger came down unto him: and he said, Behold, this evil is of the LORD; what should I wait for the LORD any longer?

α.7.1 NEit Elisha n8wau, n8tam8k wuttin[n]8waonk Jehovah yeu wussin J[e]hovah, saup papaume yeu utt8cheyeu8k, nequt quttuhwhosu pa[s]quag n8khik pish un[n]ôadtu pasuk shekle, kah neese quttuhwhosuash barl[i]e pasuk shekle, ut 8squontamut Samaria.
E.7.1 Then Elisha said, Hear ye the word of the LORD; Thus saith the LORD, To morrow about this time shall a measure of fine flour be sold for a shekel, and two measures of barley for a shekel, in the gate of Samaria.

α.7.2 Neit sontim, noh 8pit ketass8t ompatuss[u]k, namp8hamauau manittowompuh, kah n8wau, kusseh, Jehovah kenogkeneganehteadt ut kesukqut, sun woh yeu n$nih? kah n8wau, kusseh, pish k8ch naum[u]n kuskesukqut, qut matta pish kummeech8un,
E.7.2 Then a lord on whose hand the king leaned answered the man of God, and said, Behold, if the LORD would make windows in heaven, might this thing be?  And he said, Behold, thou shalt see it with thine eyes, but shalt not eat thereof.

α.7.3 Kah na yóog wutchek8enúog, ahhut petutteamuk squontamut, kah nag, uttúog tohwutch yeu appeog, nô pajeh kenuppenanonut?
E.7.3 And there were four leprous men at the entering in of the gate: and they said one to another, Why sit we here until we die?

α.7.4 Unn8wáog, nuppetutteamun otanat, neit mashogqueneaonganú8 otanat, kah na pish kuttit nuppunnau, kah yeu ut chequnappeog, wonk nunnupmun; yowutche yeuyeu éhhoh, weech8humontuh Syrianse ayeuhteaog, nag keteaáhikqueog pish kuppomantamumun, kah nag nushikqueog, webe woh kenupmun.
E.7.4 If we say, We will enter into the city, then the famine is in the city, and we shall die there: and if we sit still here, we die also. Now therefore come, and let us fall unto the host of the Syrians: if they save us alive, we shall live; and if they kill us, we shall but die.

α.7.5 Kah nampoaeu omohkeog âunat Syrianse tuppuksinn8onganit: kah paáhettit wehqshik Syrianse tuppuksinn8wonganit, kusseh, na matta howan wutappein.
E.7.5 And they rose up in the twilight, to go unto the camp of the Syrians: and when they were come to the uttermost part of the camp of Syria, behold, there was no man there.

α.7.6 Newutche Jehovah Syrianse ayeuteaoh n8tamwaheau, chariotse wattauatonkqussuonk, kah horsese wattauatonkqussuonk wadtauatunkqussuongane mishe ayeuteaog: kah uttúog, kusseh, Isr[a]elle ketass8t, ayeuuhkonittue onkquottauau Hittitse ketass8tamwoh, kah Egyptianse ketass8tamwoh, kukquee[n]tonkqunnanónut.
E.7.6 For the LORD had made the host of the Syrians to hear a noise of chariots, and a noise of horses, even the noise of a great host: and they said one to another, Lo, the king of Israel hath hired against us the kings of the Hittites, and the kings of the Egyptians, to come upon us.

α.7.7 Newaj neepauwehettit kah wussem8og quenau waompog, kah nukkodtumwog wek8óash, kah wuthorsesumóuh, kah wutassesumóuh, kah tuppuksinnóonk neanágkup, & wussemoog wutch uppomantam8ongan8.
E.7.7 Wherefore they arose and fled in the twilight, and left their tents, and their horses, and their asses, even the camp as it was, and fled for their life.

α.7.8 Kah yeug wadchekqutcheg paahettit wehqshik tuppuksiñ8wonk petutteaog pasuk wetu, kah meetsuog & wuttattamwog, kah na 8tauwuneau silver kah gold, kah hogk8ongash, kah moncheog wuttatahtauuneau, kah wonk peyaog, kah petutteaog onkatog we[tu] kah na wonk 8tauwuneau, kah moncheog kah wuttatahtauuneau.
E.7.8 And when these lepers came to the uttermost part of the camp, they went into one tent, and did eat and drink, and carried thence silver, and gold, and raiment, and went and hid it; and came again, and entered into another tent, and carried thence also, and went and hid it.

α.7.9 Neit uttúog, matta k8neseumun, yeu kesukok wunaunchem8kae kesukod, kah mutchequnapimun, yeu appeog pajeh mohtompa[n]it, ne teagwe wosketuonk, kenuhkekonkumun newutche yeuyeu éhhoh monchetuh, kah unnontuh ketass8t neh wekit.
E.7.9 Then they said one to another, We do not well: this day is a day of good tidings, and we hold our peace: if we tarry till the morning light, some mischief will come upon us: now therefore come, that we may go and tell the king's household.

α.7.10  Neit peyaog, kah wehkomaog noh n[a]nawehteunk keitotanae squont, kah nag wuttinn[i]neau n8waog nuppeyo[m]unnónu[p] wuttuppukkussinn8wongan8ôut Syriansog, kah kusseh, na mo matta howan wuta[p]pein, [as]uh wosk[e]tomp wadtautaonkqussuōk qut horsesog kishpi[ss]uog, kah assesog kishpissuog, wetuomash [neáuno]gkup.
E.7.10 So they came and called unto the porter of the city: and they told them, saying, We came to the camp of the Syrians, and, behold, there was no man there, neither voice of man, but horses tied, and asses tied, and the tents as they were.

α.7.11 Kah wehkomau nanawunnu[m]unu[t]cheh squont, kah nag wu[ss]inneau ketass8t wuttinnomekomukqut.
E.7.11 And he called the porters; and they told it to the king's house within.

α.7.12 Kah ketass8t omohku nukkonaeu, kah unnau wuttinneumoh, yeuyeu kenahtinunúmw8 uttoh Syriansog anhikqueog: nag wahteauog kukkod[t]upumun, newajeh sohhamwehettit wuttuppuksin8onganit, upputtogquenaóont ut ohteuhkonit, n8waog, sohhamwehettit wutch otanat, pish kukketeáe tohqunóunónog, kah pish kuppetutteámun otanat.
E.7.12 And the king arose in the night, and said unto his servants, I will now shew you what the Syrians have done to us. They know that we be hungry; therefore are they gone out of the camp to hide themselves in the field, saying, When they come out of the city, we shall catch them alive, and get into the city.

α.7.13 Kah pasuk8h wuttinneumoh namp8ham kah n8wau, newutche nemunáhettich, k8wehquetumoush, napanna tahs8oh horsesoh neh sequnutcheh, n[e]g sequnutcheg ut otanat, (kusseh nag neane wame ummuttaán8ongan8 Israel, neg sequttahwhutcheg, kusseh, nussim, nag neane wame ummuttaán8ongan8 Israelitsog neg mohtuppaécheg) kah ann8teamwuttuh, kah naumuttuh.
E.7.13 And one of his servants answered and said, Let some take, I pray thee, five of the horses that remain, which are left in the city, (behold, they are as all the multitude of Israel that are left in it: behold, I say, they are even as all the multitude of the Israelites that are consumed:) and let us send and see.

α.7.14 Newaj nemunáhettit nesu8oh chariotse horsesoh, & ketass8t asuhkaue ann8team8 Syriansoh, n8wau, monchek, kah naum8k.
E.7.14 They took therefore two chariot horses; and the king sent after the host of the Syrians, saying, Go and see.

α.7.15 Kah nah wutasukauóuh en Jordan kah kusseh, wame may numwohteau hogk8ongash kah auwohteaongash, nish Syriansog pagketamwehétticheh, kônupisháhettit,, kah ann8naenúog qushkeog kah wuttinnóneau ketass8tamwoh.
E.7.15 And they went after them unto Jordan: and, lo, all the way was full of garments and vessels, which the Syrians had cast away in their haste. And the messengers returned, and told the king.

α.7.16 Kah missinninnuog sohhamwog kah mukk8kinnumwontamwog wek8óash Syriansog: neit nequt quttuhwhosu pasquag n8khik pasuk shekle [ó]adtu, kah neese quttuhwhôsuash barlihash, pasuk shekle òadtuash, neaunak wuttinn8waonk Jehovah.
E.7.16 And the people went out, and spoiled the tents of the Syrians. So a measure of fine flour was sold for a shekel, and two measures of barley for a shekel, according to the word of the LORD.

α.7.17 Kah ketass8t kehtimau ne sontimoh ne wunnutcheg ompatussik, wunnanawehtinneat squont: kah missinninnuog wuttattaskuhkauóuh ut squont, & nupp8, ne an8wop Manittwomp, noh kodt8hkomp ketass8t paaónont.
E.7.17 And the king appointed the lord on whose hand he leaned to have the charge of the gate: and the people trode upon him in the gate, and he died, as the man of God had said, who spake when the king came down to him.

α.7.18 Kah nnih, neane Manittowomp ken8nomp ketass8tamwoh, n8wop, neese quttuhwhosuash barlihash, pasuk shekle, kah nequt quttuhwhosu pasquag n8khik pasuk shekle, [ô]adtu saup, papaume yeu tont, ut Samariae squontamut.
E.7.18 And it came to pass as the man of God had spoken to the king, saying, Two measures of barley for a shekel, and a measure of fine flour for a shekel, shall be to morrow about this time in the gate of Samaria:

α.7.19 Kah yeuoh sontim namp8hamauau Manittowompuh, kah n8wau, yeuyeu kusseh, Jehovah kenogkeneganehteadt ut kesukqut, sun ne woh nnih? kah n8wau, kusseh, pish kenaumun wutch kuskesukqut, qut matta pish na kuttit meetsein.
E.7.19 And that lord answered the man of God, and said, Now, behold, if the LORD should make windows in heaven, might such a thing be? And he said, Behold, thou shalt see it with thine eyes, but shalt not eat thereof.

α.7.20 Kah ne wutushpunan, newutche missinninnùog wutahtaskuhkauóuh ut squontamut, kah nupp8.
E.7.20 And so it fell out unto him: for the people trode upon him in the gate, and he died.

α.8.1 NEit Elisha ken8nau mittamwossissoh, (noh wunnaumonuh nompenumauont uppomantamóonk) n8wau, neepaush, kah monchish ken, kah neg kekit, kah ut kéohteáash uttoh woh adt keohteáyean, newutche Jehovah wehquetum mahshagqunneáonk kah wonk pish nuhkuhkom ut ohkekontu nesausuk tahshe kodtumwáe.
E.8.1 Then spake Elisha unto the woman, whose son he had restored to life, saying, Arise, and go thou and thine household, and sojourn wheresoever thou canst sojourn: for the LORD hath called for a famine; and it shall also come upon the land seven years.

α.8.2 Kah mittamwossis neepau, kah usseu ne an8wadt Manittowomp, kah weechaau neh wekit, keohteóou ut wutohtuóut Philistiansog nesausuk tahshe kodtumwae.
E.8.2 And the woman arose, and did after the saying of the man of God: and she went with her household, and sojourned in the land of the Philistines seven years.

α.8.3 Kah nnih, nesausuk tahshe kodtum8 mahtshunk, mittamwossis qushkeu wutch wutohtuout Philistiansog, kah sohham ummauunnitteauónat ketass8toh wutch wek, kah wutch wutohke.
E.8.3 And it came to pass at the seven years' end, that the woman returned out of the land of the Philistines: and she went forth to cry unto the king for her house and for her land.

α.8.4 Kah ketass8t keket8kauau Gehazi wuttinneumoh Manittowomp, n8wau, usse[h] k8wehquetumoush wame mogagish, nish Elisha mahche ussechish.
E.8.4 And the king talked with Gehazi the servant of the man of God, saying, Tell me, I pray thee, all the great things that Elisha hath done.

α.8.5 Kah nnih, anont ketass8tamwoh pomantamwaheau nupp8e muhhogkuh, kusseh, mittamwossis noh wunnaumonuh keteahomukup, mauunnitteauau ketass8tamwoh, wutche wek, & wutch wutohke, kah Gehazi n8wau, Nussontimom ketass8t, yeuoh mittamwossis kah yeuh wunnaumonuh, neh Elisha keteahompoh.
E.8.5 And it came to pass, as he was telling the king how he had restored a dead body to life, that, behold, the woman, whose son he had restored to life, cried to the king for her house and for her land. And Gehazi said, My lord, O king, this is the woman, and this is her son, whom Elisha restored to life.

α.8.6 Kah ketass8t nat8tomauont mittamwussissoh, noh wuttinnon. Neit ketass8t ukkuhquttumauoh howae aninnohsuénúh, n8wau, nompenumau wame ne wuttaihe, kah wame meechummúonk wutch wutohteakonit nadteuh nôgkodtuk ohke, pajeh yeuyeu.
E.8.6 And when the king asked the woman, she told him. So the king appointed unto her a certain officer, saying, Restore all that was hers, and all the fruits of the field since the day that she left the land, even until now.

α.8.7 Kah Elisha peyau Damaskus, kah Benhadad Syriae ketass8t mahchinau, kah unnon, n8won, Manittowomp peyau,
E.8.7 And Elisha came to Damascus; and Benhadad the king of Syria was sick; and it was told him, saying, The man of God is come hither.

α.8.8 Kah ketass8t unnau Hazael, neemunush mag8onk ut kenutcheganit, kah nogkushkau Manittowomp, kah nat8tomau Jehovah noh nashpe, n8wash sun woh nukketeam wutch yeu mahchin[á]onk?
E.8.8 And the king said unto Hazael, Take a present in thine hand, and go, meet the man of God, and enquire of the LORD by him, saying, Shall I recover of this disease?

α.8.9 Neit Hazael monchu wunnogskauónat, kah kenunnum mag8onk ut wunnutcheganit wutch nishnoh wanegik ut Damaskus, ya[u]unchage Camelse weé[enun]ash, kah peyàu, kah neepau anaquabenit, kah n8wau, kenaumon Benhadad ketass8t ut Syria, nutann8nuk en kuhhogkat, n8wau, sun woh nukketeam wutch yeu unninneá[o]nk.
E.8.9 So Hazael went to meet him, and took a present with him, even of every good thing of Damascus, forty camels' burden, and came and stood before him, and said, Thy son Benhadad king of Syria hath sent me to thee, saying, Shall I recover of this disease?

α.8.10 Kah Elisha wuttinnuh, monchish, us, wunnamuhkut woh kukketeam: qut Jehovah nunnahtinuk noh pish wunnamuhkut nupp8.
E.8.10 And Elisha said unto him, Go, say unto him, Thou mayest certainly recover: howbeit the LORD hath shewed me that he shall surely die.

α.8.11 Kah menuhkodtauwompu, nô pajeh wutákodchinat: kah Manittowomp mau.
E.8.11 And he settled his countenance stedfastly, until he was ashamed: and the man of God wept.

α.8.12 Kah Hazael n8wau, tohwutch maùk nussontimom? kah namp8ham, newutche n8wahteoh ne machuk pish anheadt wunnaumonuh Israel, ummenuhkonogg88ash pish kutchikohsumũash, 8skeneum8uh pish kenush[ô]og nashpe togkodteg, kah pish kuppapashkontupoh wunneechan8oh, kah pish kukkodsumau wompequae ummittamwuss8oh.
E.8.12 And Hazael said, Why weepeth my lord? And he answered, Because I know the evil that thou wilt do unto the children of Israel: their strong holds wilt thou set on fire, and their young men wilt thou slay with the sword, and wilt dash their children, and rip up their women with child.

α.8.13 Kah Hazael n8wau, teag, kittinneum [a]num, yeu woh wutussenat mohsag? kah Elisha namp8ham, Lord nunnahtinuk ken pish kukketass8tam8 ut Syria.
E.8.13 And Hazael said, But what, is thy servant a dog, that he should do this great thing? And Elisha answered, The LORD hath shewed me that thou shalt be king over Syria.

α.8.14 Neit ama[i] wutch Elisha, kah peyaonau wussontimomoh, noh anukqut, toh kittinuk Elisha? kah namp8ham, nuttinuk ken woh wunnamuhkut kukketeam.
E.8.14 So he departed from Elisha, and came to his master; who said to him, What said Elisha to thee? And he answered, He told me that thou shouldest surely recover.

α.8.15 Kah nnih mohtompog, nemunum kuhpogkônagk, kah ukquogkinnumun nippekontu, kah wussepakenumun ut wuskesukqut, newaj nuppuk, kah Hazael wunnompe ketass8tamómuh.
E.8.15 And it came to pass on the morrow, that he took a thick cloth, and dipped it in water, and spread it on his face, so that he died: and Hazael reigned in his stead.

α.8.16 Kah napanna wutteashe kodtumómut Joram wunnaumonuh Ahab, ketass8t ut Israel, Jehoshaphat neit kohtass8tam8it ut Judah, Jehoram wunnaumonuh Jehoshaphat ketass8t ut Judah, n8che ketass8tam88.
E.8.16 And in the fifth year of Joram the son of Ahab king of Israel, Jehoshaphat being then king of Judah, Jehoram the son of Je hoshaphat king of Judah began to reign.

α.8.17 Shwinchage kah neeswe kodtumwohkom n8che ketass8tam8it, kah shwosuk tahshe kodtumwae ketass8tam88 ut Jerusalem.
E.8.17 Thirty and two years old was he when he began to reign; and he reigned eight years in Jerusalem.

α.8.18 Kah pomushau ummayeuóut Israelle ketass8tamwog, ne [á]seip wek Ahab, newutche wuttaunoh Ahab 8mittamwossissinneuh, kah matchesut ut anaquabit Jehovah.
E.8.18 And he walked in the way of the kings of Israel, as did the house of Ahab: for the daughter of Ahab was his wife: and he did evil in the sight of the LORD.

α.8.19 Qut onch matta paguanóou Jehovah Judahoh, wutche Davidoh wuttinneumoh, neane quoshomomp nagwutteae wuttinnumauonat wequai, kah en wunneechanit.
E.8.19 Yet the LORD would not destroy Judah for David his servant's sake, as he promised him to give him alway a light, and to his children.

α.8.20 Ut ukkesukodtumut Edom amai wutch agwe wunnutcheganit Judah, kah ketass8tamwuhkóog nehenwonche.
E.8.20 In his days Edom revolted from under the hand of Judah, and made a king over themselves.

α.8.21 Neit Joram qushkodteau en Zair, kah wame weechóg chariotsash, kah neepau nukoñae, kah togkomau Edomitsoh, neh weenekunkqutcheh, kah chariotse mugquompaog, kah missinninnúog spuhh8wáog wekuóut.
E.8.21 So Joram went over to Zair, and all the chariots with him: and he rose by night, and smote the Edomites which compassed him about, and the captains of the chariots: and the people fled into their tents.

α.8.22 Qut onch Edom amaeu wutch agwe wunnutcheganit Judah pajeh yeu kesukok, neit Libna amaeu ne nan ahquompag.
E.8.22 Yet Edom revolted from under the hand of Judah unto this day. Then Libnah revolted at the same time.

α.8.23 Kah onkatogish wutusseongash Joram, kah wame ne ásit, sunnummatta wussukwhosinash Judae ketass8tamwog ummehquontamóe wussukwhosuongan8óut?
E.8.23 And the rest of the acts of Joram, and all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?

α.8.24 Kah Joram wesoquom8mau 8shoh, kah posekinau weeche 8shit ut wutotonat David, kah Ahaziah wunnaumonuh wunnompe ketass8tam8mukquoh.
E.8.24 And Joram slept with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers in the city of David: and Ahaziah his son reigned in his stead.

α.8.25 Nabo neese kodtum8mut Joram wunnaumonuh Ahab Israelle ketass8t, Ahaziah wunnaumonuh Jehoram Judae ketass8t n8che ketass8tam88.
E.8.25 In the twelfth year of Joram the son of Ahab king of Israel did Ahaziah the son of Jehoram king of Judah begin to reign.

α.8.26 Ahaziah nesnehchage kah neese kodtumwohkom n8che ketass8tam8it, kah noh k[e]tass8tam88 nequt kodtumwae ut Jerusalem, kah ohkasoh ussowesuoh Athaliah, wuttaunoh Omri Israelle ketass8t.
E.8.26 Two and twenty years old was Ahaziah when he began to reign; and he reigned one year in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Athaliah, the daughter of Omri king of Israel.

α.8.27 Kah pomushau ummayut wek Ahab, kah matchesu ut anaquabit Jehovah, neane wek Ahab, newutche neh wessenumukqutcheh wek Ahab.
E.8.27 And he walked in the way of the house of Ahab, and did evil in the sight of the LORD, as did the house of Ahab: for he was the son in law of the house of Ahab.

α.8.28 Kah weechaau Joramoh wunnaumonuh Ahab ayeuuhkononat Hazael ketass8t ut Syria, ut Ramoth$Gilead; kah Syriansog n8chumwehtahwhaog Joram.
E.8.28 And he went with Joram the son of Ahab to the war against Hazael king of Syria in Ramothgilead; and the Syrians wounded Joram.

α.8.29 Kah ketass8t Joram qushkeu neetskesinneat ut Jezreel, wutch n8chumwetáhwhuttuwongash, nish Syriansog anheáhettiche ut Ramah; ayeuuhkononat Hazaeloh Syriae ketass8toh, kah Ahaziah wunnaumonuh Jehoram Judae ketass8t, w8ms8 wunnáuónat Joramoh wunnaumonuh Ahab ut Jezreel, newutche mahchinau.
E.8.29 And king Joram went back to be healed in Jezreel of the wounds which the Syrians had given him at Ramah, when he fought against Hazael king of Syria. And Ahaziah the son of Jehoram king of Judah went down to see Joram the son of Ahab in Jezreel, because he was sick.

α.9.1 KAh Elisha quoshodtumwaen, wehkomau pasuk8h wuñaumonáuh quoshodtumwaenúog, kah wuttinuh, puttukquobisish ut kusseganit, kah yeu neemunush wisquie pummee ut kenutcheganit, kah aush Ramoth$Gilead.
E.9.1 And Elisha the prophet called one of the children of the prophets, and said unto him, Gird up thy loins, and take this box of oil in thine hand, and go to Ramothgilead:

α.9.2 Kah na peyôan, naut natinneáh Jehu wunnaumonuh Jehoshaphat, wunnaumonuh Nimshi, kah pettutteash, & omohkeah wutch kenugke wematut, kah uss8wun kemu chamberut.
E.9.2 And when thou comest thither, look out there Jehu the son of Jehoshaphat the son of Nimshi, and go in, and make him arise up from among his brethren, and carry him to an inner chamber;

α.9.3 Neit neemunush wisquie pumme, kah sokenush uppuhkukqut, k[à]h n8wash, yeu wussin Jehovah, kusses[e]qunush kukketass8tam8uneat ut Israel, neit wohshitanush, kah wussemwush, kah ahque na apsh.
E.9.3 Then take the box of oil, and pour it on his head, and say, Thus saith the LORD, I have anointed thee king over Israel. Then open the door, and flee, and tarry not.

α.9.4 Neit wusken, wuskenúe quoshodtumwaen, au Ramoth$Gilead.
E.9.4 So the young man, even the young man the prophet, went to Ramothgilead.

α.9.5 Kah paont, kusseh, ayeuteae ummugquompaog nummatappuog, kah n8wau, kuppaudaunchem8kaush woi mugquomp, kah Jehu n8wau, howan nenawun wame? kah n8wau, ken woi mugquomp.
E.9.5 And when he came, behold, the captains of the host were sitting; and he said, I have an errand to thee, O captain. And Jehu said, Unto which of all us? And he said, To thee, O captain.

α.9.6 Kah neepau petutteu wetuômut[-], kah sussokenumauoh pumme uppuhkukqut, kah wuttinuh, yeu wussin Jehovah um-Manitt8moh Israel, kussesequnush kukketass8tam8uneat ummissinninneumoh Jehovah, ut Israel.
E.9.6 And he arose, and went into the house; and he poured the oil on his head, and said unto him, Thus saith the LORD God of Israel, I have anointed thee king over the people of the LORD, even over Israel.

α.9.7 Kah pish kuttogkodtam wek Ahab kussontimom, onk woh nutann8tontam 8sqheongan8 nuttinneumog [q]oshodtumeaenúog, kah 8sqheongan8 wame wuttinneumoh Jeho[u]ah, ut wunnutcheganit Jezebel.
E.9.7 And thou shalt smite the house of Ahab thy master, that I may avenge the blood of my servants the prophets, and the blood of all the servants of the LORD, at the hand of Jezebel.

α.9.8 Newutche mamusse wek Ahab pish paguaneum8, kah nuttummetah wutch Ahabut noh sagkétog pummeneutunk kah noh kobhausit, kah sequnit ut Israel.
E.9.8 For the whole house of Ahab shall perish: and I will cut off from Ahab him that pisseth against the wall, and him that is shut up and left in Israel:

α.9.9 Kah nuttatuppehteoh wek Ahab wekut Jeroboam wunnaumonuh Nebat, kah netatuppe wekit Baasha unnaumonuh Ahij[a]h.
E.9.9 And I will make the house of Ahab like the house of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, and like the house of Baasha the son of Ahijah:

α.9.10 Kah anumwog pish m8hwh[ao]g Jezebeloh, ut wutchipiyeumut Jezreel; kah matta pish howane posekinuk8. Kah woshittanum squont kah wusseem8.
E.9.10 And the dogs shall eat Jezebel in the portion of Jezreel, and there shall be none to bury her. And he opened the door, and fled.

α.9.11 Neit Jehu sohham, en wuttinneumoh wussontimomoh, kah pasuk wuttinuh, wame wunnegen? toh waj yeuoh kogke[i]shke[n] peyaonukqueân, kah nah wuttinuh, k8waheomw8 wosketomp, kah ukkeket8káonk.
E.9.11 Then Jehu came forth to the servants of his lord: and one said unto him, Is all well? wherefore came this mad fellow to thee? And he said unto them, Ye know the man, and his communication.

α.9.12 Kah n8waog, pann8waonk, yeuye ussinan, kah n8wau, yeu kah yeu nuttugqun, ye[u] wussin Jehovah, kusseseq[u]nush kukketass8tam8uneat ut Israel.
E.9.12 And they said, It is false; tell us now. And he said, Thus and thus spake he to me, saying, Thus saith the LORD, I have anointed thee king over Israel.

α.9.13 Kah nag kenuppe usseog, kah nemunum nishnoh wosketomp wuthogk8onk, & agwe ponamw[o]g ut woskeche stairsut. kah nag, puhpequohtoog nashpe monopuhpequana[sh], n8waog, Jehu ketass8tam88.
E.9.13 Then they hasted, and took every man his garment, and put it under him on the top of the stairs, and blew with trumpets, saying, Jehu is king.

α.9.14 Neit Jehu wunnaumonuh Jehoshaphat wunnaumonuh Nimshi, ayeuúhkonittue wunnompewussu Joramut, (kah Joram wadchunum Ramoth$Gilead, nagum, kah wame Israel, newutche Hazael Syrie ketass8t.
E.9.14 So Jehu the son of Jehoshaphat the son of Nimshi conspired against Joram. (Now Joram had kept Ramothgilead, he and all Israel, because of Hazael king of Syria.

α.9.15 Qut ketass8t Joram qushkeu, wunneetske[n]nneat ut Jezreel, wutch n8chumwetahwhuttuongash nish Syriansog anheáhetticheh, ayeuuhkono[n]t Hazael Syriae ketass8t) kah Jehu n8wau, ne unnantamog neit howan sohhogkitch, asuh pohquohhogkitch wutch otanat, monchenat unnonat ut Jezreel.
E.9.15 But king Joram was returned to be healed in Jezreel of the wounds which the Syrians had given him, when he fought with Hazael king of Syria.)  And Jehu said, If it be your minds, then let none go forth nor escape out of the city to go to tell it in Jezreel.

α.9.16 Neit nayeumuk chariot, kah au Jezreel, (newutche Joram na wussepsinin) kah Ahaziah Judae ketass8t w8mseup nauonat Joram.
E.9.16 So Jehu rode in a chariot, and went to Jezreel; for Joram lay there. And Ahaziah king of Judah was come down to see Joram.

α.9.17 Kah na wuñepauun askuhwhosuenin ut Jezrelle wonkon8sinut, kah naau Jehu wutchippánumoh, paont, kah n8wau, nunnau chippan8og, kah Joram n8wau, nemun8k h[ò]rsesoh na8mukquit, kah ann8nog nag noggushkauónat, kah n8waj, sun wunoht[é]aongannu8?
E.9.17 And there stood a watchman on the tower in Jezreel, and he spied the company of Jehu as he came, and said, I see a company. And Joram said, Take an horseman, and send to meet them, and let him say, Is it peace?

α.9.18 Neit pasuk horsesoh na8mukquit, wunnogskauonat, kah n8wau yeu wussin ketass8t, sun wunohteaonganú8? kah Jehu n8wau, tohwutch weogkehteauan wunohteaonk? quinnupish en nuppishquanit, Kah askuhwheteaenin wuttinnon, n8wau, ann8naenin nah uppeyaónuh, qut matta wonk peyauou.
E.9.18 So there went one on horseback to meet him, and said, Thus saith the king, Is it peace? And Jehu said, What hast thou to do with peace? turn thee behind me. And the watchman told, saying, The messenger came to them, but he cometh not again.

α.9.19 Neit nahohtoeu wonk ann8team8 horsesut, noh nah páônont, kah n8wau, yeu wussin ketass8t, sun wunohteaonganú8? kah Jehu namp8ham, tohwaj weogkehteauan wunohteaonk quinnupish en nuppishqua[n]it.
E.9.19 Then he sent out a second on horseback, which came to them, and said, Thus saith the king, Is it peace? And Jehu answered, What hast thou to do with peace? turn thee behind me.

α.9.20 Kah askuhwheteaen wuttinnon n8wau, nah uppeyaonuh kah matta wonk peyau, kah uppomushaongan8 onatuh uppomushaonk Jehu wunnaumonuh Nimshi, newutche kogkeâe pomushau.
E.9.20 And the watchman told, saying, He came even unto them, and cometh not again: and the driving is like the driving of Jehu the son of Nimshi; for he driveth furiously.

α.9.21 Kah Joram n8wau, nanashwek, káh chariot quaquashwunnumun, kah Joram Israelle ketass8t, kah Ahaziah Judae ketass8t sohhamwog naneeswe ut wut-chariottumóut kah ayeuuhkônittue sohwohtauaog Jehuoh, kah na wuttit nogkishkauon ut wutchippiyeumut Naboth wut$Jezrelit,
E.9.21 And Joram said, Make ready. And his chariot was made ready. And Joram king of Israel and Ahaziah king of Judah went out, each in his chariot, and they went out against Jehu, and met him in the portion of Naboth the Jezreelite.

α.9.22 Kah n$nih, Joram nauont Jehuoh, n8wau, sun wunohteaonganú8 Jehu? kah namp8ham teagwe wunnohteaonk, nisohke wunnanwun8dsquauosuongash kohkasoh Jesabel, kah uppauwomoh monahettit?
E.9.22 And it came to pass, when Joram saw Jehu, that he said, Is it peace, Jehu? And he answered, What peace, so long as the whoredoms of thy mother Jezebel and her witchcrafts are so many?

α.9.23 Kah Joram quinuppenum wunnutcheg kah wusseem8, kah unnau Ahaziahoh, yeu wunnompuwussuonganú8 woi Ahaziah,
E.9.23 And Joram turned his hands, and fled, and said to Ahaziah, There is treachery, O Ahaziah.

α.9.24 Kah Jehu wuttonkenau ahtomp[o]h nashpe mamusse ummenuhkesuonk, kah muswau Joramoh, na nashaue ukkenauwameonganit, kah kôuhquodt sohham8m8 en wuttahhut, kah penushau ut chariotut.
E.9.24 And Jehu drew a bow with his full strength, and smote Jehoram between his arms, and the arrow went out at his heart, and he sunk down in his chariot.

α.9.25 Neit unnau Bidkaroh ummugquompomoh tashinok, kah unnohteagk ut wutchippiyeume ohteakonit Naboth wut-Jezrelit, newutche mehquontash, ken kah nen asuhkaue na8mitteáog 8shoh Ahab, Jehovah upponamauon yeu 8weanun:
E.9.25 Then said Jehu to Bidkar his captain, Take up, and cast him in the portion of the field of Naboth the Jezreelite: for remember how that, when I and thou rode together after Ahab his father, the LORD laid this burden upon him;

α.9.26 Wunnamuhkut nauomp wunonkou, 8sqheonk Naboth, kah wunnaumonuh 8sqheongan8 n8wop Jehovah, kah kutonkquatoush yeu ut ayeuonganit, n8wau Jehovah, newutche yeuyeu neemunok, kah unnohko[u]8k en ne ohteahkonit neaunak wuttinn8waonk Jehovah.
E.9.26 Surely I have seen yesterday the blood of Naboth, and the blood of his sons, saith the LORD; and I will requite thee in this plat, saith the LORD. Now therefore take and cast him into the plat of ground, according to the word of the LORD.

α.9.27 Qut Ahaziah Judae ketass8t yeu nag*, wussem8 en nogque mayut tanohketeaongane wetuomut: kah Jehu wutasukauoh, kah n8wau, noh wonk togkom8k ut chariotut, kah wutussenau, ahhut kuhkuhquemuk Gur, ne kishke Ibleam; kah spuhh8au Megiddo, kah na wuttit nuppun.
E.9.27 But when Ahaziah the king of Judah saw this, he fled by the way of the garden house. And Jehu followed after him, and said, Smite him also in the chariot. And they did so at the going up to Gur, which is by Ibleam. And he fled to Megiddo, and died there.

α.9.28 Kah wuttinneumoh ukkinukquoh ut chariotut, en Jerusalem kah upposekinóuh 8weenohket weeche 8shoh ut wutotanat David.
E.9.28 And his servants carried him in a chariot to Jerusalem, and buried him in his sepulchre with his fathers in the city of David.

α.9.29 Kah nabo nequt kodtum8mut Joram wunnaumonuh Ahab, Ahaziah n8che ketass8tam88 ut Judah.
E.9.29 And in the eleventh year of Joram the son of Ahab began Ahaziah to reign over Judah.

α.9.30 Kah Jehu paont Jezreel, Jezebel wunn8tamun, kah noh ánoggu, kah wunassuhquábesu, kah natauwompu wutch kenogkenaganit.
E.9.30 And when Jehu was come to Jezreel, Jezebel heard of it; and she painted her face, and tired her head, and looked out at a window.

α.9.31 Kah Jehu petutteadt squontamut, n8wau, sun Zimre wunohteau noh nashont wussontimomoh:
E.9.31 And as Jehu entered in at the gate, she said, Had Zimri peace, who slew his master?

α.9.32 Kah tahshinum wuskesuk ut kenogkeneganit, kah n8wau, howan weech8humit, howan? kah na 8ch sohwhadtauwompinneau neesuoh asuh nishuog euneuchesog.
E.9.32 And he lifted up his face to the window, and said, Who is on my side?  who? And there looked out to him two or three eunuchs.

α.9.33 Kah n8wau, n8konteagk, neit wunn8kuhkonáuh, kah nawhutch 8squeheonk seáhsheau sussupponkomuk, kah ut horsesut, sógwuhkáuont ut agwe wusseetut.
E.9.33 And he said, Throw her down. So they threw her down: and some of her blood was sprinkled on the wall, and on the horses: and he trode her under foot.

α.9.34 Kah petutteadt, meetsu kah wuttattam, kah n8wau, yeuyeu nók yeuoh matánumôe mittamwossis, kah posekin8k: newutche noh ketass8t wuttaunoh,
E.9.34 And when he was come in, he did eat and drink, and said, Go, see now this cursed woman, and bury her: for she is a king's daughter.

α.9.35 Kah moncheog posékinónat, qut wanne teag wonk wunnampteauóuh, webe wuskonontup, kah wusseetash, kah wunnutchegash.
E.9.35 And they went to bury her: but they found no more of her than the skull, and the feet, and the palms of her hands.

α.9.36 Newaj wonk peyahettit, kah wuttinnóneau: kah n8wau, yeu wuttinn8waonk Jehovah, ne an8wadt nashpe wuttinneumoh Elijaoh, wut-Tishbite n8wau, ut wutchippiyeumut Jezreel, anumwog pish meechwog 8weyaus Jezebel.
E.9.36 Wherefore they came again, and told him. And he said, This is the word of the LORD, which he spake by his servant Elijah the Tishbite, saying, In the portion of Jezreel shall dogs eat the flesh of Jezebel:

α.9.37 Kah wuhhogkuh Jezebel pish ogqueneunkquodt m8iit ut woskeche ohteuhkonit, ut wutchippiyeumut Jezreel, onk woh mat n8wau8og yeuoh Jezebel.
E.9.37 And the carcase of Jezebel shall be as dung upon the face of the field in the portion of Jezreel; so that they shall not say, This is Jezebel.

α.10.1 KAh Ahab nesausuk tahshinchag tahs88oh wunnaumonuh ut Samaria: kah Jehu wusṣukhum wusṣukwhongash, kah wunnegonshhuonash en Samaria, en Jezreelle nánawunnuáenuut, en Eldersut, kah en nag nanawunoncheg wuñeechánoh Ahab; n8wau,
E.10.1 And Ahab had seventy sons in Samaria. And Jehu wrote letters, and sent to Samaria, unto the rulers of Jezreel, to the elders, and to them that brought up Ahab's children, saying,

α.10.2 Yeuyeu quenau yeu wussukwhonk peyaonukqueóg, wunnaumonuh kussontimomou k8wetomukqunnaóont, kah k8charitsumimw8, kah horsesog, kah wonk wonkkôn8sine keitotan, kah kenauwameongash.
E.10.2 Now as soon as this letter cometh to you, seeing your master's sons are with you, and there are with you chariots and horses, a fenced city also, and armour;

α.10.3 Pepen8k wanegit kah tapeneunkqussit wutch kussontimóm8 wunnaumonat, kah appehúk wutappuonganit 8shoh, kah ayeukontamwansh8k kussontimóm8 wekit.
E.10.3 Look even out the best and meetest of your master's sons, and set him on his father's throne, and fight for your master's house.

α.10.4 Qut nag mishe wabesuog kah n8waog, kusseh, nees8oh ketass8tamwoh, n8nanum8oh neepauin anaquabit: uttoh koh woh neepauinnean?
E.10.4 But they were exceedingly afraid, and said, Behold, two kings stood not before him: how then shall we stand?

α.10.5 Kah noh nanawunuk wetu, kah noh nanawunuk keitotan, kah wonk Eldersog, kah neg nanawunoncheg, nag an8team8og en Jehu, n8waog, nenawun kittinneumog, kah nutussemun wame ne áseeog, matta nutayeu[u]mun howae ketass8t, ussish nean wunnegik ut kuskesukqut.
E.10.5 And he that was over the house, and he that was over the city, the elders also, and the bringers up of the children, sent to Jehu, saying, We are thy servants, and will do all that thou shalt bid us; we will not make any king: do thou that which is good in thine eyes.

α.10.6 Neit nahohtôeu wonk 8sukkuhhumâuuh, n8wau, nen weech8huméóg, kah n8swetam[o]g n8wadtautaonkqussuonk, neemunok uppuhkuk8uh wosk[e]tompaog, kussontimómw8 wunnaumonuh, kah peyaònek ut Jezreel, saup yeu to[n]t (kah ketass8t wunnaumonuh nesausuk adtahshinchagkusséhettit, wehtomáog kéhche missinninnúh ne otánat, neg nanawunoncheg)
E.10.6 Then he wrote a letter the second time to them, saying, If ye be mine, and if ye will hearken unto my voice, take ye the heads of the men your master's sons, and come to me to Jezreel by to morrow this time. Now the king's sons, being seventy persons, were with the great men of the city, which brought them up.

α.10.7 Kah n$nih, wussukwhonk páuhónukquéhettit, nemunáog ketass8t wunnaumonuh, kah nushaog nesausuk tahshinchagkodtuh wosketompuh, kah ponamwog uppuhkukquash man8taut, kah wunnegonshhuonáoash en Jezreel.
E.10.7 And it came to pass, when the letter came to them, that they took the king's sons, and slew seventy persons, and put their heads in baskets, and sent him them to Jezreel.

α.10.8 Kah uppeyon ann8naen, kah wuttiñon, n8wau, nag paudtoog uppuhkuk88ash ketass8t wunnaumonuh, kah n8wau, neese wunnumwonkquttau8k ahhut petutteamuk sqontamut, nô paje[k] mohtompanit.
E.10.8 And there came a messenger, and told him, saying, They have brought the heads of the king's sons. And he said, Lay ye them in two heaps at the entering in of the gate until the morning.

α.10.9 Kah n$nih, mohtompog sohham, kah neepau, k[â]h unnau wáme missinninnúh, kussampweusseaeneumw8: kusseh, nutayeuuhkonittue wunnombeukon nussontimom, kah nunnush, qut hówan wame yeuh wu[u]nushah?
E.10.9 And it came to pass in the morning, that he went out, and stood, and said to all the people, Ye be righteous: behold, I conspired against my master, and slew him: but who slew all these?

α.10.10 Eyeu wahteau8k, matta pish teag penushan8 en ohkekontu, wutch wuttinn8waonk Jehovah, ne Jehovah an8wop papaume wek A[b]ab, newutche wutussen nean8wop nashpe wuttinneumoh Elijahoh.
E.10.10 Know now that there shall fall unto the earth nothing of the word of the LORD, which the LORD spake concerning the house of Ahab: for the LORD hath done that which he spake by his servant Elijah.

α.10.11 Neit Jehu nushau wame neh asquttahwhutcheh wutch wekit Ahab ut Jezreel, kah wame ummogosketompomuh kah anonkumoncheh, kah wussephausuéneumoh, nô pajeh wanne howane wutusquttahwhonat.
E.10.11 So Jehu slew all that remained of the house of Ahab in Jezreel, and all his great men, and his kinsfolks, and his priests, until he left him none remaining.

α.10.12 Kah neepau, kah monchu, kah peyau Samaria: kah apit m8sôsue wetuómut ut mayut.
E.10.12 And he arose and departed, and came to Samaria. And as he was at the shearing house in the way,

α.10.13 Jehu nogkushkauau weematoh Ahaziah Judae ketass8t, kah n8wau, howanig kenaau? k[á]h nag namp8hamwog, nenawun wematoh Ahaziah, kah n8w8mussimun wonkumonat ketass8t wunnaumonuh, kah wunneechanoh sonksq.
E.10.13 Jehu met with the brethren of Ahaziah king of Judah, and said, Who are ye? And they answered, We are the brethren of Ahaziah; and we go down to salute the children of the king and the children of the queen.

α.10.14 Kah n8wau, keteáe, nemun8k, kah nah wunneemunóuh keteáe, kah wunnushóuh, ut m8sum8áe weetuome pasohtheganit, yauunchagkussuoh kah neesuoh wosketompuh: kah wanne howane sequttahwóou.
E.10.14 And he said, Take them alive. And they took them alive, and slew them at the pit of the shearing house, even two and forty men; neither left he any of them.

α.10.15 Kah ná waj amait nameheau Jonadaboh wunnaumonuh Rechaboh, wunnogskunkqunat: kah 8wonkumoh, kah wuttinuh, kuttah sampwi, neane nuttah weet[ó]aog kuttah, kah Jonadab namp8ham, nux: n$nag, aninnumah kenutcheg, kah wutti[n]ñumauoh wunnutcheg, kah ukkuhkukqunuh en wutchariottumut.
E.10.15 And when he was departed thence, he lighted on Jehonadab the son of Rechab coming to meet him: and he saluted him, and said to him, Is thine heart right, as my heart is with thy heart? And Jehonadab answered, It is. If it be, give me thine hand. And he gave him his hand; and he took him up to him into the chariot.

α.10.16 Kah n8wau weechaeh kah naish nus-zealum wutch Jehovah: neit wunnaiyeumheuh ut wut-chariottumut.
E.10.16 And he said, Come with me, and see my zeal for the LORD. So they made him ride in his chariot.

α.10.17 Kah paont Samaria, nushau wame neh asque[k]táwhutche ut Ahabut, ut Samaria, nô pajeh uppaguanónat, neaunak wuttinn8waonk Jehovah, ne anomp Elijahoh.
E.10.17 And when he came to Samaria, he slew all that remained unto Ahab in Samaria, till he had destroyed him, according to the saying of the LORD, which he spake to Elijah.

α.10.18 Kah Jehu miyanau wame missinninnúh, kah nah wuttinuh, Ahab ogguhse wowussumap Baal, Jehu pish um̃8cheke wowussumuh.
E.10.18 And Jehu gathered all the people together, and said unto them, Ahab served Baal a little; but Jehu shall serve him much.

α.10.19 Newutche yeuyeu, wehquetumiék wame ukquoshodtumwaéneumoh Baal, kah wame wuttinn[eu]moh, kah wame wussephausuéneumoh, a[hqu]e howan quenauwusitch, newutche nen nummishe sephamau Baal, howan quenauwussit, matta pish po[m]antam8, qut Jehu wunnompuwusuwáe ussen, onk woh uppaguano[u]at wâussumoncheg Baaloh.
E.10.19 Now therefore call unto me all the prophets of Baal, all his servants, and all his priests; let none be wanting: for I have a great sacrifice to do to Baal; whosoever shall be wanting, he shall not live. But Jehu did it in subtilty, to the intent that he might destroy the worshippers of Baal.

α.10.20 Kah Jehu n8wau, wahteauwahuak m8ishe moeonk wutch Baal, kah nag wahteauwáhuwaog.
E.10.20 And Jehu said, Proclaim a solemn assembly for Baal. And they proclaimed it.

α.10.21 Kah Jehu ann8team8 panuppe wame Israelut, kah wame waussumoncheg Baaloh peyaog, newajeh matta howan quenauussek, noh matta paunk: kah petutteaog wekit Baal; kah wek Baal numwapin papakodcheh.
E.10.21 And Jehu sent through all Israel: and all the worshippers of Baal came, so that there was not a man left that came not. And they came into the house of Baal; and the house of Baal was full from one end to another.

α.10.22 Kah unnau neh nanawunumunutche, auwohteáe komuk, p[à]dtaush hogk8ongash wutch wame neg waussumoncheg Baaloh, kah nah uppaudtauoh hogk8ongash.
E.10.22 And he said unto him that was over the vestry, Bring forth vestments for all the worshippers of Baal. And he brought them forth vestments.

α.10.23 Kah Jehu, kah Jonadab wunnaumonuh Rechab petutteaog wekit Baal, kah unnau waussumonchég Baaloh, natinneohteag, & natauómpam8k uttoh en yeu kuttit wetómukqunnea[u] howae wuttinneumoh Jehovah qut webe waussumoncheg Baaloh,
E.10.23 And Jehu went, and Jehonadab the son of Rechab, into the house of Baal, and said unto the worshippers of Baal, Search, and look that there be here with you none of the servants of the LORD, but the worshippers of Baal only.

α.10.24 Kah petutteahettit magunat sephausuongash, kah chikotae mag8ongash; Jehu kéhtimau shwosuk tahshinchagkodtoh wosketompuh, ut poquadchit, kah n8wau, wosketompaog neg paudtauunágeg ut kenutchegan8óut, pasuk pohquohhuk, noh moncheáheont, upp[om]anatamóonk pish nompeyeu8 uppomantamóonk.
E.10.24 And when they went in to offer sacrifices and burnt offerings, Jehu appointed fourscore men without, and said, If any of the men whom I have brought into your hands escape, he that letteth him go, his life shall be for the life of him.

α.10.25 Kah n$niyeup, quenau mahche sephausit chikohtae sephausuongash, Jehu unnau wadchanuwaénuh, kah ummugquompuh, petutteagk, nush8k, howan sohhogkitch, kah wuttogkomóuh en kenag togkodtog, kah wadchanuaenúog, kah mugquompaog wussohwhôkon[á]uh, kah petut[t]eaog keitotanat ut wekit Baal.
E.10.25 And it came to pass, as soon as he had made an end of offering the burnt offering, that Jehu said to the guard and to the captains, Go in, and slay them; let none come forth. And they smote them with the edge of the sword; and the guard and the captains cast them out, and went to the city of the house of Baal.

α.10.26 Kah sohh8wunáog wuttinneukontongoh Baal, wutch wekit Baal, kah wutchikwosóuh:
E.10.26 And they brought forth the images out of the house of Baal, and burned them.

α.10.27 Kah n8konteáog wuttinneukontungoh Baal, kah sohquehtahamwog wek Baal, kah umm8[e]komukquhkoneau paj[e]h yeu kesukok.
E.10.27 And they brake down the image of Baal, and brake down the house of Baal, and made it a draught house unto this day.

α.10.28 Yeu wuttin Jehu ushkoméheon Baaloh wutch Israelut.
E.10.28 Thus Jehu destroyed Baal out of Israel.

α.10.29 Qut ummatcheseongash Jeroboam wunnaumonuh Nebat, noh matcheseáheont Israeloh, Jehu matta na 8ch amaèin, golde calfsog neg apitcheg Bethel kah Dan.
E.10.29 Howbeit from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin, Jehu departed not from after them, to wit, the golden calves that were in Bethel, and that were in Dan.

α.10.30 Kah Jehovah unnau Jehuoh, newutche k8nesem, ussenat ne sampwag ut nuksesukqut kah kuttinteóh wek Ahab, neaunak wame ut nuttahut, keneechanog ut yaue pometuonganit, pish appuog wutappuonganit Israel.
E.10.30 And the LORD said unto Jehu, Because thou hast done well in executing that which is right in mine eyes, and hast done unto the house of Ahab according to all that was in mine heart, thy children of the fourth generation shall sit on the throne of Israel.

α.10.31 Qut Jehu matta nunnukqussu pomshonat wuttinnaumatuonganit Jehovah um-Manitt8moh Israel, nashpe ma[mu]sse wuttah, newutche matta amáeu wut[ch] ummatcheseongash Jeroboam, noh matcheseaheont Israeloh.
E.10.31 But Jehu took no heed to walk in the law of the LORD God of Israel with all his heart: for he departed not from the sins of Jeroboam, which made Israel to sin.

α.10.32 Yeush kesukodtash Jehovah n8che tióhquswau Israeloh: kah Hazael nah wuttogkomuh, ut wame sussippoiyeumut Israel:
E.10.32 In those days the LORD began to cut Israel short: and Hazael smote them in all the coasts of Israel;

α.10.33 Wutch Jordan wutcheksuiyeu, wame Gileade óhke, Gaditsog, kah Reubenitsog, kah Manassitsog, wutch Aroer, (new kishke Arnone sepuut) Gilead kah Bashan.
E.10.33 From Jordan eastward, all the land of Gilead, the Gadites, and the Reubenites, and the Manassites, from Aroer, which is by the river Arnon, even Gilead and Bashan.

α.10.34 Kah onkatogish wutusseongash Jehu, kah wame ne asit, kah wame ne ummenuhkesuonk, sunnummatta wussukwhos[i]ónash ut Israelle ketass8tamwog ummehquontamóe wussukwhongan8óut?
E.10.34 Now the rest of the acts of Jehu, and all that he did, and all his might, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?

α.10.35 Kah Jehu weesogquom8mau 8shoh, kah upposekinóuh ut Samaria, kah Jehoahaz wunnaumonuh wunnompe ketass8tamomuh.
E.10.35 And Jehu slept with his fathers: and they buried him in Samaria. And Jehoahaz his son reigned in his stead.

α.10.36 Kah nisahke Jehu ketass8tam8it ut Israel, ut Samaria, nesnechage kah shwosuk tahshe kodtumwae.
E.10.36 And the time that Jehu reigned over Israel in Samaria was twenty and eight years.

α.11.1 KAh Athalia ohkasoh Ahaziah, nag* wunnaumonuh nupp8oh, neepau, kah paguanau wame ketass8tamóe wuskannem.
E.11.1 And when Athaliah the mother of Ahaziah saw that her son was dead, she arose and destroyed all the seed royal.

α.11.2 Qut Jehosheba, wuttaunoh ketass8t Joram, wetompasu Ahaziah, kah ukkomm8tinuh wutch kenugke ketass8t wunnaumonáhtu neh nashómukeh: kah wutattashóuh, nagum, kah nanukkéhukqutcheh, ut appinneáe chamberut, wutch Athaliahut, newaj matta nushómuk.
E.11.2 But Jehosheba, the daughter of king Joram, sister of Ahaziah, took Joash the son of Ahaziah, and stole him from among the king's sons which were slain; and they hid him, even him and his nurse, in the bedchamber from Athaliah, so that he was not slain.

α.11.3 Kah noh 8weetomuh, attáhshau ut wekit Jehovah nequtta tahshe kodtumwae: kah Athaliah ketass8tam88 ne ut ohkeit.
E.11.3 And he was with her hid in the house of the LORD six years. And Athaliah did reign over the land.

α.11.4 Kah nesausuk adtahshe kodtum8uk, Jehoiada ann8hteam8, kah neemskauau, nequt pasuk8e nanawunnuaenúunitcheh, kah weeche mugquompuh, kah wadchánuaénúh, kah uppaudtauónuh ut wekit Jehovah, kah nah 8n8wonáuh, kah nah wutchadchekéimuh ut wekit Jehovah, kah nah wunnahtinuh ketass8t wunnaumonuh.
E.11.4 And the seventh year Jehoiada sent and fetched the rulers over hundreds, with the captains and the guard, and brought them to him into the house of the LORD, and made a covenant with them, and took an oath of them in the house of the LORD, and shewed them the king's son.

α.11.5 Kah nah wutann8nuh n8wau, yeu teag ne woh aséog, nashwe chippisseógish petutteáog Sabbath$daye, pish nanawunukeg askuhwheteáonk ut ketass8t wekit.
E.11.5 And he commanded them, saying, This is the thing that ye shall do; A third part of you that enter in on the sabbath shall even be keepers of the watch of the king's house;

α.11.6 Kah nashwe chippissitcheg pish appuog ut Surre squontamut, kah nashwe chippissitcheg, ut squontamut, uppisquan8óut wadchanuwaenúog: ne pish kittinne wadchanumuneau weetuómue âskuhwheteaonk, matta s8kepinnónat.
E.11.6 And a third part shall be at the gate of Sur; and a third part at the gate behind the guard: so shall ye keep the watch of the house, that it be not broken down.

α.11.7 Kah neesechippeogish kenaau wame sohhamógish Sabbathut, nag pish nanawehteaog askuhwheteaonk ut wekit Jehovah, waéene ketass8tamwut.
E.11.7 And two parts of all you that go forth on the sabbath, even they shall keep the watch of the house of the LORD about the king.

α.11.8 Kah pish k8wéenuhkau8mw8 ketass8t, nish$noh wosketomp wuttogkodt[e]g ut wunnutcheganit, kah noh petutteadt en anóme pumigkompoonganit nushinach: kah kenaau wetom8k ketass8t nean wohhog, kah nean petutteadt.
E.11.8 And ye shall compass the king round about, every man with his weapons in his hand: and he that cometh within the ranges, let him be slain: and be ye with the king as he goeth out and as he cometh in.

α.11.9 Kah nequt pasuk8e mugquompaog usseog neaunak wame nish Jehoiada anan8teamupash, kah nag nemunáog nish$noh wosketomp wuttinneumoh, neh petutteanutcheh Sabbath$dayeu, weeche nag sohhogig Sabbath$daye, kah nag peyaonáog Jehoiadahuh sephausuénuh.
E.11.9 And the captains over the hundreds did according to all things that Jehoiada the priest commanded: and they took every man his men that were to come in on the sabbath, with them that should go out on the sabbath, and came to Jehoiada the priest.

α.11.10 Kah sephausuen aninnumauau nequt pasuk8e ummugquompuh, ukqunnuhtukquash wutokqunegash ketass8t David, nish ohtagish temple.
E.11.10 And to the captains over hundreds did the priest give king David's spears and shields, that were in the temple of the LORD.

α.11.11 Kah wadchannaenúog, wé[e]nekkompauwéhtauaog ketass8toh, nish$n[o]h wosketomp wuttogkodteg ut wunnutcheganit, wutch unninuhkounne naiyag temple, wehque menadcheeniyeu naiyag temple kishke Altar kah temple.
E.11.11 And the guard stood, every man with his weapons in his hand, round about the king, from the right corner of the temple to the left corner of the temple, along by the altar and the temple.

α.11.12 Kah sohh8wunau ketass8t wunnaumonuh, kah upponamauoh chehtuhquab, kah wauwáonk, kah ketass8tamwuhkonuh, kah wussussequnuh, kah pohponkinitchohh8wog, kah n8waog, God wadchanonch ketass8tamwoh.
E.11.12 And he brought forth the king's son, and put the crown upon him, and gave him the testimony; and they made him king, and anointed him; and they clapped their hands, and said, God save the king.

α.11.13 Kah Athaliah n8tog 8wadtauatonkqussuongan8 wadchanuaénuog kah missinninnúog peyaoneau missinninnúh ut wut-templeumut Jehovah.
E.11.13 And when Athaliah heard the noise of the guard and of the people, she came to the people into the temple of the LORD.

α.11.14 Kah natauwompit kah kusseh, ketass8t kechekompau neepatuhquonk, neohenagkup, kah sontimóog, kah monopuhpeguaenuog kishke ketass8tamut, kah wame ohkée missinninnuog wekontamwog kah puhpequohtóog monopuhpeguash: kah Athaliah neh$nekikom wuthogk8unash, kah mishont8wau, wunnombeukuhteaouk, wunnombeukuhteaonk.
E.11.14 And when she looked, behold, the king stood by a pillar, as the manner was, and the princes and the trumpeters by the king, and all the people of the land rejoiced, and blew with trumpets: and Athaliah rent her clothes, and cried, Treason, Treason.

α.11.15 Qut Jehoiada sephausuen, ann8nau nequt pasuk8 mugquompoh, ayeuhteae aninnohsuénuh, kah nah wuttinuh sohh8wun8k poquodche ussukkompauonganit, kah noh asukauont nush8k nashpe togkodteg, newutche sephausuen án8wop, ahque nushinach ut wekit Jehovah.
E.11.15 But Jehoiada the priest commanded the captains of the hundreds, the officers of the host, and said unto them, Have her forth without the ranges: and him that followeth her kill with the sword. For the priest had said, Let her not be slain in the house of the LORD.

α.11.16 Kah wuttohqunóuh, kah au ne mayut, horsesog ahhut peáhettit ketass8t wekit, kah na$ut nushon.
E.11.16 And they laid hands on her; and she went by the way by the which the horses came into the king's house: and there was she slain.

α.11.17 Kah Jeoiada wunn8wau ut nashauwe Lordut, kah ketass8tamut, kah missinninnuh, nag woh Jehovah 8missinninneumuneat: kah wonk nashaue ketass8t & missinninúog.
E.11.17 And Jehoiada made a covenant between the LORD and the king and the people, that they should be the LORD's people; between the king also and the people.

α.11.18 Kah wame ohkee missinninnuog petutteáog wekit Baal, kah wussukquttahhamuneau, wutaltarumash, kah wuttinneukontunkoh, uppannuppe sukquehthamuneau, kah nag nushaog Mattan wussephausuéneumoh Baal, ut anaquohtag altarash: kah sephausuen kehtimau aninnohsuénuh, ut weekit Lord.
E.11.18 And all the people of the land went into the house of Baal, and brake it down; his altars and his images brake they in pieces thoroughly, and slew Mattan the priest of Baal before the altars. And the priest appointed officers over the house of the LORD.

α.11.19 Kah nemunau nequt pasuk8e nanawunnuaénuh, kah ummugquompuh, kah wadchanuaénuh, kah wame ohkée missinninnuh, kah w8msuunaog ketass8toh wutch wekit Jehovah, kah peyaog wadchanuwae squontamwe mayut, en ketass8t wekit, kah quenappu wutappuong[á]n8out ketass8tamwog.
E.11.19 And he took the rulers over hundreds, and the captains, and the guard, and all the people of the land; and they brought down the king from the house of the LORD, and came by the way of the gate of the guard to the king's house. And he sat on the throne of the kings.

α.11.20 Kah wame ohkée missinninuog wekontamwog, kah keitotan manunohteau, kah nushaog Athaliahoh nashpe togkodteg kishke ketass8t wekit.
E.11.20 And all the people of the land rejoiced, and the city was in quiet: and they slew Athaliah with the sword beside the king's house.

α.11.21 Joash nesausuk tahshe kodtamwohkomup n8che ketass8tam8it.
E.11.21 Seven years old was Jehoash when he began to reign.

α.12.1 WUnnesausuk tahshe kodtum8mut Jehu, Joash n8che ketass8tam88, & yauunchage kodtumwae ketass8tam88 ut Jerusalem, kah ohkasoh ussowesuoh Zibiah wutch Beersheba.
E.12.1 In the seventh year of Jehu Jehoash began to reign; and forty years reigned he in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Zibiah of Beersheba.

α.12.2 Kah Jehoash ussu ne sampwag ut anaquabit Jehovah nisahkepomontog, uttoh adt Jehoiada sephausuen kuhk8tomauomp.
E.12.2 And Jehoash did that which was right in the sight of the LORD all his days wherein Jehoiada the priest instructed him.

α.12.3 Qut qunuhqui ayeuongash matta amaunum8unash, missinninnúog ashpumme sephausuog, kah chikkohsumwog weetemungquok ut qunnuhqui ayeuonganehtu.
E.12.3 But the high places were not taken away: the people still sacrificed and burnt incense in the high places.

α.12.4 Kah Jehoash unnau sephausuenúh, wame teaguash, wutch wunneetupanatamwe maumachiit, nish padtomukish Jehovah wekit, wutteaguash nish$noh pasuk noh agkemut, wutteaguash nish$noh wann8huk, kah wame teaguash, paóm8ugish wuttahhut paudtauunat wekit Jehovah.
E.12.4 And Jehoash said to the priests, All the money of the dedicated things that is brought into the house of the LORD, even the money of every one that passeth the account, the money that every man is set at, and all the money that cometh into any man's heart to bring into the house of the LORD,

α.12.5 Sephausu[e]nuog nish neemunnumhettich, nish$noh wosketomp wutch weetompaut, kah onchteau8m8utch tattauwagish ut wetuómut, uttoh adt namehteómuk touwi. 
E.12.5 Let the priests take it to them, every man of his acquaintance: and let them repair the breaches of the house, wheresoever any breach shall be found.

α.12.6 Qut n$niyeup, ut neesnechage kah nishwe kodtum8mut ketass8t Jehoash, sephausuenuog asquam onchitteau8og nish tadtauagish ut wetuómut.
E.12.6 But it was so, that in the three and twentieth year of king Jehoash the priests had not repaired the breaches of the house.

α.12.7 Neit ketass8t Jehoash wehkomau Jehoiadahoh sephausuen, kah sephausuenúh, kah nah wuttinuh, tohwutch mat onchehteau8óg tadtauwutchaagish wetuómut? newutche ne tahshe attumunumók wutteaug8oash ketompaóog, qut ôadtéhteagk wutch tadtauwutcháage w[u]tuómut.
E.12.7 Then king Jehoash called for Jehoiada the priest, and the other priests, and said unto them, Why repair ye not the breaches of the house? now therefore receive no more money of your acquaintance, but deliver it for the breaches of the house.

α.12.8 Kah sephausuenúog weetuodtuog, netahshe attumunúmauónat wutteag8oash missinninnúog, kah matta wunnehteau8unat tadtauutcháagish ut wetuómut.
E.12.8 And the priests consented to receive no more money of the people, neither to repair the breaches of the house.

α.12.9 Qut Jehoiada sephausuen nemunau chestoh, kah pukqussum onkqussohhou kah upponamun kishke altarut aninnohkôunneiyeu, ahhut petutteamuk wekit Lord, kah sephausuenúog neg nannauussquontamácheg ne ponamuneau wame teaguash, nish paudtomukish wekit Jehovah.
E.12.9 But Jehoiada the priest took a chest, and bored a hole in the lid of it, and set it beside the altar, on the right side as one cometh into the house of the LORD: and the priests that kept the door put therein all the money that was brought into the house of the LORD.

α.12.10 Kah n$niyeup, namohettit monatash teaguash ut chestut, ketass8t 8suhkuhwh[ó]suaéneumoh, kah negonne sephausuen kuhkuhqueog, kah upponamunáoash, kah ogketamwog teaguash nish maskomukish ut wekit Jehovah.
E.12.10 And it was so, when they saw that there was much money in the chest, that the king's scribe and the high priest came up, and they put up in bags, and told the money that was found in the house of the LORD.

α.12.11 Kah mohtogketamwéhettit teaguash, wuttinnumauunáoash wunnutchegan8óut neg asecheg anakausuonk, neg nanawunukeg wek Jehovah, kah wussohh8wuttauóneau Carpentersoh kah weekéhteaénúh, neg anakausitcheg ut wekit Jehovah.
E.12.11 And they gave the money, being told, into the hands of them that did the work, that had the oversight of the house of the LORD: and they laid it out to the carpenters and builders, that wrought upon the house of the LORD,

α.12.12 Kah Masonoh, kah wá[n]tahhogeg qussukquanash, kah adtôónat timber, kah wunnehthamwe qussukquanash, onchteauunat tadtautchá[o]gish ut wekit Jehovah, kah wame nish sohham8m8ugish wutch wetu oncheteáuunat.
E.12.12 And to masons, and hewers of stone, and to buy timber and hewed stone to repair the breaches of the house of the LORD, and for all that was laid out for the house to repair it.

α.12.13 Qut matta kesteau8un wutch wek Jehovah silvere bowlsash, snuffersash, wunnonganash, monopuhpequonash, ne teague golde wishquash, asuh silvere wishquash, nashpe teagua[s]h nish paudtomukish wekit Jehovah.
E.12.13 Howbeit there were not made for the house of the LORD bowls of silver, snuffers, basons, trumpets, any vessels of gold, or vessels of silver, of the money that was brought into the house of the LORD:

α.12.14 Qut nish wuttinnumaúonáoash anakausuenúh, kah nish nashpe oncheteáuog wek Jehovah.
E.12.14 But they gave that to the workmen, and repaired therewith the house of the LORD.

α.12.15 Nano, matta wunnompagu[n]umauo8og wosketompuh neh wunnutchegan8óut ponamwehettiche teagua[hs], ôadtuhkauónat anakausuenúog, newu[t]che nag pabuhtanumwe usséog. 
E.12.15 Moreover they reckoned not with the men, into whose hand they delivered the money to be bestowed on workmen: for they dealt faithfully.

α.12.16 Panneseáe teaguash, kah matcheseae teaguash, matta paudtau8unash wekit Jehovah: wutchiyeumoe sephausuenutu.
E.12.16 The trespass money and sin money was not brought into the house of the LORD: it was the priests'.

α.12.17 Neit Hazael Syriae ketass8t kuhkuhqueu, kah ayeuuhkontam Gath, kah wussohkomun: kah Hazel unnukquaeu ônat Jerusalem.
E.12.17 Then Hazael king of Syria went up, and fought against Gath, and took it: and Hazael set his face to go up to Jerusalem.

α.12.18 Kah Jehoash Judae ketass8t neemunum wame waneetupanatamweyeu8gish, nish Jehosophat kah Jehoram, kah Ahaziah 8shoh, Judae ketass8toh wunneetupanatamwahteunkish, kah nehenwonche 8neetupanatamwéayeumash, kah wame gold nish namteómukish ut nompok8unuhtú, ut wekit Jehovah, kah ut ketass8t wekit, kah wunnegonshhuónash en Hazaelut Syriae ketass8tut, kah monchu wutch Jerusalem.
E.12.18 And Jehoash king of Judah took all the hallowed things that Jehoshaphat, and Jehoram, and Ahaziah, his fathers, kings of Judah, had dedicated, and his own hallowed things, and all the gold that was found in the treasures of the house of the LORD, and in the king's house, and sent it to Hazael king of Syria: and he went away from Jerusalem.

α.12.19 Kah onkatoganash wutusseongash Jehoash, kah wame nish asechish, sunnummatta wussukwh[ó]sin8ash ut Judae ketass8tamwog ummequontam8ongane wussukwhosuongan8óut?
E.12.19 And the rest of the acts of Joash, and all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?

α.12.20 Kah wuttinneumoh neepóoh, kah wunnombekohteaog, kah nushaog Jehoashoh, ut Millo wekit, ne adt womusimuk Silla.
E.12.20 And his servants arose, and made a conspiracy, and slew Joash in the house of Millo, which goeth down to Silla.

α.12.21 Newutche Jozachar wunnaumonuh Shimeath, kah Jehozabad wunnaumonuh Shomer, wuttinneumoh, wuttogkomóuh, kah nupp8, kah upposekinouh weeche 8shoh, ut keitotanat David, kah Amaziah wunnaumonuh wunnompass8tammom8h.
E.12.21 For Jozachar the son of Shimeath, and Jehozabad the son of Shomer, his servants, smote him, and he died; and they buried him with his fathers in the city of David: and Amaziah his son reigned in his stead.

α.13.1 WUnnesnechage kah nishwe kodtum8mit Joash wunnaumonuh Ahaziah Judae ketass8t, Jehoahaz wunnaumonuh Jehu, n8che ketass8tam88 ut Israel ut S[á]maria, nabonesausuk tahshe kodtumwae.
E.13.1 In the three and twentieth year of Joash the son of Ahaziah king of Judah Jehoahaz the son of Jehu began to reign over Israel in Samaria, and reigned seventeen years.

α.13.2 Kah ussu ne machuk ut anaquabit Jehovah kah asuhkom ummatcheseongash Jeroboam wunnaumonuh Nebat, noh matcheseáheont Israeloh, matta wunnukkodtum8u[n]ash.
E.13.2 And he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD, and followed the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, which made Israel to sin; he departed not therefrom.

α.13.3 Kah ummusquantam8onk Jehovah ayeuuhkonittue nashqunau ut Israeloh, kah n[o]h upp[o]nuh wunnutcheganit Hazael Syriae ketass8t, kah ut wunnutcheganit Benhadad wunnaumonuh Hazael, nisohkepomontamwehettit.
E.13.3 And the anger of the LORD was kindled against Israel, and he delivered them into the hand of Hazael king of Syria, and into the hand of Benhadad the son of Hazael, all their days.

α.13.4 Kah Jehoahaz nanompassumau Jehovah, kah Jeho[u]ah wunn8tauoh: newutche naum sunukkuhwhaonk Israel, newutch Syriae ketass8t wussunukkohhumun
E.13.4 And Jehoahaz besought the LORD, and the LORD hearkened unto him: for he saw the oppression of Israel, because the king of Syria oppressed them.

α.13.5 (Kah Jehovah aninnumauau Israeloh, pohquohwussuéninnúh, newaj sohhamwehettit wutch agwe wunnutchegan8óut Syriansog: kah wunnaumonuh Israel ayeuog wetuomehtu neane negonaunagkup.
E.13.5 (And the LORD gave Israel a saviour, so that they went out from under the hand of the Syrians: and the children of Israel dwelt in their tents, as beforetime.

α.13.6 Qut matta nukkodtumòog ummatcheseongash Jeroboam wek, noh matcheseáheont Israeloh, ne uppomushon, kah na ohteau kuhpiyeuash wonk ut Samaria.)
E.13.6 Nevertheless they departed not from the sins of the house of Jeroboam, who made Israel sin, but walked therein: and there remained the grove also in Samaria.)

α.13.7 Kah matta sequnnumauóou missinninnúh Jehoahazoh, qut napanna tahshinchagkod horsesog na8mukqutcheg, kah piogquodtash chariotsash, kah piogque muttannonganog kussuog ohkeishácheg: newutche Syriae ketass8t uppapaguanópuh, kah uppapuppissiyeuhkonápoh nashpe poggohhamóonk.
E.13.7 Neither did he leave of the people to Jehoahaz but fifty horsemen, and ten chariots, and ten thousand footmen; for the king of Syria had destroyed them, and had made them like the dust by threshing.

α.13.8 Kah onkatogish wutusseongash Jehoahaz, kah wame nish asecheh, kah ummenuhkesuonk, sunnummattá wussukwhosin8ash ut Israelle ketass8tamwog ummehquantamoe wussukwhosuongan8óut.
E.13.8 Now the rest of the acts of Jehoahaz, and all that he did, and his might, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?

α.13.9 Kah Jehoahaz weesequom8mau 8shoh, kah upposekinóuh ut Samaria, kah Joashoh wunnaumonuh wunnompass8tamómukquoh.
E.13.9 And Jehoahaz slept with his fathers; and they buried him in Samaria: and Joash his son reigned in his stead.

α.13.10 Shwinchag kah nesausuk tahshe ukkodtum8nout Joash Judae ketass8t, Jehoash wunnaumonuh Jehoahaz n8che ketass8tam88 ut Israel ut Samaria, nabo nequtta tahshe kodtumwae.
E.13.10 In the thirty and seventh year of Joash king of Judah began Jehoash the son of Jehoahaz to reign over Israel in Samaria, and reigned sixteen years.

α.13.11 Kah matchesu ut anaquabit Jehovah, matta nukkodtum8 wame ummatcheseongash Jeroboam wunnaumonuh Nebat, noh matcheseáheomp Israeloh, nish uppomushonash.
E.13.11 And he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD; he departed not from all the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel sin: but he walked therein.

α.13.12 Kah onkatoganash wutusseongash Joash, kah wame ne asépash, kah ummenuhk[e]suonk ne nashpe ayeuuhkonont Amaziahhoh Judae ketass8t, sunnummatta wussukwhosinóash ut Israelle ketass8tamwog ummehquontamóe wussukwhosuongan8óut?
E.13.12 And the rest of the acts of Joash, and all that he did, and his might wherewith he fought against Amaziah king of Judah, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?

α.13.13 Kah Joash wesequom8ou 8shoh: kah Jeroboam appeup wutappuonganit: kah Joash posekinau ut Samaria, ut kenugke Israelle ketass8tamwog.
E.13.13 And Joash slept with his fathers; and Jeroboam sat upon his throne: and Joash was buried in Samaria with the kings of Israel.

α.13.14 Kah Elisha mahchinau, ne mahchináonk waj nuppuk, kah Joash Israelle ketass8t uppeyaónùh, kah mau ut waabe wuskesukqut, kah n8wau, woi n8sh, n8sh, wut-chariotum Israel, kah wunnaiyomukqutteomoh.
E.13.14 Now Elisha was fallen sick of his sickness whereof he died. And Joash the king of Israel came down unto him, and wept over his face, and said, O my father, my father, the chariot of Israel, and the horsemen thereof.

α.13.15 Kah Elisha wuttinuh, neemun ohtomp kah kôuhquodtash, kah nemunnum ohtomp kah kôuhquodtash.
E.13.15 And Elisha said unto him, Take bow and arrows. And he took unto him bow and arrows.

α.13.16 Kah unnau Israelle ketass8toh, ponsh kenutcheg ahtompeit, kah upponamun wunnutcheg: kah Elisha ponam wunnutchegash ut woskeche ketass8t wunnutcheganit.
E.13.16 And he said to the king of Israel, Put thine hand upon the bow. And he put his hand upon it: and Elisha put his hands upon the king's hands.

α.13.17 Kah n8wau woshwunum8k kenogkaneg wutch pwoiyeu, kah woshwunnumun; neit Elisha n8wau, pumsh kah pummu, kah n8wau, uppohquohwussu[a]ongane kôuhquod Jehovah, kah pohquohwussuae kôuhquod wutch Syria: newutche pish kuttogkom Syriansog ut Aphek, n[ó] pajeh kummohtupanóna[ó]out.
E.13.17 And he said, Open the window eastward. And he opened it. Then Elisha said, Shoot. And he shot. And he said, The arrow of the LORD's deliverance, and the arrow of deliverance from Syria: for thou shalt smite the Syrians in Aphek, till thou have consumed them.

α.13.18 Kah n8wau, nemunush kôuhquodtash, kah wunnemunumunash: kah unnau Israelle ketass8toh, togkodtash ohke, kah wunnishwudt togkodtamun, kah wutcheqununumun.
E.13.18 And he said, Take the arrows. And he took them. And he said unto the king of Israel, Smite upon the ground. And he smote thrice, and stayed.

α.13.19 K[a]h Manittowomp ummsquanumuh, kah n8wau, ken woh napanna asuh nequtta kutteashunk kodtamuneh, neit woh kuttogkodtam Syria nô pajeh kummohtupánumunat: qut yeuyeu, pish kuttogkodtam Syria webe nishwudt.
E.13.19 And the man of God was wroth with him, and said, Thou shouldest have smitten five or six times; then hadst thou smitten Syria till thou hadst consumed it: whereas now thou shalt smite Syria but thrice.

α.13.20 Kah Elisha nupp8, kah upposekinó[u]h: kah Moabitse chippann8wongash, mukk8kenumwontamwog ohke papaume waj kutchissik kodtumm8.
E.13.20 And Elisha died, and they buried him. And the bands of the Moabites invaded the land at the coming in of the year.

α.13.21 Kah n$nihyeup, posekináhettit wosketompuh, kusseh, nauwaog chippan8oh, kah penuhteáog wosketompoh en 8weenohkemut Elisha, kah wosketomp n8kinit, kah mâsunuk wuskonash Elisha, wonk pomantam, kah neepauwéhto wussetash.
E.13.21 And it came to pass, as they were burying a man, that, behold, they spied a band of men; and they cast the man into the sepulchre of Elisha: and when the man was let down, and touched the bones of Elisha, he revived, and stood up on his feet.

α.13.22 Qut Hazael Syrie ketass8t, sunukkohwhau Israeloh, nisohke pomontog Jehoahaz.
E.13.22 But Hazael king of Syria oppressed Israel all the days of Jehoahaz.

α.13.23 Kah Jehovah nahuk kitteamonteánumoh, kah ummonanumoh, kah 8t8ánumuh, newutche 8n8waongan8 Abrahamoh, kah Isaakoh, kah Jakoboh, kah matta uppaguanuh; kah asquam wussohwhôt[eâ]un[a]t wutch anaquabit.
E.13.23 And the LORD was gracious unto them, and had compassion on them, and had respect unto them, because of his covenant with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and would not destroy them, neither cast he them from his presence as yet.

α.13.24 Neit Hazael Syrie ketass8t nupp8, kah Benhadadoh wuñaumonuh, wunnompass8tamómukquoh.
E.13.24 So Hazael king of Syria died; and Benhadad his son reigned in his stead.

α.13.25 Kah Jehoash, wunnaumonuh Jehoahaz, wonk amaunum wutch wunnutcheganit Benhadad wunnaumonuh Hazael, keitotanash, nish nemunukupash wutch wunnutcheganit Jehoash 8shoh, nashpe ayeuhteaonk, nishwudt Joash wussohkauoh, kah tomwéhteau Israelle keitotanash.
E.13.25 And Jehoash the son of Jehoahaz took again out of the hand of Benhadad the son of Hazael the cities, which he had taken out of the hand of Jehoahaz his father by war. Three times did Joash beat him, and recovered the cities of Israel.

α.14.1 NAhohtôe kodtum8mut Joash wunnaumonuh, Jehoahaz Israelle ketass8t Amaziah ketass8tam88, wunnaumonuh Joash Judae ketass8t.
E.14.1 In the second year of Joash son of Jehoahaz king of Israel reigned Amaziah the son of Joash king of Judah.

α.14.2 Neh neesnechagke kah napanna kodtumwohkom n8che ketass8tam8it, kah ketass8t[a]m88 n[e]snehchage kah pasuk8gun kodtumwae ut Jerusalem: kah ohkasoh 8wesuonk Jehoaddan wutch Jerusalem.
E.14.2 He was twenty and five years old when he began to reign, and reigned twenty and nine years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Jehoaddan of Jerusalem.

α.14.3 Kah ussu ne sampwag ut anaquabit Jehovah, qut mata netatuppeyeueu Davidoh 8shoh: usseu neaunak wame nish Joashoh asénitcheh.
E.14.3 And he did that which was right in the sight of the LORD, yet not like David his father: he did according to all things as Joash his father did.

α.14.4 Qut qunnunkqui ayeuongash matta amaunum8unash, ashpummeu missinninnúog sephausuog, kah chikohsumwog wetemungquok ut qunuhqui ayeuonganehtu.
E.14.4 Howbeit the high places were not taken away: as yet the people did sacrifice and burnt incense on the high places.

α.14.5 Kah n$niyeup, quenau ass8tamóonk menehketeomuk ut wunnutcheganit, nush[á]u wuttinneumoh neh nashoneupoh 8shoh ketass8t.
E.14.5 And it came to pass, as soon as the kingdom was confirmed in his hand, that he slew his servants which had slain the king his father.

α.14.6 Qut wunnechan8oh nushehteaénúog matta wunnushoh, neansukwhosik ut wuttinnaumatuongane wussukwhonganit Moses, uttoh adt Jehovah ann8teamóp, n8wau, wut8shinneunk matta pish nushoog wutch wunneechaneuh, asuh matta wunneechaneunk wutche wut8shinneunk, qut nishnoh wosketomp pish nushau, wutch nehenwonche ummatcheseonk.
E.14.6 But the children of the murderers he slew not: according unto that which is written in the book of the law of Moses, wherein the LORD commanded, saying, The fathers shall not be put to death for the children, nor the children be put to death for the fathers; but every man shall be put to death for his own sin.

α.14.7 Piogque muttannonganog kussuoh wut-Edomitsoh nushau ut salte 8nouhkôiyeuut, kah ayeuteáe sohkom Selah, kah wuttissowétamun Joktheel pajeh yeu kesukok.
E.14.7 He slew of Edom in the valley of salt ten thousand, and took Selah by war, and called the name of it Joktheel unto this day.

α.14.8 Ne[a]t Amaziah ann8nau ann8naénuh, en Jehoash wunnaumonuh Jehoahaz, wunnaumonuh Jehu, Israelle ketass8t, n8wau, peyaush, mónunneâadtittéuh.
E.14.8 Then Amaziah sent messengers to Jehoash, the son of Jehoahaz son of Jehu, king of Israel, saying, Come, let us look one another in the face.

α.14.9 Kah Jehoash Israelle ketass8t negont8au Amaziahoh Judae ketass8toh, n8wau, kogkôunog ohquóhhou ut Lebanon, negonshhuon Cedaroh ne ohtag ut Lebanon, n8wau, aninnumau kuttaunoh nunnaumon, 8mittamwossissinneat, kah touohkomukque puppinashim paumwushau, kah task8hkauau kogkôunogkuhquohh8oh.
E.14.9 And Jehoash the king of Israel sent to Amaziah king of Judah, saying, The thistle that was in Lebanon sent to the cedar that was in Lebanon, saying, Give thy daughter to my son to wife: and there passed by a wild beast that was in Lebanon, and trode down the thistle.

α.14.10 Wunnamuhkut kuttogkodtamup Edom, kah kuttah tahshinâusu: woweenowash, kah apsh kekit, newutche tohwutch weoggehteauan k8woskhuwaonk, woh kuppenushonan, ken kah Judah weeche ken?
E.14.10 Thou hast indeed smitten Edom, and thine heart hath lifted thee up: glory of this, and tarry at home: for why shouldest thou meddle to thy hurt, that thou shouldest fall, even thou, and Judah with thee?

α.14.11 Qut Amaziah matta n8tam8, newaj Jehoash Israelle ketass8t kuhkuhqueit, kah nagum kah Amaziah Judae ketass8t, monunneaadtuog, ut Bethshemesh, ne wadchiik Judah.
E.14.11 But Amaziah would not hear. Therefore Jehoash king of Israel went up; and he and Amaziah king of Judah looked one another in the face at Bethshemesh, which belongeth to Judah.

α.14.12 Kah Judah togkomau ut anaquabit Israel, kah spuhh8waog nish$noh wosketomp, wekit.
E.14.12 And Judah was put to the worse before Israel; and they fled every man to their tents.

α.14.13 Kah Jehoash Israelle ketass8t tohqunau Amaziahoh Judae ketass8t, wunnaumonuh Joash wunnaumonuh Ahaziah, ut Bethshemesh, kah peyau Jerusalem, kah touwutchá[h]inóu Jerusaleme pummeneutunk wutch Ephraime squontamut, wehque náshik squontamut, yauut pasuk8e isquonogkod.
E.14.13 And Jehoash king of Israel took Amaziah king of Judah, the son of Jehoash the son of Ahaziah, at Bethshemesh, and came to Jerusalem, and brake down the wall of Jerusalem from the gate of Ephraim unto the corner gate, four hundred cubits.

α.14.14 Kah nemunum wame gold kah silver, kah wame wishquash nish nameteaumukish ut wekit Jehovah, kah ut nompakouanehtu ketass8t wekit, kah wanomwaonganehtea[m]ukeg, kah qushkeu en Samaria.
E.14.14 And he took all the gold and silver, and all the vessels that were found in the house of the LORD, and in the treasures of the king's house, and hostages, and returned to Samaria.

α.14.15 Kah onkatoganash wutusseongash Joash nish asechish, kah ummenhkesuonk, kah wuttoh ane ayeuhkonouh Amaziahoh Judae ketass8toh, sunnummatta wussukwhosin8ash, ut Israelle ketass8tamwog ummehquontamóe wussukwhosuongan8óut?
E.14.15 Now the rest of the acts of Jehoash which he did, and his might, and how he fought with Amaziah king of Judah, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?

α.14.16 Kah Joash weesequom8mau 8shoh, kah posekinau ut Samaria, weeche Israelle ketass8tamwoh, kah Jeroboamoh wunnaumonuh wunnompe ketass8tam8mukquoh.
E.14.16 And Jehoash slept with his fathers, and was buried in Samaria with the kings of Israel; and Jeroboam his son reigned in his stead.

α.14.17 Kah Amaziah wunnaumon[u]h Joash Judae ketass8t, pomantam mahche nuppuk Jehoash wunnaumonuh Jehoahaz Israelle ketass8t, nabo napanna tahshe kodtumwae.
E.14.17 And Amaziah the son of Joash king of Judah lived after the death of Jehoash son of Jehoahaz king of Israel fifteen years.

α.14.18 Kah onkatoganash wutusseongash Amaziah, sunnummatta wussukwhosin8ash ut Judae ketass8tamwog ummequontamóe wussukwhongan8óut?
E.14.18 And the rest of the acts of Amaziah, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?

α.14.19 Kah wutayeuuhkonittue wunnombeukonóuh ut Jerus[a]lem: kah ushpuhh8au en Lachish, qu[e]nag asuhkaúe ann8team8og en Lachish, kah na wuttit nushoneau.
E.14.19 Now they made a conspiracy against him in Jerusalem: and he fled to Lachish; but they sent after him to Lachish, and slew him there.

α.14.20 Kah uppas8óuh aht8che horsesut, kah posekinau ut Jerusalem weeche 8shoh, ut wutotanat David.
E.14.20 And they brought him on horses: and he was buried at Jerusalem with his fathers in the city of David.

α.14.21 Kah wame Judae missinninnuog nemunáog Azariah (noh nabo nequtta adtahshe kodtumwohkog) & wunnompe ketass8tamwuhkonáuh wutch 8shoh Amaziahoh.
E.14.21 And all the people of Judah took Azariah, which was sixteen years old, and made him king instead of his father Amaziah.

α.14.22 Noh ayim Elath, kah wunnompenumun Judah, mahche ketasṣ8t weesequomomont 8shoh,
E.14.22 He built Elath, and restored it to Judah, after that the king slept with his fathers.

α.14.23 Nabo napanna wutteashe kodtum8mut Amaziah wunnaumonuh Joash Judae ketass8t, Jeroboam wunnaumonuh Joash Israele ketasṣ8t n8che ketasṣ8tam88 ut Samaria yauunchage kah nequt kodtum8.
E.14.23 In the fifteenth year of Amaziah the son of Joash king of Judah Jeroboam the son of Joash king of Israel began to reign in Samaria, and reigned forty and one years.

α.14.24 Kah usṣu ne machuk ut anaquabit Jehovah, matta nukkodtum8 wame ummatcheseongash Jeroboam wunnaumonuh Nebat, noh matcheseáheont Israelloh.
E.14.24 And he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD: he departed not from all the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin.

α.14.25 Noh nompenum Israelle sussippoiyeuash wutch ahhut peteamuk Hamath, wehque mukoshquttae kehtahhannit neaunak wuttinn8waonk Jehovah um-Manitt8moh Israel, ne an8wop nashpe wunnutcheganit wuttinneumoh Jonahoh, wunnaumonuh Amittai quoshodtumwaen, wutch Gath-Hepher.
E.14.25 He restored the coast of Israel from the entering of Hamath unto the sea of the plain, according to the word of the LORD God of Israel, which he spake by the hand of his servant Jonah, the son of Amittai, the prophet, which was of Gathhepher.

α.14.26 Newutche Jehovah naum wutuhquanumóonk Israel, ne ahche weesogkon: newutche naut wanne howan kuppinnúsu, asuh asquttahwhut, asuh matta howan noh anumauont Israeloh.
E.14.26 For the LORD saw the affliction of Israel, that it was very bitter: for there was not any shut up, nor any left, nor any helper for Israel.

α.14.27 Kah Jehovah matta n8woou nutjishkham 8wesuonk Israel wutch agwe kesukqut, qut nah wuttomheuh nashpe wunnutcheganit Jeroboam wunnaumonuh Joash.
E.14.27 And the LORD said not that he would blot out the name of Israel from under heaven: but he saved them by the hand of Jeroboam the son of Joash.

α.14.28 Kah onkatoganash wutusṣeongash Jeroboam kah wame niṣh asecheh, ummenuhkesuonk, uttoh an ayeuhteup, kah uttoh an qushkinuk Damascus kah Hamath, ne wadtaumaik Judah, wutch Israel, sunnummatta wussukwhosin8oash ut Israelle ketass8tamwog ummequontamóe wussukwhosuonganuóut?
E.14.28 Now the rest of the acts of Jeroboam, and all that he did, and his might, how he warred, and how he recovered Damascus, and Hamath, which belonged to Judah, for Israel, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?

α.14.29 Kah Jeroboam weesequom8 8shoh, weeche Israelle ketass8tamwoh, kah Zachariah wunnaumonuh wunnompe ketass8tam8mukquoh.
E.14.29 And Jeroboam slept with his fathers, even with the kings of Israel; and Zachariah his son reigned in his stead.

α.15.1 NEsnehchage kah nesausuk tahshe ukkodtum8mut Jeroboam Israelle ketass8t, Azariah wunnaumonuh Amaziah Judae ketass8t n8che ketass8tam88.
E.15.1 In the twenty and seventh year of Jeroboam king of Israel began Azariah son of Amaziah king of Judah to reign.

α.15.2 Nabo nequtta tahshe kodtumwohkom n8che ketass8tam8ut, kah napanna tahshinchage kah neese kodtumwae ketass8tam88 ut Jerusalem, kah ohkasoh uss8wesuoh Jecholiah wutch Jerusalem.
E.15.2 Sixteen years old was he when he began to reign, and he reigned two and fifty years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Jecholiah of Jerusalem.

α.15.3 Kah ussu ne sampwagk ut wuskesukqut Jehovah, neaunak wame ne 8shoh Amaziahoh aseneup.
E.15.3 And he did that which was right in the sight of the LORD, according to all that his father Amaziah had done;

α.15.4 Webe qunuhqui ayeuongash matta ontahtauunash: missinninnuog ashpumme sephausuog kah chikohsumwog wetemungquok ut qunuhqui ayeuonganehtu.
E.15.4 Save that the high places were not removed: the people sacrificed and burnt incense still on the high places.

α.15.5 Kah Jehovah togkomau ketass8toh newaje wutchegqut, pajeh wunnupp8ongane kesukodtumut, kah nussinneu wetuómut, kah Jotham ketass8t wunnaumonuh, nanawunum wetu, kah wussumau ohke missinninnúh.
E.15.5 And the LORD smote the king, so that he was a leper unto the day of his death, and dwelt in a several house. And Jotham the king's son was over the house, judging the people of the land.

α.15.6 Kah onkatoganash wutusseongash Azariah, kah wame ne aseit, sunnummatta wussukwhosin8ash ut Judae ketasss8tamwog ummequontamóe wussukwhongan8óut?
E.15.6 And the rest of the acts of Azariah, and all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?

α.15.7 Neit Azariah weesequom8mau 8shoh, kah upposekinóuh weeche 8shoh, ut wutotanat David, kah Jothamoh wunnaumonuh wunnompass8tamómukquoh.
E.15.7 So Azariah slept with his fathers; and they buried him with his fathers in the city of David: and Jotham his son reigned in his stead.

α.15.8 Shwinchage kah shwosuk tahshe kodtum8mit Azariah, Judae ketass8t, Zachariah wunnaumonuh Jeroboam n8che ketass8tam88 ut Samaria, nequtta tahsuoh nepauzsoh.
E.15.8 In the thirty and eighth year of Azariah king of Judah did Zachariah the son of Jeroboam reign over Israel in Samaria six months.

α.15.9 Kah ussu ne máchuk ut ánáquábit Jehovah, ne 8shoh aseneup, matta amaeu wutch ummatcheseonganit Jeroboam wunnaumonuh Nebat, noh matcheseáheont Israelloh.
E.15.9 And he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD, as his fathers had done: he departed not from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin.

α.15.10 Kah Shallum wunnaumonuh Jabesh wutayeuuhkonittue wunnombekonuh, wuttogkomuh ut anaquabhettit missinninnúog, kah wunnushoh, kah wunnompe ketahs8tam8moh.
E.15.10 And Shallum the son of Jabesh conspired against him, and smote him before the people, and slew him, and reigned in his stead.

α.15.11 Kah onkatoganash wutasṣeongash Zachariah kusṣeh, wusṣukwhosuash Israelle ketasṣ8tamwog ummequontamóe wusṣukwhongan8ôut.
E.15.11 And the rest of the acts of Zachariah, behold, they are written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel.

α.15.12 Yeu wuttinn8waonk Jehovah, ne ânont Jehuoh, n8w[o]p, kenaumonu[n]k pish appuog ut Israel wutappuonganit pajeh yauut pometuonganit, kah ne nniyeup.
E.15.12 This was the word of the LORD which he spake unto Jehu, saying, Thy sons shall sit on the throne of Israel unto the fourth generation. And so it came to pass.

α.15.13 Shallum wunnaumonuh Jabesh n8che ketasṣ8tam88, shwinchag kah pasuk8gun, tahshe kohtahs8tam8it Uzziah, Judae ketasṣ8t, kah ketasṣ8tamoou mamusṣe nepauzoh ut Samaria.
E.15.13 Shallum the son of Jabesh began to reign in the nine and thirtieth year of Uzziah king of Judah; and he reigned a full month in Samaria.

α.15.14 Newutche Menahem wunnaumonuh Gad; kuhkuhqueu wutch Tirza, kah peyau Samaria, kah togkomau Shallumoh wunnaumonuh Jabesh ut Samaria, kah wunnushoh, kah wunnompasṣ8tam8moh. 
E.15.14 For Menahem the son of Gadi went up from Tirzah, and came to Samaria, and smote Shallum the son of Jabesh in Samaria, and slew him, and reigned in his stead.

α.15.15 Kah onkatoganash wutusṣeongash Shallum, kah wunnombeukohteáonk ne ayik, kusseh wussukwhosuash, Israelle ketahs8tamwog ummequontamóe wussukwhosuongán8ôut.
E.15.15 And the rest of the acts of Shallum, and his conspiracy which he made, behold, they are written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel.

α.15.16 Neit Menahim togkodtam Tiphsah, kah wame ne noh ohtag, kah wussissippoiyeum8 wutch Tirza, newutche matta 8woshwunnumauóuh, newaj togkodtog, kah mittamwussissoh ne noh adt pôasinutcheh, wunnukkutchaswoh.
E.15.16 Then Menahem smote Tiphsah, and all that were therein, and the coasts thereof from Tirzah: because they opened not to him, therefore he smote it; and all the women therein that were with child he ripped up.

α.15.17 Shwinchage kah pask8gun tahshe kodtum8mut Azaria Judae ketass8t Menahem wuñaumonuh Gad n8che ketahs8tam88 ut Israel, piogque kodtumwae ut Samaria.
E.15.17 In the nine and thirtieth year of Azariah king of Judah began Menahem the son of Gadi to reign over Israel, and reigned ten years in Samaria.

α.15.18 Kah ussu ne machut ut anaquabit Jehovah, matta nukkodtum8 nisohke pomantog ummatcheseongash Jeroboam wunnaumonuh Nebat, noh matcheseáheont Israeloh.
E.15.18 And he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD: he departed not all his days from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin.

α.15.19 Kah Pul Assyriae ketahs8t ayeuuhkonittue peyaantam ohke, & Menahem uninnumauau Puloh, nequt muttannonganogkodtash silvere talentsash wunnutcheg woh 8wetomukqut, menehketeauunat ketahs8tamóonk ut wunnutcheganit.
E.15.19 And Pul the king of Assyria came against the land: and Menahem gave Pul a thousand talents of silver, that his hand might be with him to confirm the kingdom in his hand.

α.15.20 Kah Menahem sohwuttoou silver wutch Israel, wutch wame mogkenauwetuenûog, nishnoh pasuk wosketomp, napanna tahshinchagkodtash silvere shekelsash, [u]ninnumauónat Assyriae ketahs8t, neit Assyriae ketahs8t qushkeu, kah matta na wutappein, ohkeit.
E.15.20 And Menahem exacted the money of Israel, even of all the mighty men of wealth, of each man fifty shekels of silver, to give to the king of Assyria. So the king of Assyria turned back, and stayed not there in the land.

α.15.21 Kah onkatogish wutusseongash Menahem, kah wame ne asit sunnummatta wussukwhosin[ô]ash Israelle ketass8tamwog ummehquontamóe wussukwhongan8óut?
E.15.21 And the rest of the acts of Menahem, and all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?

α.15.22 Kah Menahem weesequom8mau 8shoh, kah Pekahiahoh wunnaumonuh wunnompass8tam8mukquoh.
E.15.22 And Menahem slept with his fathers; and Pekahiah his son reigned in his stead.

α.15.23 Napanna tahshinchage kodtum8mut Azariah Judae ketasṣ8toh, Pekahiah wunnaumonuh Menahem n8che ketahs8tam88 ut Israel, ut Samaria, neese kodtumwáe.
E.15.23 In the fiftieth year of Azariah king of Judah Pekahiah the son of Menahem began to reign over Israel in Samaria, and reigned two years.

α.15.24 Kah ussu ne mach[ú]k ut anaquabit Jehovah, matta amaeu wutch ummatcheseong[à]nit Jeroboam wunnaumonuh Nebat noh matcheseáheont Israeloh.
E.15.24 And he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD: he departed not from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin.

α.15.25 Qut Pekahiah wunnaumonuh Remaliah ummugquompomoh 8nombeuhkonukquoh kah wuttogkomukquoh ut [S]amaria, ut ummishekomukqut ketahs8t: weeche Argob, kah Arieh, kah weech[e]yeumuk napanna tahshinchag tuhsuoh Gileaditse wosketompuh, kah wunnushoh, kah wunnompe ketass8tam8moh.
E.15.25 But Pekah the son of Remaliah, a captain of his, conspired against him, and smote him in Samaria, in the palace of the king's house, with Argob and Arieh, and with him fifty men of the Gileadites: and he killed him, and reigned in his room.

α.15.26 Kah onkatogish wutusseongash Pekahiah kah wame ne asit, kusseh, wussukwhosuash Israelle ketass8tamwog ummequontamóe wussukwhongan8óut.
E.15.26 And the rest of the acts of Pekahiah, and all that he did, behold, they are written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel.

α.15.27 Napanna tahshinchage kah neese kodtum8mit Ahaziah Judae ketass8t, Pekah wunnaumonuh Remalaiah n8che ketass8tam88 ut Israel, nesnehchage kodtumwae.
E.15.27 In the two and fiftieth year of Azariah king of Judah Pekah the son of Remaliah began to reign over Israel in Samaria, and reigned twenty years.

α.15.28 Kah ussu ne machuk ut anaquabit Jehovah, matta amaeu wutch matcheseonganit Jeroboam wunnaumonuh Nebat, noh matcheseáheont Israeloh.
E.15.28 And he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD: he departed not from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin.

α.15.29 Ut ukkesukodtumut Pekah Israelle ketass8t, Tiglath-Pileser Asserie kétass8t, peyau kah sohkom Ijon, kah Abel-beth-maachah, kah Janoah, kah K[a]desh, kah Hazor, kah Gilead, kah Galile, wame Naphthalie ohke, kah nah ummissinnohkonuh ut Assyria.
E.15.29 In the days of Pekah king of Israel came Tiglathpileser king of Assyria, and took Ijon, and Abelbethmaachah, and Janoah, and Kedesh, and Hazor, and Gilead, and Galilee, all the land of Naphtali, and carried them captive to Assyria.

α.15.30 Kah Hoshea wunnaumonuh Eláh, wunnombeukonóuh Pekahoh, wunnaumonuh Remaliah, kah wuttogk[o]muh kah wunnushuh, kah wunnompass8tamómoh, nesnechage kodtum8mit Jotham wunnaumonuh Uzziah.
E.15.30 And Hoshea the son of Elah made a conspiracy against Pekah the son of Remaliah, and smote him, and slew him, and reigned in his stead, in the twentieth year of Jotham the son of Uzziah.

α.15.31 Kah onkatoganash wutusseongash Pekah kah wame ne asit, kusseh, wussukwhosuash, Israelle ketass8tamwog ummequontamóe wussukwhongan8óut.
E.15.31 And the rest of the acts of Pekah, and all that he did, behold, they are written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel.

α.15.32 Nôwutuhtôeu kodtum8m Pekah wunnaumonuh Remaliah Israelle ketass8t, Jotham wunnaumonuh Uzziah Judae ketass8t n8che ketass8tam88.
E.15.32 In the second year of Pekah the son of Remaliah king of Israel began Jotham the son of Uzziah king of Judah to reign.

α.15.33 Nesnehchage kah napanna tahshe kodtumwohkom n8che ketass8tam8ut, kah nabo nequtta tahshe kodtumwae ketass8tam88 ut Jerusalem, kah ohkasoh ussowesuoh Jerusha wuttaumoh Zadok.
E.15.33 Five and twenty years old was he when he began to reign, and he reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Jerusha, the daughter of Zadok.

α.15.34 Kah ussu ne sampwag ut anaquabit Jehovah, ussu neaunak wame 8shoh Uzziahoh aséneup.
E.15.34 And he did that which was right in the sight of the LORD: he did according to all that his father Uzziah had done.

α.15.35 Qut qunuhqui ayeuongash matta ontattauunash, missinninnuog ashpumme sephausuog kah chikohsumwog wetemungquok ut qunuhqui ayeuonganehtu; noh ayim qunushqui usquont ut wekit Jehovah
E.15.35 Howbeit the high places were not removed: the people sacrificed and burned incense still in the high places. He built the higher gate of the house of the LORD.

α.15.36 Kah onkatoganash wutusseongash Jotham, kah wame ne asit, sunnummatta wussukwhosin8ash ut Judae ketass8tamwog ummehquontamóe wussukwhongan8óut.
E.15.36 Now the rest of the acts of Jotham, and all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?

α.15.37 (Yeush ut kesukodtash, Jehovah n8che ayeuuhkonittue Judah ann8nau Rezin Syriae ketass8t, kah Pekah wunnaumonuh Remaliah)
E.15.37 In those days the LORD began to send against Judah Rezin the king of Syria, and Pekah the son of Remaliah.

α.15.38 Kah Jotham weesequom8mau 8shoh ut wutotanat David 8shoh, kah Ahaz wunnaumonuh wunnompass[8]tamómukqu[o]h.
E.15.38 And Jotham slept with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers in the city of David his father: and Ahaz his son reigned in his stead.

α.16.1 NAbo nesausuk wutteashe kodtum8mut Pekah wunnaumonuh Remaliah, Ahaz wunnaumonuh Jotham Judae ketass8t n8che ketass8tam88.
E.16.1 In the seventeenth year of Pekah the son of Remaliah Ahaz the son of Jotham king of Judah began to reign.

α.16.2 Nesnechage kodtumwohkom Ahaz n8che ketass8tam8ut, kah nabo nequtta tahshe kodtumwae ketass8tam88 ut Jerusalem, kah matta ussu ne sampwag ut anaquabit Jehovah um-Manitt8moh, netatuppe David 8shoh.
E.16.2 Twenty years old was Ahaz when he began to reign, and reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem, and did not that which was right in the sight of the LORD his God, like David his father.

α.16.3 Qut pomushau ummayut Israelle ketass8tamwog, nux, wunnaumonuh paumushaheau n8taut, neaunak wunnushkeneunkquott8m8ash pen8wohteaog, neh Jehovah sohwhôteacheh wutch anaquabhettit wunnaumonuh Israel.
E.16.3 But he walked in the way of the kings of Israel, yea, and made his son to pass through the fire, according to the abominations of the heathen, whom the LORD cast out from before the children of Israel.

α.16.4 Kah sep[h]ausu kah chikohsum wetemungquok ut qunu[h]qui ayeuonganehtu, kah ut wadchuuhkontu, kah agwe nishnoh askuhquomut.
E.16.4 And he sacrificed and burnt incense in the high places, and on the hills, and under every green tree.

α.16.5 Neit Rezin Syriae ketass8t & Pekah wunnaumonuh Remaliah Israelle ketass8t kuhkuhqueog en Jerusalem, ayeuuhkonat: kah nah wéenuhkomog Ahaz, qut matta wussohkougk8oh.
E.16.5 Then Rezin king of Syria and Pekah son of Remaliah king of Israel came up to Jerusalem to war: and they besieged Ahaz, but could not overcome him.

α.16.6 Ne ahquompak Rezin Syriae ketass8t, tomwutteau Elath en Syria, kah ama8hkauau Jewsoh wutch Elath, kah Syriansog peyaog Elath, kah na wuttaiinneau pajeh yeu kesukok.
E.16.6 At that time Rezin king of Syria recovered Elath to Syria, and drave the Jews from Elath: and the Syrians came to Elath, and dwelt there unto this day.

α.16.7 Neit Ahaz ann8nau ann8naénùh, en Tiglath-Pileser Assyriae ketass8tamwog, n8wau, nen kittinneum kah kenaumon, kuhkuhquish, kah pohquawusseh wutch wunnutcheganit Siriae ketass8t[,] kah wutch wunnutcheganit Israelle ketass8t, neg ayeuuhkonittue waabehtunkqueaneg.
E.16.7 So Ahaz sent messengers to Tiglathpileser king of Assyria, saying, I am thy servant and thy son: come up, and save me out of the hand of the king of Syria, and out of the hand of the king of Israel, which rise up against me.

α.16.8 Kah Ahaz nemunum silver kah gold ne namehteomuk ut wekit Jehovah, kah ut nompekouunit ketass8t wekit, kah wunnegonshhuon en Assyriae ketass8tamut wutche mag8onk.
E.16.8 And Ahaz took the silver and gold that was found in the house of the LORD, and in the treasures of the king's house, and sent it for a present to the king of Assyria.

α.16.9 Kah Assyriae ketass8t 8namptáuoh: newutche Assyriae ketass8t ayeuuhkonittue kuhkuhk8p en Damascus, kah wussohkomun, kah ummissinóhkonuh wehque Kir, kah nushau Rezinoh.
E.16.9 And the king of Assyria hearkened unto him: for the king of Assyria went up against Damascus, and took it, and carried the people of it captive to Kir, and slew Rezin.

α.16.10 Kah Ahaz ketásṣ8t au Damaskus, nogushkauónat Tiglath$Pileser Asṣyriae ketasṣ8t kah naum Altar ne ohtag Damaskus: kah ketasṣ8t Ahaz negonshhuau en Urijah sephausuénuut, neaunagk, kah neagwutteausik, neaunak wame ne an[a]kausuonk.
E.16.10 And king Ahaz went to Damascus to meet Tiglathpileser king of Assyria, and saw an altar that was at Damascus: and king Ahaz sent to Urijah the priest the fashion of the altar, and the pattern of it, according to all the workmanship thereof.

α.16.11 Kah Urijah sephausuenin ayim Altar, neaunak wame ne negonshhuadt ketasṣ8t Ahaz wutch Damascus.
E.16.11 And Urijah the priest built an altar according to all that king Ahaz had sent from Damascus: so Urijah the priest made it against king Ahaz came from Damascus.

α.16.12 Kah ketasṣ8t wagk Damascus, ketass8t naum Altar, kah ketasṣ8t pas8sukom Altar, kah na wuttit sephausin.
E.16.12 And when the king was come from Damascus, the king saw the altar: and the king approached to the altar, and offered thereon.

α.16.13 Kah chikosṣum wutchikohtae mag8ongash, kah ummetsue sephausuongash, kah wussokanumun 8tattamoe mag8ongash, kah seaôhteau 8nohte[á]e mag8ongane 8squeheonk ut woskeche Altarut.
E.16.13 And he burnt his burnt offering and his meat offering, and poured his drink offering, and sprinkled the blood of his peace offerings, upon the altar.

α.16.14 Kah wonk paudto wompuhshagque Altar ne anaquabit Jehovah, wutch anaquohtag wetu, wutch nashaue Altarut kah wekit Jehovah, kah upponumun nanummiyeue Altarut.
E.16.14 And he brought also the brasen altar, which was before the LORD, from the forefront of the house, from between the altar and the house of the LORD, and put it on the north side of the altar.

α.16.15 Kah ketasṣ8t Ahaz ann8nau Urijahoh sephausuen n8wau, ut mishe Altarut chiko[h]ush nompoae chikohtae mag8ongash kah wunnonkquae, metsue mag8ongash, kah ketasṣ8t wutchikohtae sephausuonk, kah ummetsue mag8ongash, weeche wutchikohtae ummag8ongan8oash wame ohkée missinninnúog, kah ummetsue mag8onga[n]8ash, kah 8tattamwe mag8ongan8oash, kah ne ut wusṣéaohkonau, wame chikohtae mag8ongané wusqueheonk, kah wame sephausue wusqueheonk: kah brasṣe Altar pish wutche nen ne nashpe nat8tomuhkon.
E.16.15 And king Ahaz commanded Urijah the priest, saying, Upon the great altar burn the morning burnt offering, and the evening meat offering, and the king's burnt sacrifice, and his meat offering, with the burnt offering of all the people of the land, and their meat offering, and their drink offerings; and sprinkle upon it all the blood of the burnt offering, and all the blood of the sacrifice: and the brasen altar shall be for me to enquire by.

α.16.16 Ne wutusṣen Urijah sephausuen neaunag wame ketasṣ8t Ahaz anann8teamwit
E.16.16 Thus did Urijah the priest, according to all that king Ahaz commanded.

α.16.17 Kah ketasṣ8t Ahaz tummusṣum baseseh wusṣash, kah ontohtoon laver wutch nah woskeche, kah n8kenum keitoh, wutch woskeche brasse oxinut, neg agwappehwóhettit, kah upponamun m8see qusṣukquanit.
E.16.17 And king Ahaz cut off the borders of the bases, and removed the laver from off them; and took down the sea from off the brasen oxen that were under it, and put it upon the pavement of stones.

α.16.18 Kah onkwhoonk wutch Sabbath, ne ayimóhettit ut wetuómut, & ketasṣ8t ahhut petutteadt poquodchit, qushkeu wutch wekit Jehovah, wutche Assyriae ketass8t.
E.16.18 And the covert for the sabbath that they had built in the house, and the king's entry without, turned he from the house of the LORD for the king of Assyria.

α.16.19 Kah onkatogish wutusseongash Ahaz ash asechish, sunnummatta wussukwhosin8ash Judae ketass8tamwog ummehquontamoe wussukwhongan8óut.
E.16.19 Now the rest of the acts of Ahaz which he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?

α.16.20 Kah Ahaz weesequom8màu 8shoh, kah posekinau weeche 8shoh ut wutotanat David, kah Hezekiahoh wunnaumonuh wunnompass8tam8mukquoh.
E.16.20 And Ahaz slept with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers in the city of David: and Hezekiah his son reigned in his stead.

α.17.1 UT nabo wunneese kodtumomut Ahaz Judae ketass8t, Hoshea wunnaumonuh Elah n8che ketass8tam88 ut Samaria, ut Israel, pask8gun tahshe kodtumwae.
E.17.1 In the twelfth year of Ahaz king of Judah began Hoshea the son of Elah to reign in Samaria over Israel nine years.

α.17.2 Kah usseu ne machuk ut anquabit Jehovah, qut matta neane Israelle ketass8tamwoh neh negonuhkongqutcheh.
E.17.2 And he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD, but not as the kings of Israel that were before him.

α.17.3 Shalmaneser Assyriae ketass8t wutayeuhkonittue kuhkuhquehtunkoh, kah Hoshea 8tinninneúmuneuh, kah wutompwunuh.
E.17.3 Against him came up Shalmaneser king of Assyria; and Hoshea became his servant, and gave him presents.

α.17.4 Kah Assyriae ketass8t namehteau wunombeukanittuonk ut Hoshea: newutche ann8nau ann8náénúh en Sout Egypte ketass8tut, kah wanne ompwunnau8og Assyriae ketass8toh, neáne ásekodtumókish: newajeh Assyriae ketass8t kuppohwhout, kah wuttohtogkupinuh ut kuppishshagkinnittue kommukqut.
E.17.4 And the king of Assyria found conspiracy in Hoshea: for he had sent messengers to So king of Egypt, and brought no present to the king of Assyria, as he had done year by year: therefore the king of Assyria shut him up, and bound him in prison.

α.17.5 Neit Assyriae ketass8t kuhkuhqueu pannuppu wame ohkeit, kah kuhkuhqueu en Samaria, kah nishwe kodtumwae 8wéenuhkomun.
E.17.5 Then the king of Assyria came up throughout all the land, and went up to Samaria, and besieged it three years.

α.17.6 Pask8gun wutteashe kodtum8mut Hoshea, Assyriae ketass8t sohkom Samaria, kah Israelloh monchanau in Assyria, kah nah upponuh ut Halah, kah ut Habor, kishke G[ó]zane sepuut, kah ut ukkeitotanaóut Medsog.
E.17.6 In the ninth year of Hoshea the king of Assyria took Samaria, and carried Israel away into Assyria, and placed them in Halah and in Habor by the river of Gozan, and in the cities of the Medes.

α.17.7 Newutche nniyeup, wunnaumonuh Israel matcheneheaog Jehovah um-Manitt8m8uh, neh quohkuhk8unuk8hpoh wutch Egypt wutch agwe wunnutcehganit Pharoh Egypte ketass8t.
E.17.7 For so it was, that the children of Israel had sinned against the LORD their God, which had brought them up out of the land of Egypt, from under the hand of Pharaoh king of Egypt, and had feared other gods,

α.17.8 Kah pomushaog ukkuhk8waongan8óut pen8wohteaog, (neh Jehovah sohw[ô]hteápoh ut anaquabhettit wunnaumonuh Israel) kah Israelle ketass8tamwog nish ayimohetticheh.
E.17.8 And walked in the statutes of the heathen, whom the LORD cast out from before the children of Israel, and of the kings of Israel, which they had made.

α.17.9 Kah wunnaumonuh Israel kemeusseog, yeush matta sampwan8gish ayeuuhkonittue Jehovah um-Manitt8m8uh; kah ayimwog qunuhqui ayeuongash ut wame ukkeitotanaóont, wutch askuhwheteáe komukqut, wehque pummeneuse kitotanat.
E.17.9 And the children of Israel did secretly those things that were not right against the LORD their God, and they built them high places in all their cities, from the tower of the watchmen to the fenced city.

α.17.10 Kah wunohtóog nunneukontunkane manitt8, kah kuppiyeuash ut nish$noh kussohkôiyeu wadchuut, kah nish$noh ut agwe askuhquomut.
E.17.10 And they set them up images and groves in every high hill, and under every green tree:

α.17.11 Kah na wuttit chikohsumuneau wetemungquok ut wame qunuhqui ayeuonganéhtu, ne asehetteup pen8wohteaog, neh Jehovah sohh8wunumpoh ut anaquabenit: kah nag usséog machukish m8m8sqheónat Jehovah un musquanittamunat.
E.17.11 And there they burnt incense in all the high places, as did the heathen whom the LORD carried away before them; and wrought wicked things to provoke the LORD to anger:

α.17.12 Newutche nag wowussumáog nunneukontunkane manitto! nish papaume Jehovah anompash, matta pish yeu kutusseineau.
E.17.12 For they served idols, whereof the LORD had said unto them, Ye shall not do this thing.

α.17.13 Qut Jehovah ayeuuhkonittue wâ8waóneau Israelloh kah Judahoh, nashpe wa[w]e quoshodtumwaenúog, kah wame naumwaénuog, n8waog, quinnuppegk wutch kummatche mayeuóut, kah nanawehteó8k nutann8team8ongash, kah nukkuhk8waongash, neaunak wame naumatuonk neann8nogkup k8sh8óog, kah nish negonshhuwaonash en kuhhogkaóut, nashpe nuttinneumog quoshodtumwaenúog.
E.17.13 Yet the LORD testified against Israel, and against Judah, by all the prophets, and by all the seers, saying, Turn ye from your evil ways, and keep my commandments and my statutes, according to all the law which I commanded your fathers, and which I sent to you by my servants the prophets.

α.17.14 Qut matta n8tam[ó]og, qut men[é]hketeauog wussittippukan8óash, onatuh wussittippukkan8óash 8sh8oh, neg matta wanamptam8gig Jehovah ūManitt8m8oh.
E.17.14 Notwithstanding they would not hear, but hardened their necks, like to the neck of their fathers, that did not believe in the LORD their God.

α.17.15 Kah pogketamwog ukkuhk8waongash, kah 8n8waonk, ne ayimauomp 8sh8oh, kah 8wauwaongash nish ayeuuhkonittue wauwaononcheh, kah n8suhkomwog tahn8cheyeu88k, kah tahn8cheyeu8og, kah asuhkauwaog pen8wohteuh ne wéenuhkongqhetticheh, ne papaume Jehovah quohtinnumpoh.
E.17.15 And they rejected his statutes, and his covenant that he made with their fathers, and his testimonies which he testified against them; and they followed vanity, and became vain, and went after the heathen that were round about them, concerning whom the LORD had charged them, that they should not do like them.

α.17.16 Kah nag nukkodtumwog wame wutann8team8ongash Jehovah, kah ayimóog sábassumwe nunneukontunkoh, nesóog kalfsog, kah ayimwog kuppi, kah wowussumáog wame k[é]sukque chippan8oh: kah wuttinneumuhkauáog Baaloh.
E.17.16 And they left all the commandments of the LORD their God, and made them molten images, even two calves, and made a grove, and worshipped all the host of heaven, and served Baal.

α.17.17 Kah pamwushaheáog wunnaumonáoh kah wuttaun8oh n8taut, kah usseog pauwauongash kah mamontumó8ongash, kah nag mag8og wuhhogkauh matcheussenat ut anaquabit Jehovah, umm8sqheonat en musquanittamunat.
E.17.17 And they caused their sons and their daughters to pass through the fire, and used divination and enchantments, and sold themselves to do evil in the sight of the LORD, to provoke him to anger.

α.17.18 Newaj Jehovah mishe musquanumont Israelloh, kah wutontashuh wutch anaquabit, wanne howan sequn[ó]uh webe wutchippann8onk Judah.
E.17.18 Therefore the LORD was very angry with Israel, and removed them out of his sight: there was none left but the tribe of Judah only.

α.17.19 Wonk Judah matta nanawehteauóog wutann8team8ongash Jehovah um-Manitt8m8oh, qut pomushaog ukkuhk8waongan8óut Israel nish ayimohetticheh.
E.17.19 Also Judah kept not the commandments of the LORD their God, but walked in the statutes of Israel which they made.

α.17.20 Kah Jehovah pogketam wame 8skañem Israel, kah wutunkquanumúhheuh, & nah upponuh wunnutchegan8óut woskehuwaenuog, nô pajeh uppogkenónat wutch anaquabit.
E.17.20 And the LORD rejected all the seed of Israel, and afflicted them, and delivered them into the hand of spoilers, until he had cast them out of his sight.

α.17.21 Newutche tanogshanau Israelloh wutch wekit David, kah Jeroboamoh wunnaumonuh Nebat ketass8tamw[é]hteaog, kah Jeroboam ama8hkauau Israeloh wutch asuhkauónat Jehovah, kah ummishe matcheseáheuh.
E.17.21 For he rent Israel from the house of David; and they made Jeroboam the son of Nebat king: and Jeroboam drave Israel from following the LORD, and made them sin a great sin.

α.17.22 Newutche wunnaumonuh Israel, pomushaog wame ummatcheseonganit Jeroboam ne aséip, matta wuñukkodtum8unáoash.
E.17.22 For the children of Israel walked in all the sins of Jeroboam which he did; they departed not from them;

α.17.23 Nô pajeh Jehovah wutontushónat Israeloh wutch anaquabit, nean8wop nashpe wame quoshodtumwáe wuttinneumoh: neit Israel amaunau wutch nehenwonche wutohkeit en Assyria pajeh yeu kesukok.
E.17.23 Until the LORD removed Israel out of his sight, as he had said by all his servants the prophets. So was Israel carried away out of their own land to Assyria unto this day.

α.17.24 Kah Assyriae ketass8t pas8au wosketompuh wutch Babylon, kah wutch Cuthah, kah wutch Ava, & wutch Hamath, & wutch Sepharuaim, kah nah upponuh Samariae otanahtu, nompe wunnaumonuh Israel: kah nag ohtóog Samaria, k[a]hayeuog 8tanahtu.
E.17.24 And the king of Assyria brought men from Babylon, and from Cuthah, and from Ava, and from Hamath, and from Sepharvaim, and placed them in the cities of Samaria instead of the children of Israel: and they possessed Samaria, and dwelt in the cities thereof.

α.17.25 Kah nniyeup na weske ayéhettit, matta qushouóog Jehovah, newaj Jehovah ann8nont qunnón8oh ut kenugke nahoh, neg nashoncheg nawhutche nahoh.
E.17.25 And so it was at the beginning of their dwelling there, that they feared not the LORD: therefore the LORD sent lions among them, which slew some of them.

α.17.26 Newaj ken8nahettit Assyriae ketass8toh n8waog, wutohtimóinneash nish ontahtauanish, kah wánoht[à]uanish ut Samarie keitotanahtu, matta whteau8og, uttoh woh áséhtauuh Manitt8 ne ut ohkeit: newaj ann8nont qunon8oh ut kenugke nahoh, kah kusseh, wunnushóuh, newutche wahheo8og toh aséhtaut Manit ne ut ohkeit.
E.17.26 Wherefore they spake to the king of Assyria, saying, The nations which thou hast removed, and placed in the cities of Samaria, know not the manner of the God of the land: therefore he hath sent lions among them, and, behold, they slay them, because they know not the manner of the God of the land.

α.17.27 Neit Assyriae ketass8t ass8team8, n8wau, na ass8un8k pasuk sephausénin, noh na wâs8óg, kah nâ onch, kah nâ ápitch, kah nah kuhk8tomauâhettich ne aséhtauut Manit ne ut ohkeit.
E.17.27 Then the king of Assyria commanded, saying, Carry thither one of the priests whom ye brought from thence; and let them go and dwell there, and let him teach them the manner of the God of the land.

α.17.28 Neit pasuk sephausuen, neh wôs8wáhetticheh wutch Samaria, peyau, kah ayeu Bethel, kah ukkuhk8tomauoh, uttoh woh án qushit Jehovah.
E.17.28 Then one of the priests whom they had carried away from Samaria came and dwelt in Bethel, and taught them how they should fear the LORD.

α.17.29 Qut nish$noh wutohtimóin ayimóog nehenwonche um-Manitt8m8[o]h, kah up[n]onouh wekuóut, ukqunuhqui ayeuonganehtu, nish Samaritansog ayimohetticheh, nish wutohtim[o]in ut wut8tanaóut ne ayéhhettit
E.17.29 Howbeit every nation made gods of their own, and put them in the houses of the high places which the Samaritans had made, every nation in their cities wherein they dwelt.

α.17.30 Kah Babylone wosketompaog manitt8teáog Succoth-Benoth, kah Cuthe wosketompaog, Ne[r]gal, kah Ham[á]the wosketompaog Ashima,
E.17.30 And the men of Babylon made Succothbenoth, and the men of Cuth made Nergal, and the men of Hamath made Ashima,

α.17.31 Kah A[r]vitsog Nibhaz kah Tartak, kah Sepharvitsog chikkosumau[á]oh wunneechan8oh ut n8taut Adrameiechoh, kah Anamelech, ummanitt8m8oh Sepharvaim.
E.17.31 And the Avites made Nibhaz and Tartak, and the Sepharvites burnt their children in fire to Adrammelech and Anammelech, the gods of Sepharvaim.

α.17.32 Neit qushaog Jehovah, kah nag sephausuenunuhk[o]og peississinitcheh, ut qunuhqui ayeuonganit, neh sephamwanshhikqhetticheh ut qunuhqui ayeuongane kommukquehtu.
E.17.32 So they feared the LORD, and made unto themselves of the lowest of them priests of the high places, which sacrificed for them in the houses of the high places.

α.17.33 Qusháog Jehovah, kah wowussumaog nehenwonche ummanitt8m8oh, ne aséhettit wutohtimóneash, nish n[á] was8wunukquehetticheh.
E.17.33 They feared the LORD, and served their own gods, after the manner of the nations whom they carried away from thence.

α.17.34 Pajeh yeu kesukok usseog ne aséhetteup, matta qushauóog Jehovah, kah matta usseog neaunak ukkuhk8waongan8oash asuh 8nohtauongan8oash, asuh neaunag wuttinnaumatuonk, kah wutann8team8onk, ne Jehovah an ann8nont wunnaumonuh Jakoboh, neh as8wenumpoh Israel.
E.17.34 Unto this day they do after the former manners: they fear not the LORD, neither do they after their statutes, or after their ordinances, or after the law and commandment which the LORD commanded the children of Jacob, whom he named Israel;

α.17.35 Neh Jehouah wan8wahetteupoh, kah ummeechumuhkonuh, n8wau, matta pish kukqushomw8 onkatogig manitt8og, asuh nag nauwaehtauwóhteogk, asuh sephamauwôhteogk.
E.17.35 With whom the LORD had made a covenant, and charged them, saying, Ye shall not fear other gods, nor bow yourselves to them, nor serve them, nor sacrifice to them:

α.17.36 Webe Jehovah noh sohh8wunukqueóg wutch ohkit Egypt, nashpe mishemenuhkesuonk, kah summagunnumwe muhpit noh pish kukqushau, kah noh pish k8wowussumou, kah noh pish kussephamauâu.
E.17.36 But the LORD, who brought you up out of the land of Egypt with great power and a stretched out arm, him shall ye fear, and him shall ye worship, and to him shall ye do sacrifice.

α.17.37 Kah kuhk8waongash kah wunohtauongash, kah naumatuonk, kah ann8team8onk, ne wâsukkuhhamungqueog, pish kukkehkinneasimw8 ussenat micheme, & matta pish kukqushomw8 onkatogig manitt8og.
E.17.37 And the statutes, and the ordinances, and the law, and the commandment, which he wrote for you, ye shall observe to do for evermore; and ye shall not fear other gods.

α.17.38 Kah wuñ8waonk ne aninnumauun mat pish k8wa[n]hukk8un, kah matta pish kukqushomw8 onkatogig manitt8og.
E.17.38 And the covenant that I have made with you ye shall not forget; neither shall ye fear other gods.

α.17.39 Qut Jehovah kum[-]Manitt8mw8 noh pish kukqushau, kah noh pish kuppohquohwhunukom wutch wunnutchegan8óut wame kumatwóm8óog.
E.17.39 But the LORD your God ye shall fear; and he shall deliver you out of the hand of all your enemies.

α.17.40 Qut matta n8tam8og, qut nag usseog ne áhesséhetteup
E.17.40 Howbeit they did not hearken, but they did after their former manner.

α.17.41 Newaj yeush wutohtimóneash qusháog Jehovah, kah wuttinneumuhkauáog wuttinneukontunkan8h, na neeswe, wunneechan8oh, kah wunneechan8oh wunneechan8oh: neasen[o]up 8sh8oh ne wutusseneau pajeh yeu kesukok.
E.17.41 So these nations feared the LORD, and served their graven images, both their children, and their children's children: as did their fathers, so do they unto this day.

α.18.1 KAh nniyeup wunnishwe kodtum8mut Hoshea wunnaumonuh Elah Israelle ketass8t, Hezekiah wunnaumonuh Ahaz Judae ketass8t n8che ketass8tam88.
E.18.1 Now it came to pass in the third year of Hoshea son of Elah king of Israel, that Hezekiah the son of Ahaz king of Judah began to reign.

α.18.2 Nesnechage kah napanna tahshe kodtumwohkomup n8che ketass8tam8it, kah ketass8tam88 nesnechage kah pasuk8gun tahshe kodtumwae, ut Jerusalem: ohkasoh wonk ussowesuoh Abi wuttaunoh Zachariah.
E.18.2 Twenty and five years old was he when he began to reign; and he reigned twenty and nine years in Jerusalem. His mother's name also was Abi, the daughter of Zachariah.

α.18.3 Kah ussu ne s[a]mpwag ut anaquabit Jehovah, neaunak wame ne aséneup Davidoh 8shoh.
E.18.3 And he did that which was right in the sight of the LORD, according to all that David his father did.

α.18.4 Ontahto qunuhqui ayeuongash, kah soquetahwau nunneukontunkoh, kah tummehtham kuppiyeuash, kah soquetahwau brasse ask8koh ne Moses [á]yeuompoh, newutche pajeh yeush kesukodtash wunnaumonuh Israel wuttit chikohsumuneau wetemungquok, kah wuttissowetamun, Nehushtan.
E.18.4 He removed the high places, and brake the images, and cut down the groves, and brake in pieces the brasen serpent that Moses had made: for unto those days the children of Israel did burn incense to it: and he called it Nehushtan.

α.18.5 Pabuhtanumau Jehovahoh um-Manitt8moh Israel, newaj asuhkaue nagum wanne howane unnonk8, ut kenugke wàme Judae ketass8tamwog, asuh howane negonukkunkupoh.
E.18.5 He trusted in the LORD God of Israel; so that after him was none like him among all the kings of Judah, nor any that were before him.

α.18.6 Newutch môsogquehtauau Jehovah, kah matta wutahque asuhkauwôh, qut wunnanawéhteauôh wutann8team8ongash, nish Jehovah ann8nompash Mosesoh.
E.18.6 For he clave to the LORD, and departed not from following him, but kept his commandments, which the LORD commanded Moses.

α.18.7 Kah Jeho[u]ah 8wetomuh, kah wunnaiyeu uttoh au sohhog, kah cheketauau Assyriae ketass8toh, kah matta 8tinninneumuhkauoh.
E.18.7 And the LORD was with him; and he prospered whithersoever he went forth: and he rebelled against the king of Assyria, and served him not.

α.18.8 Togkomau Philistiansoh wehque Gaza, kah wussissepóiyeum8oash, wutch askuhwhete[á]e komukqut pajeh pummenúsue keitotanat.
E.18.8 He smote the Philistines, even unto Gaza, and the borders thereof, from the tower of the watchmen to the fenced city.

α.18.9 Kah nniyeup ut yaue kodtum8mut Hezekiah, (ne wunnesausuk tahshe kodtum8m Hoshea wunnaumonuh Elah Isrelle ketass8t) Shalmaneser Assyriae ketass8t, ayeukonittue peyaontam Samaria, kah 8wéenuhkomun.
E.18.9 And it came to pass in the fourth year of king Hezekiah, which was the seventh year of Hoshea son of Elah king of Israel, that Shalmaneser king of Assyria came up against Samaria, and besieged it.

α.18.10 Kah mahtshunk nishwe kodtum8, wussohkomuneau, nequtta wutteashe kodtum8mut Hezekiah, (ne pasuk8gun wutteashe kodtumm8 Hoshea Israelle ketass8t) Samaria sohkomun.
E.18.10 And at the end of three years they took it: even in the sixth year of Hezekiah, that is in the ninth year of Hoshea king of Israel, Samaria was taken.

α.18.11 Kah Assyriae ketass8t monchanau Israelloh en Assyria, kah upponuh Halah, kah Habar kishke Gozane sepuut, kah ut ukkeitotanom8ash Medesog.
E.18.11 And the king of Assyria did carry away Israel unto Assyria, and put them in Halah and in Habor by the river of Gozan, and in the cities of the Medes:

α.18.12 Newutche matta noswehtamóog 8wadtauatonkqussuonk Jehovah um-Manitt8m8oh, qut pannesehtamwog 8n8waonk, wame ne Moses wuttinneumoh Jehovah anann8teamop, kah matta nah wunn8tauoh, asuh wutusseinuh.
E.18.12 Because they obeyed not the voice of the LORD their God, but transgressed his covenant, and all that Moses the servant of the LORD commanded, and would not hear them, nor do them.

α.18.13 Kah nabo weyaue kodtum8mut Hezekiah, Sennakerib Assyrie ketass8t ayeukonittue kuhkuhquehtam wame pummeneutaúsue keitotanash ut Judah, kah wussohkomunash.
E.18.13 Now in the fourteenth year of king Hezekiah did Sennacherib king of Assyria come up against all the fenced cities of Judah, and took them.

α.18.14 Kah Hezekiah Judae ketass8t ann8team8 en Assyriae ketass8tamut en Lachish, n8wau, nummatchesem, qushkish wutch nuhhogkat, ne ponamaiean, nunnoswehtamun: kah Assyriae ketass8t kehtimau Hezekiahoh Judae ketass8toh, nishwudt pasuk8e sil[y]ere talentsash, kah nishwinchage golde talentsash.
E.18.14 And Hezekiah king of Judah sent to the king of Assyria to Lachish, saying, I have offended; return from me: that which thou puttest on me will I bear. And the king of Assyria appointed unto Hezekiah king of Judah three hundred talents of silver and thirty talents of gold.

α.18.15 Kah Hezekiah wuttinnumau wame ne silver ne ohtag wekit Jehovah, kah ut nompakouunehtu ketass8t wekit.
E.18.15 And Hezekiah gave him all the silver that was found in the house of the LORD, and in the treasures of the king's house.

α.18.16 Na ahquompak Hezekiah tummussum gold wutch squontamut wut-Templumut Jehovah, kah wutch pillersut, nish Hezekiah Judae ketass8t agquodtukupash, & wuttinnumauon Assyriae ketass8toh.
E.18.16 At that time did Hezekiah cut off the gold from the doors of the temple of the LORD, and from the pillars which Hezekiah king of Judah had overlaid, and gave it to the king of Assyria.

α.18.17 Kah Assyriae ketass8t ann8nau Tartan, kah [T]absaris kah Rabshakeh, wutch Lachish, en Hezechiahut, nashpe mishe kenauwameonk ayeuuhkonittue Jerusalem, kah nag kuhkuhqueog, kah peyaog Jerusalem, kah kóhkuhquehettit, peyaog, kah neep8ok kishke conduit, wutch ongkoue nippissepagwut, ne wuttauomáog8mut fuller wutohteakonit.
E.18.17 And the king of Assyria sent Tartan and Rabsaris and Rabshakeh from Lachish to king Hezekiah with a great host against Jerusalem. And they went up and came to Jerusalem. And when they were come up, they came and stood by the conduit of the upper pool, which is in the highway of the fuller's field.

α.18.18 Kah wehkomáhettit ketass8toh Eliakim wunnaumonuh Hilkiah noh nanawunuk wetuomut wussohwehta[u]oh, kah Shebna wussukwhosuen, kah Joah wunnaumonuh Asaph mehquontamwaenin.
E.18.18 And when they had called to the king, there came out to them Eliakim the son of Hilkiah, which was over the household, and Shebna the scribe, and Joah the son of Asaph the recorder.

α.18.19 Kah Rabsheka wuttinuh, euyeu ken8nok Hezechiah, yeu wussin mishe ketass8t, Assyriae ketass8t, chaugua yeu paubahtantamóonk, ne pabahtaman?
E.18.19 And Rabshakeh said unto them, Speak ye now to Hezekiah, Thus saith the great king, the king of Assyria, What confidence is this wherein thou trustest?

α.18.20 Kussin, (qut nish tahn8che kutt8wonganu8ash) ken8nittuonk, kah menuhkesuonk nish wutch ayeuwuttuonk: yeuyeu howan pabahtanumadt, waj ayeuuhkonittue chekehtaiean?
E.18.20 Thou sayest, (but they are but vain words,) I have counsel and strength for the war. Now on whom dost thou trust, that thou rebellest against me?

α.18.21 Yeuyeu kusseh, kutompattussun anwôh8unne s8hqutcháiyeue wekinasq, ut Egypt ne wosketomp ompatussuk, pish padokshau wunnutcheganit, kah konnuksheau, ne wuttinniin Pharoh ketass8t ut Egypt, wame neh pabahtánumukqutcheh.
E.18.21 Now, behold, thou trustest upon the staff of this bruised reed, even upon Egypt, on which if a man lean, it will go into his hand, and pierce it: so is Pharaoh king of Egypt unto all that trust on him.

α.18.22 Qut usseog, nuppabahtanumômun Jehovah numManitt8mun, suñummatta nnoh, wutaltarumash kah ukqunuhquiyeumash Hezechiah nish amaunukish, kah ánóp Judah kah Jerusalem, pish k8wowussumuwom8 ut anaquohtag yeu altar ut Jerusalem.
E.18.22 But if ye say unto me, We trust in the LORD our God: is not that he, whose high places and whose altars Hezekiah hath taken away, and hath said to Judah and Jerusalem, Ye shall worship before this altar in Jerusalem?

α.18.23 Yeuyeu newutche, k8wehquetumoush aninnumau nussontimom ketass8t ut Assyria wanómwahteamukeh, & kittinnumoush neese muttannonganogkussuoh horsesog, tapeneuman ken wutch kuhhogkáyeu, quenashonaôont naiyeumutcheg.
E.18.23 Now therefore, I pray thee, give pledges to my lord the king of Assyria, and I will deliver thee two thousand horses, if thou be able on thy part to set riders upon them.

α.18.24 Toh kittinne neit woh quinnuppenum wuskesuk peississinitcheh nussontimom wuttinneumoh, kah pabahtanumon Egypte ketass8t, wutche chariotsash kah wutche horsesoh na8mukqutcheg?
E.18.24 How then wilt thou turn away the face of one captain of the least of my master's servants, and put thy trust on Egypt for chariots and for horsemen?

α.18.25 Sun yeuyeu nukkuhkuhquem matta weetomeg Jehovah, ayeuuhkonittue yeu ayeuonk paguatauunat? Jehovah nuttinuk, ayeuuhkonittue kuhqueontash ye ohke kah paguatoush.
E.18.25 Am I now come up without the LORD against this place to destroy it?  The LORD said to me, Go up against this land, and destroy it.

α.18.26 Neit Eliakim wunnaumonuh Hilkiah, kah Shebna kah Joah unnáog Rabshekah, k8wehqueteumoush, Assyriáe unnont8wanumau kittinneumog (newutche n8wohtamunan) kah ahque Jewsont8wánumaiinan, ut wuttauog8óut missinninnuog neg woskecheneutongan.
E.18.26 Then said Eliakim the son of Hilkiah, and Shebna, and Joah, unto Rabshakeh, Speak, I pray thee, to thy servants in the Syrian language; for we understand it: and talk not with us in the Jews' language in the ears of the people that are on the wall.

α.18.27 Qut Rabshekah nah wuttinuh; sun nussontimom nutann8nuk en kussontimomut, kah ken unneyat yeush kutt8wongash, sunnummatta nutann8nuk8 en yeug wosketompaog apitcheg pumeneutonganit, onk woh meechwog nehenwonche ummoyeu, kah woh wuttattamwog nehenwonche wunninneyeu weeche kenaau?
E.18.27 But Rabshakeh said unto them, Hath my master sent me to thy master, and to thee, to speak these words? hath he not sent me to the men which sit on the wall, that they may eat their own dung, and drink their own piss with you?

α.18.28 Neit Rabshekah neepau, kah mishont8wae Jewsónt8wau, kah ket8hkau n8wau, n8tam8k ukkutt8wongash mishe ketass8t, Assyriae ketass8t.
E.18.28 Then Rabshakeh stood and cried with a loud voice in the Jews' language, and spake, saying, Hear the word of the great king, the king of Assyria:

α.18.29 Yeu wussin ketass8t Hezechiah ahque as8kukkomuk8k, newutche matta pish tapenum8 kuttomhukqunnaóont wutch nunnutcheganit.
E.18.29 Thus saith the king, Let not Hezekiah deceive you: for he shall not be able to deliver you out of his hand:

α.18.30 Kah ahque Hezechiah pabuhtanumwáhik8k Jehovah, n8wadt, Jehovah pish wunnamuhkut kuppohquohwhunukqun, kah yeu keitotan matta pish mag8un en wunnutcheganit Assyriae ketass8t.
E.18.30 Neither let Hezekiah make you trust in the LORD, saying, The LORD will surely deliver us, and this city shall not be delivered into the hand of the king of Assyria.

α.18.31 Ahque n8tog Hezechiah: newutche yeu wussin Assyriae ketass8t, natinneham8k nukkitteamonteanitteáonk, nashpe mag8onk kah sohwehtiegk, neit meech8k nishnoh howan nehenwonche 8weenomwussippog, kah nishnoh howan upfigsúhtug, kah wuttattam8k nishnoh howan wunnippeim, nehenwonche pasohtheganit.
E.18.31 Hearken not to Hezekiah: for thus saith the king of Assyria, Make an agreement with me by a present, and come out to me, and then eat ye every man of his own vine, and every one of his fig tree, and drink ye every one the waters of his cistern:

α.18.32 Nô pajeh nuppeyonat kutamaununnaóut, en ohkeit, netatuppeyeuuk kutohkeyeuóut, weatchiminne kah wine ohke, petukqunnegane kah weenominneohtekonue ohke olive pummée ohke kah hony: onk woh kuppomantamumw8, kah matta woh kenupp8mw8, kah ahque kuhkeitok Hezechiah, wunumómukqueog, n8wadt, Jehovah pish kuttomhikqun.
E.18.32 Until I come and take you away to a land like your own land, a land of corn and wine, a land of bread and vineyards, a land of oil olive and of honey, that ye may live, and not die: and hearken not unto Hezekiah, when he persuadeth you, saying, The LORD will deliver us.

α.18.33 Sun howae wutohtimóinnée manitt8og, tomwéhteáog wame wutohkeyeu wutch wunnutcheganit Assyriae ketass8t?
E.18.33 Hath any of the gods of the nations delivered at all his land out of the hand of the king of Assyria?

α.18.34 Uyyeiyeu ummanitt8moh Hamath, kah Arphad? uttiyeu ummanitt8moh Sepharuaim kah Hena, kah Juah? sun woh nag tomwehteáog Samaria wutch nunnutcheganit.
E.18.34 Where are the gods of Hamath, and of Arpad? where are the gods of Sepharvaim, Hena, and Ivah? have they delivered Samaria out of mine hand?

α.18.35 Howae nag kenugke wame ummanitt8m8oh wutohtimóinneunk, nag pohquohwhuttunkig wutohtimóin wutch nunnutcheganit, toh waj woh Jehovah pohquohwhuttunk Jerusalem wutch nunnutcheganit?
E.18.35 Who are they among all the gods of the countries, that have delivered their country out of mine hand, that the LORD should deliver Jerusalem out of mine hand?

α.18.36 Qut missinninnúog chequnappuog, kah matta wunnamp8hamauóuh kutt8onk: newutche ketass8t ne wuttann8téam8onk, n8wau, ahque namp8ham[o]k.
E.18.36 But the people held their peace, and answered him not a word: for the king's commandment was, saying, Answer him not.

α.18.37 Neit Eliakim wunnaumonuh Hilkiah, noh nanaunuk neh wetuómut, kah Shebna wussukwhosuen, kah Joah wunnaumonuh Asaph, peyaonáog Hézechiahoh, nashpe wuthogk8[u]n8oash nehnekuhkausuash, & wuttinno[un]áoash ukkutt8wongash Rabsheka.
E.18.37 Then came Eliakim the son of Hilkiah, which was over the household, and Shebna the scribe, and Joah the son of Asaph the recorder, to Hezekiah with their clothes rent, and told him the words of Rabshakeh.

α.19.1 KAh nniyeup, ketass8t Hezekiah n8tog nehnekuhkom wuthogk8unash, kah hogk8 man8tiónak, kah petutteau wekit Jehovah.
E.19.1 And it came to pass, when king Hezekiah heard it, that he rent his clothes, and covered himself with sackcloth, and went into the house of the LORD.

α.19.2 Kah ann8nau Eliakimoh, noh nanawunont neh wetuomut, kah Shebna scribe, kah sephausuenue Eldersog, hogk8og man8tiónak, en Isaiah quoshodtumwaenuut, wunnaumonuh Amoz.
E.19.2 And he sent Eliakim, which was over the household, and Shebna the scribe, and the elders of the priests, covered with sackcloth, to Isaiah the prophet the son of Amoz.

α.19.3 Kah wuttinóuh, yeu wussin Hezekiah, yeu kesukok wuttamehpunáe, aûskon[t]uongane, kah blasphemae kesukod: newutche mukkiog 8mwog neekinneat, kah matta menuhkesuonganinn8 wunneekinnaónat.
E.19.3 And they said unto him, Thus saith Hezekiah, This day is a day of trouble, and of rebuke, and blasphemy; for the children are come to the birth, and there is not strength to bring forth.

α.19.4 Paguadcheh Jehovah kum-Manitt8m n8tam wame ukkutt8wongash Rabsheka, noh ketass8t Assyria wussontimom, ann8noncheh kehkomónat pomantamwae God, kah pish áushkontam kutt8wongash nish Jehovah kum-Manitt8m n8togish: newutche tahshinish kuppeantamóonk wutche neg sequnnutcheg.
E.19.4 It may be the LORD thy God will hear all the words of Rabshakeh, whom the king of Assyria his master hath sent to reproach the living God; and will reprove the words which the LORD thy God hath heard: wherefore lift up thy prayer for the remnant that are left.

α.19.5 Neit wuttinneumoh Hezekiah peya8naog Isaiaoh.
E.19.5 So the servants of king Hezekiah came to Isaiah.

α.19.6 Kah Isaiah wuttinuh, yeu woh kuttinnóneau kussontimom8, yeu wussin Jehovah; ahque wabesuontash kutt8wongash nish n8tamanish, nish nashpe wuttinneumoh Assyriae ketass8t blasphemukqueh.
E.19.6 And Isaiah said unto them, Thus shall ye say to your master, Thus saith the LORD, Be not afraid of the words which thou hast heard, with which the servants of the king of Assyria have blasphemed me.

α.19.7 Kusseh, nutann8n mahmiss8pahsôsit, kah pish n8tam aunchem8kaonk, kah pish qushkeu nehenwonche wutohkit, kah nuppénusháh nashpe togkodteg ut nehenwonche wutohkeit.
E.19.7 Behold, I will send a blast upon him, and he shall hear a rumour, and shall return to his own land; and I will cause him to fall by the sword in his own land.

α.19.8 Neit Rabsheka qushkeu, kah nameheau Assyriae ketass8toh ayyeuuhkona[u] Libnahoh: newutche noh n8tam, noh amái wutch Lachish.
E.19.8 So Rabshakeh returned, and found the king of Assyria warring against Libnah: for he had heard that he was departed from Lachish.

α.19.9 Kah n8tog n8won papaume Tirhakah Ethiopiáe ketass8t, kusseh, noh sohham kutayeuhkonukqunat, wonk ann8nau ann8naénuh en Hezekiah, n8wau,
E.19.9 And when he heard say of Tirhakah king of Ethiopia, Behold, he is come out to fight against thee: he sent messengers again unto Hezekiah, saying,

α.19.10 Yeu pish kuttinnoneau ketass8t ut Judah, n8wak, kum-Manitt8m noh pabuhtanumadt, ahque ass8kekomukquish, n8wadt, Jerusalem matta pish mag8un en wunnutcheganit Assyriae ketass8t.
E.19.10 Thus shall ye speak to Hezekiah king of Judah, saying, Let not thy God in whom thou trustest deceive thee, saying, Jerusalem shall not be delivered into the hand of the king of Assyria.

α.19.11 Kusseh, ken8tam uttoh Assyriae ketass8tamwog neánteunk wame ohkeash, papaquanne paguanónat: kah sun woh ken kuttóm?
E.19.11 Behold, thou hast heard what the kings of Assyria have done to all lands, by destroying them utterly: and shalt thou be delivered?

α.19.12 Wutohtimóinne manitt8og, sun nah uppohquohwhunóuh neh n8shog paguanáhetticheh? Gozan, kah Haran, kah Rezeph, kah wunnaumonuh Eden, ut Thelasar?
E.19.12 Have the gods of the nations delivered them which my fathers have destroyed; as Gozan, and Haran, and Rezeph, and the children of Eden which were in Thelasar?

α.19.13 Uttiyeuoh Hamathe ketass8t, kah Arphade ketass8t, kah Sepharvaimme keitotanáe ketass8t, Henah, kah [J]vah?
E.19.13 Where is the king of Hamath, and the king of Arpad, and the king of the city of Sepharvaim, of Hena, and Ivah?

α.19.14 Kah Hezekiah attumunum wussukwhonk wutch wunnutchegan8óut ann8naenuog, kah wutogketamun: kah Hezekiah kuhkuhqueu en wekit Jehovah, kah sepagenumun, ut anaquabit Jehovah.
E.19.14 And Hezekiah received the letter of the hand of the messengers, and read it: and Hezekiah went up into the house of the LORD, and spread it before the LORD.

α.19.15 Kah Hezekiah peantam ut anaquabit Jehovah, kah n8wau, Woi Jehovah um-Manitt8moh Israel, ken áyean ut nashaúe Cherubimsut, ken Manit, ken webe nusse, ut wame ketass8tam8ongash ohkeit, ken kutáyim kesuk kah ohke.
E.19.15 And Hezekiah prayed before the LORD, and said, O LORD God of Israel, which dwellest between the cherubims, thou art the God, even thou alone, of all the kingdoms of the earth; thou hast made heaven and earth.

α.19.16 Jehovah nauwansh kehtauog kah n8tash, Jehovah wôshwunush kuskesukquash kah naish, & n8tash ukkutt8wongash Sennakerib, noh negonshhuadt kehkomónat pomantamwae God.
E.19.16 LORD, bow down thine ear, and hear: open, LORD, thine eyes, and see: and hear the words of Sennacherib, which hath sent him to reproach the living God.

α.19.17 Wunnamuhkuteyeu8 Jehovah, Assyriae ketass8tamwog nehtóog wutohtimóneash, kah wutohkeyeuóash.
E.19.17 Of a truth, LORD, the kings of Assyria have destroyed the nations and their lands,

α.19.18 Kah unnohteáog ummanitt8m8oh n8taut, newutche nag matta manitt88og, qut wutanakausuongan8 wosketompaog wunnutchegan8oash, mehtug kah qussuk; newajeh paguan[á]hettit.
E.19.18 And have cast their gods into the fire: for they were no gods, but the work of men's hands, wood and stone: therefore they have destroyed them.

α.19.19 Newutche yeuyeu, woi Jehvoah num-Manitt8mun k8wehquetumoush tomwuhhinnean wutch wunnutcheganit, onk wame ass8tam8ongash ut ohkeit woh wahteóog ken Jehovah God, ken webe nussu.
E.19.19 Now therefore, O LORD our God, I beseech thee, save thou us out of his hand, that all the kingdoms of the earth may know that thou art the LORD God, even thou only.

α.19.20 Nei[t] Isajah wunnaumonuh Amoz ann8nau Hezekiahut, n8wau, yeu wussin Lord um-Manitt8moh Israel: ne an [à]yeuuhkonittue peantamaúwean wutch Sennakerib Assyriae ketass8t, nunn8tamun.
E.19.20 Then Isaiah the son of Amoz sent to Hezekiah, saying, Thus saith the LORD God of Israel, That which thou hast prayed to me against Sennacherib king of Assyria I have heard.

α.19.21 Yeu kutt8onk ne Jehovah an8wadt noh wutch papaume, penomp wuttaunoh Sion kussekeneunk, kah manowantamóe kutáhanehtunk, wuttaunoh Jerusalem kenunukquhquaehtunk.
E.19.21 This is the word that the LORD hath spoken concerning him; The virgin the daughter of Zion hath despised thee, and laughed thee to scorn; the daughter of Jerusalem hath shaken her head at thee.

α.19.22 Howan aiashpunamadt, kah blasphemadt? kah ayeuuhkonittue howan tahshinnumauadt k8wadtauatonkqussuonk, quanukque tahshinnumauadt kuskesukquash? ayeuuhkonittue 8neetupanatam8m8oh Israel.
E.19.22 Whom hast thou reproached and blasphemed? and against whom hast thou exalted thy voice, and lifted up thine eyes on high? even against the Holy One of Israel.

α.19.23 Nashpe kutann8naenúmog kutaiushpunam Jehovah, kah kussip, nashpe mátaá[m]ukish nut-charetsumash nukkuhkuhquenu en koduhkôage wadchuuhkontu, kishkontu Lebanon, kah pish nuttumetah quaquonuhqussitcheg Cedaruhtugquash, kah wunnunkqussitcheg neg k8waog, kah pish nuppetutteam, appinneash ut 8wohkôiyeumut, wuttouohkomuk8m, kah ummishumeechumohteuk.
E.19.23 By thy messengers thou hast reproached the LORD, and hast said, With the multitude of my chariots I am come up to the height of the mountains, to the sides of Lebanon, and will cut down the tall cedar trees thereof, and the choice fir trees thereof: and I will enter into the lodgings of his borders, and into the forest of his Carmel.

α.19.24 N8wonteam, kah n8tattam pen8pog, kah nashpe nusseetash nunnunassum wame sepuash ut wéenuhkomoe ayeuonganehtu.
E.19.24 I have digged and drunk strange waters, and with the sole of my feet have I dried up all the rivers of besieged places.

α.19.25 Sunnummatta kenan8tam8p n8wadt, uttoh an usseomp n8wadt, nukkuhkénauwéhtinneah? eyeu nutussen, onk woh kuttinniinneat matcheteauunat pummeneutausue keitotanash, en matchehteóe [num]wonkquait
E.19.25 Hast thou not heard long ago how I have done it, and of ancient times that I have formed it? now have I brought it to pass, that thou shouldest be to lay waste fenced cities into ruinous heaps.

α.19.26 Newaj neg na áyitcheg ogguhsein ummenuhkesuongan8, neg chepshaog, kah nanakontanumóog, nag tatuppeyeuwog ohetuhkone moskehtuut, kah ahchippogwut, tatuppeyeuog moskehtuut ut woskeche kommuk, kah onatuh pásaquodtik weatchimineash ash kogkesekinunogkup.
E.19.26 Therefore their inhabitants were of small power, they were dismayed and confounded; they were as the grass of the field, and as the green herb, as the grass on the house tops, and as corn blasted before it be grown up.

α.19.27 Qut n8wahteoh uttoh apean, kah kussohhamóonk, kah kuppetutteáonk, kah ayeuuhkonittue kutchenauôsimmuonk nen,
E.19.27 But I know thy abode, and thy going out, and thy coming in, and thy rage against me.

α.19.28 Newutche kutchenauôsimeh, kah k8wohkouéonk kuhkuhquem8 en nuhtauogkut, newajeh ponum nutom ut kutchánit, kah nup-bridleum ut kussisst8nit, kah kukquishkinish en mayut, ne wamóp.
E.19.28 Because thy rage against me and thy tumult is come up into mine ears, therefore I will put my hook in thy nose, and my bridle in thy lips, and I will turn thee back by the way by which thou camest.

α.19.29 Kah yeu pish kukkinneasuonganú8 wutche ken, pish kummeechum8 yeu kodtum8k, nish nehenwonche neekukish, kah ut nahohtôeu kodtum8ut, ne nan noh waj sonkuk; kah nishwe kodtum8ut ohkehteagk, kah kepenum8k, kah ohketeagk weenomineohtekonash, kah meech8k nish meechummuwongash.
E.19.29 And this shall be a sign unto thee, Ye shall eat this year such things as grow of themselves, and in the second year that which springeth of the same; and in the third year sow ye, and reap, and plant vineyards, and eat the fruits thereof.

α.19.30 Kah neg sequttahwutcheg, neg tonk[e]g, nag wekit Judah, pish ohkeiyeu enadchâbukod, kah meechumu en wohkumeiyeu.
E.19.30 And the remnant that is escaped of the house of Judah shall yet again take root downward, and bear fruit upward.

α.19.31 Newutche wutch Jerusalem sequttahwutcheg pish sohhamwog, kah nag pohquohhogeg wutch wadchuut S[í]on, wus-zealum Jehovah ayeuhteaunit yeu pish wutussen.
E.19.31 For out of Jerusalem shall go forth a remnant, and they that escape out of mount Zion: the zeal of the LORD of hosts shall do this.

α.19.32 Newutche yeu wussin Jeho[u]ah papaume Assyriae ketass8t, matta pish petutteaou yeu otanat, asuh pumehkitch kôuhquod na$ut, asuh peyunkitch anaquohtag nashpe ogqunneg, asuh ayeuuhkonittue kutaham8kitch.
E.19.32 Therefore thus saith the LORD concerning the king of Assyria, He shall not come into this city, nor shoot an arrow there, nor come before it with shield, nor cast a bank against it.

α.19.33 En mayut ne wag, ne nan pish wuttinqushken, kah matta pish petutteau yeu[-] otanat, wussin Jehovah.
E.19.33 By the way that he came, by the same shall he return, and shall not come into this city, saith the LORD.

α.19.34 Newutch n8wadchanum yeu keitotan tomwehteauunat, wutche nen, kah wutch nuttinneum David.
E.19.34 For I will defend this city, to save it, for mine own sake, and for my servant David's sake.

α.19.35 Kah nniyeup, ne nohkog, wut-Angelumoh Jehovah sohham, kah togkoma[u], ut Assyrianse tuppuksinnowonganit, nequt pasuk8e, kah shwosuk tahshinchag, kah napanna tahshe muttannonganog kussuog, kah nag omohkehettit nompoae, kusseh, wame nuppoe muhhogkunk.
E.19.35 And it came to pass that night, that the angel of the LORD went out, and smote in the camp of the Assyrians an hundred fourscore and five thousand: and when they arose early in the morning, behold, they were all dead corpses.

α.19.36 Neit Sennakerib Assyriae ketass8t amái, kah monchu, kah qushkeu, kah ayeu Nineveh.
E.19.36 So Sennacherib king of Assyria departed, and went and returned, and dwelt at Nineveh.

α.19.37 Kah nniyeup, waussumuadt ut wekit Nisroch ummanitt8moh, Adramelech kah Sharezer wunnaumonuh wuttogkomóuh nashpe togkodteg: kah nag u[so]uh[h]8waog en Armeniáe ohkit, kah Es[a]rhaddonoh wunnaumonuh wunnompass8tamómukquoh.
E.19.37 And it came to pass, as he was worshipping in the house of Nisroch his god, that Adrammelech and Sharezer his sons smote him with the sword: and they escaped into the land of Armenia. And Esarhaddon his son reigned in his stead.

α.20.1 YEush kesukodtash Hezekiah nahen nupp8e mahchinau, kah wuttinuh, kah quoshodtumwaenin Isaiah uppeyaonuh, kah wuttinuh, yeu wussin Jehovah, wunohtoush kek, newutche pish kenup, kah matta kuppomantam8.
E.20.1 In those days was Hezekiah sick unto death. And the prophet Isaiah the son of Amoz came to him, and said unto him, Thus saith the LORD, Set thine house in order; for thou shalt die, and not live.

α.20.2 Neit quinnuppinum wuskesuk en sussippongkomuk, kah peantamauau Jehovah, n8wau,
E.20.2 Then he turned his face to the wall, and prayed unto the LORD, saying,

α.20.3 K8wehquetumoush, woi Jehovah, yeuyeu mehquontash, uttoh án pomushái ut anaquabean, wunnamuhkuteyeu88k, kah nashpe pannuppeyeue metah, nutussem ne wanegik ut anaquabean: kah Hazekiah mishe mâu.
E.20.3 I beseech thee, O LORD, remember now how I have walked before thee in truth and with a perfect heart, and have done that which is good in thy sight. And Hezekiah wept sore.

α.20.4 Kah nniyeup, Isaiah asquam sohham8p en nashauee chippinneutunkanit: wuttinn8waonk Jehovah peyaónuk, n8wau,
E.20.4 And it came to pass, afore Isaiah was gone out into the middle court, that the word of the LORD came to him, saying,

α.20.5 Wonk qushkish, kah us Hezekiah mummugquom ut nummissinninneumut, yeu wussin Jehovah, um-Manitt8moh David k8sh, nunn8tam kuppeantamóonk, nunnaum kussippeguash; kusseh, keneetskehesh, nishikquinogkog pish kukkuhkuhquem en wekit Jehovah.
E.20.5 Turn again, and tell Hezekiah the captain of my people, Thus saith the LORD, the God of David thy father, I have heard thy prayer, I have seen thy tears: behold, I will heal thee: on the third day thou shalt go up unto the house of the LORD.

α.20.6 Kah nukk8chteoh kukkesukodtumash nabo napanna tahshe kodtumwae, kah kuttombesh, kah yeu keitotan wutch wunnutcheganit Assyriáe ketass8t, kah n8wadchanum yeu keitotan, wutche nen, kah wutche nuttinneum David.
E.20.6 And I will add unto thy days fifteen years; and I will deliver thee and this city out of the hand of the king of Assyria; and I will defend this city for mine own sake, and for my servant David's sake.

α.20.7 Kah Isaiah n8wau, nemunnum8k neqututcheoash figsash, kah wunnemunnumunáoash, kah upponamunáoash mogqueenit, kah keteau.
E.20.7 And Isaiah said, Take a lump of figs. And they took and laid it on the boil, and he recovered.

α.20.8 Kah Hezekiah unnau Isaiahoh, teague kukkinneasuonk Jehovah ne neetskehikqueh? kah woh nukkuhkuhquenat wekit Jehovah nishikquinogok?
E.20.8 And Hezekiah said unto Isaiah, What shall be the sign that the LORD will heal me, and that I shall go up into the house of the LORD the third day?

α.20.9 Kah Isaiah n8wau, yeu kuhkinneasuonk woh ahtauan wutch Jehovah, Jehovah wutussen ne an8wadt: sun woh onkauw[ô]ht kutchittôushóm8 piogque chippaiyeuut, asuh woh qushkem8ash piogque chippaiyeuut?
E.20.9 And Isaiah said, This sign shalt thou have of the LORD, that the LORD will do the thing that he hath spoken: shall the shadow go forward ten degrees, or go back ten degrees?

α.20.10 Kah Hezekiah namp8ham, peasin onkaûohteau w8mussùm8ut piogque chippaiyeuut: matchaog, asuh qushkem8itch onkouohteau piogque chippaiyeuut.
E.20.10 And Hezekiah answered, It is a light thing for the shadow to go down ten degrees: nay, but let the shadow return backward ten degrees.

α.20.11 Kah Isaiah quoshodtmwaen mauunnitteauau Jehovahoh, kah qushkehtau onkauôhtau pajeh piogque chippaiyeuut, ne w8msum8uk, ut wut-dyalumut Ahaz.
E.20.11 And Isaiah the prophet cried unto the LORD: and he brought the shadow ten degrees backward, by which it had gone down in the dial of Ahaz.

α.20.12 Na ahquompak Berodach$Baladan wunnaumonuh Bal[a]dan Babylone ketass8t, negonshhuau lettersash, kah mag8onk, en Hezekiahut, newutche n8tam Hezekiah mahche mahchi[na]u.
E.20.12 At that time Berodachbaladan, the son of Baladan, king of Babylon, sent letters and a present unto Hezekiah: for he had heard that Hezekiah had been sick.

α.20.13 Kah Hezekiah n[a]h wunn8tauoh, kah wunnahtinuh 8nach[ê]su[o]u wek, silver kah gold, kah spicesash, kah mashôadtik suss[é]queáe pummee, kah wame ukkenauwamée kommuk, kah wame [n]ish nam[teó]mukish ut wunnompek8unne komukqut: wanne teag ut wekit, asuh ut wame wunn[a]nawunnum8onganit, nish Hezechiah matta nahtinu[n]kish.
E.20.13 And Hezekiah hearkened unto them, and shewed them all the house of his precious things, the silver, and the gold, and the spices, and the precious ointment, and all the house of his armour, and all that was found in his treasures: there was nothing in his house, nor in all his dominion, that Hezekiah shewed them not.

α.20.14 Neit Isayah quoshodtumwaen peyaoneau ketass8toh Hezechiahoh, & wuttinuh, toh n8wáog yeug wosketompaog, kah tohnoh 8mwog en kuhhogkat? kah Hezechiah n8wau, nag 8mwog nôadtit wutohtimónat, wutch Babilon.
E.20.14 Then came Isaiah the prophet unto king Hezekiah, and said unto him, What said these men? and from whence came they unto thee? And Hezekiah said, They are come from a far country, even from Babylon.

α.20.15 Kah n8wau, teag naumwog ut ohkeit? kah Hezechiah namp8ham, wame teanteagwassi[n]ish nish nekit wunnaumunnáoash, wanne teag ut nunnompakouunit nish matta nahtinóogish.
E.20.15 And he said, What have they seen in thine house? And Hezekiah answered, All the things that are in mine house have they seen: there is nothing among my treasures that I have not shewed them.

α.20.16 Kah Isayah unnau Hezechiahoh, n8tash wuttinn8waonk Jehovah.
E.20.16 And Isaiah said unto Hezekiah, Hear the word of the LORD.

α.20.17 Kusseh, kesukodtash peyom8ash, wame ne ohtag kekit, kah nish k8shog ponamwehetteupash, pajeh yeu kesukok, pish uss8wuttauunash Babilon, wanne teag pish ushqunnum8un, n8wau Jehovah.
E.20.17 Behold, the days come, that all that is in thine house, and that which thy fathers have laid up in store unto this day, shall be carried into Babylon: nothing shall be left, saith the LORD.

α.20.18 Kah kenamonunk neg ontsetcheg wutch kuhhotkát, neg pish wúnaumóniéaneg, nag pish wuttamaunuh, kah neg pish eunuchsu8og ut ummishe wekit Babilone ketahs8t.
E.20.18 And of thy sons that shall issue from thee, which thou shalt beget, shall they take away; and they shall be eunuchs in the palace of the king of Babylon.

α.20.19 Neit Hezechiah unnau Isaiahoh, wunnegen wuttinn8waonk Jehovah ne an8waan: kah n8wau, sunnummatta wunegeninno, wunohteáonk & wunnamuhkuteyeuuk ohtag nukkesukodtum[ú]t.
E.20.19 Then said Hezekiah unto Isaiah, Good is the word of the LORD which thou hast spoken. And he said, Is it not good, if peace and truth be in my days?

α.20.20 Kah onkatogish wutusseongash Hezechiah, kah wame ummenuhkesuonk, & uttoh an ayik nuppissepog, kah conduit, kah paudtau nippe keitotanat, sunnummatta wusṣukwhosinóash, Judae ketahs8tamwog ummequontamoe wusṣukwhongan8óut?
E.20.20 And the rest of the acts of Hezekiah, and all his might, and how he made a pool, and a conduit, and brought water into the city, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?

α.20.21 Kah Hezechiah weesequom8mau 8shoh, kah Manasṣeh wunnaumonuh wunnompasṣ8tamomukquoh.
E.20.21 And Hezekiah slept with his fathers: and Manasseh his son reigned in his stead.

α.21.1 MAnasseh nabo neese kodtumwohkom n8che ketass8tam8it, kah ketass8tam88 napanna tahshinchage, kah napanna tahshe kodtumwae ut J[e]rusalem, kah ohkasoh ussowesuoh Hephzibah.
E.21.1 Manasseh was twelve years old when he began to reign, and reigned fifty and five years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Hephzibah.

α.21.2 Kah ussu ne machuk ut anaquabit Jehovah, neaunak wunnishkeneunkquott8m8ash pen8wohteaog, neh Jehovah sohwhohteácheh wutch anaquabhettit wunnaumonuh Israel.
E.21.2 And he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD, after the abominations of the heathen, whom the LORD cast out before the children of Israel.

α.21.3 Newutche, wonk ayim qunnuhquiayeuongash, nish Hezechiah 8shoh paguatunkupash, kah ayimauau Altarsash Baaloh, kah kuppi, ne aseip ahab Israelle ketass8t, kah wowussumau wame kesukque kenauwameongash, kah nah 8tininneumuhkauoh.
E.21.3 For he built up again the high places which Hezekiah his father had destroyed; and he reared up altars for Baal, and made a grove, as did Ahab king of Israel; and worshipped all the host of heaven, and served them.

α.21.4 Kah ayim altarsash ut wekit Jehovah, ne papaume Jehovah an8wop, ut Jerusalem nupponam n8wesuonk
E.21.4 And he built altars in the house of the LORD, of which the LORD said, In Jerusalem will I put my name.

α.21.5 Kah ayimauau altarsash wutch wame kesukque kenauwameongash ut neese chippinneutunkanit wekit Jehovah.
E.21.5 And he built altars for all the host of heaven in the two courts of the house of the LORD.

α.21.6 Kah wunnaumonuh paumusháheau n8taut, kah kukkinneasu utt8cheyeu8ash, kah ussu pauwaongash, kah weoggéheau matche nashauongoh, kah mamontamoh: ussu mishe matcheseonk ut anaquabit Jehovah, m8m8sqheònat.
E.21.6 And he made his son pass through the fire, and observed times, and used enchantments, and dealt with familiar spirits and wizards: he wrought much wickedness in the sight of the LORD, to provoke him to anger.

α.21.7 Kah ponau kuppiyeue wuttinneukontunkoh neh keṣheoncheh, ut wetuomut, ne papaume Jehovah anomp Davidoh, kah Solomonoh wunnaumonuh; yeuut wetuómut kah ut Jerusalem ne pepenam wutch wame wutchippan8wonganit Israel, na nupponumun n8wesuonk micheme.
E.21.7 And he set a graven image of the grove that he had made in the house, of which the LORD said to David, and to Solomon his son, In this house, and in Jerusalem, which I have chosen out of all tribes of Israel, will I put my name for ever:

α.21.8 Kah matta nutontohtahtoou wusseet8ash Israel, wutch ohkit ne 8sh8oh anumauogkup: webe kukkinneasehettit ussenat, neaunak wame ne anann8nog, kah neaunak wame naumatuonk ne Moses nuttinneum anann8nomp. 
E.21.8 Neither will I make the feet of Israel move any more out of the land which I gave their fathers; only if they will observe to do according to all that I have commanded them, and according to all the law that my servant Moses commanded them.

α.21.9 Qut nag matta kukkutamóog: kah Manasseh uppanneuss8unuh m8cheke matchesenat, onk ne asehettit wutohtimóneash nish Jehovah paguatunkish ut anaquabhettit wunnaumonuh Israel.
E.21.9 But they hearkened not: and Manasseh seduced them to do more evil than did the nations whom the LORD destroyed before the children of Israel.

α.21.10 Kah Jehovah ket8kau nashpe quoshodtumwaenue wuttinneumoh n8wau,
E.21.10 And the LORD spake by his servants the prophets, saying,

α.21.11 Newutche Manasseh Judae ketass8t wutussenash yeush nishkeneunkquokish, kah anue matchesumau wame Amoritsog ne aséhettit, neh negonuhkunkqutcheh, kah wonk Judahoh matcheseáheau nashpe wuttinnukontunkoh.
E.21.11 Because Manasseh king of Judah hath done these abominations, and hath done wickedly above all that the Amorites did, which were before him, and hath made Judah also to sin with his idols:

α.21.12 Newajeh yeu n8wadt Jehovah umMánitt8moh Israel, kusseh, nukkod paudto machuk ut Jerusalem, kah Judah, ne howan n8taog, naneeswe wuhtauog8ash pish nupwem8ash.
E.21.12 Therefore thus saith the LORD God of Israel, Behold, I am bringing such evil upon Jerusalem and Judah, that whosoever heareth of it, both his ears shall tingle.

α.21.13 Nussummagunum Samariae uppemunneat ut woskeche Jerusalem, kah uppinnompanumóonk wek Ahab, kah nutjishkham Jerusalem, onatuh wosketimp jishkhog wunnonk, jishkhamunat kah wunnumuhkinumunat.
E.21.13 And I will stretch over Jerusalem the line of Samaria, and the plummet of the house of Ahab: and I will wipe Jerusalem as a man wipeth a dish, wiping it, and turning it upside down.

α.21.14 Kah nutóhquontam ne asqunnumuk nutohtoonk, kah nupponóog ut wunnutchegan8óut ummatwom8oh, kah nag pish sequttahham8onganú8og, kah matcheteauonganú8og ut wame ummatwom8óut.
E.21.14 And I will forsake the remnant of mine inheritance, and deliver them into the hand of their enemies; and they shall become a prey and a spoil to all their enemies;

α.21.15 Newutche usseog ne machuk ut anaquabeh, kah num8m8sqhikquog musquantamunat, nadteuh 8sh8oh wámunut Egypt, pajeh yeu kesukok.
E.21.15 Because they have done that which was evil in my sight, and have provoked me to anger, since the day their fathers came forth out of Egypt, even unto this day.

α.21.16 Nano, Manasseh seahham mat woskehuwae wusqueheonk m8cheke, nô pajeh wuñómwameechumuhkonat Jerusalem wutch aeehtaue, chaubohk ummatcheseonk ne nashpe matcheseáheont Judahoh, ussenat n[e] machuk ut anaquabit Jehovah.
E.21.16 Moreover Manasseh shed innocent blood very much, till he had filled Jerusalem from one end to another; beside his sin wherewith he made Judah to sin, in doing that which was evil in the sight of the LORD.

α.21.17 Kah onkatogish wutusseongash Manasseh, kah wame ne asit, kah ummatcheseonk ne an matcheseit, sunnummatta wussukwhosinóash, Judae ketass8tamwog ummequontamóe wussukwhonkan8óut?
E.21.17 Now the rest of the acts of Manasseh, and all that he did, and his sin that he sinned, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?

α.21.18 Kah Manasseh weeseq[ú]om8mau 8shoh, kah posekinau tanohketeaonganit nehenwonche wekit, Uzzae tanohketeaonganit: kah Ammonoh wunnaumonuh wunnompass8tam8mukquoh
E.21.18 And Manasseh slept with his fathers, and was buried in the garden of his own house, in the garden of Uzza: and Amon his son reigned in his stead.

α.21.19 Ammon nesnehchage kah neese kodtumwohkomup n8che ketass8tam8it, kah neese kodtumwae ketass8tam88 ut Jerusalem, kah ohkasoh ussowesuoh Meshullemeth, wuttaunuh Haruz wutch Jotbah.
E.21.19 Amon was twenty and two years old when he began to reign, and he reigned two years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Meshullemeth, the daughter of Haruz of Jotbah.

α.21.20 Kah usseu ne machuk ut anaquabit Jehovah, ne aséneup Manassehoh 8shoh.
E.21.20 And he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD, as his father Manasseh did.

α.21.21 Kah pomushau wame mayash, nish 8shoh paumush8hpash, kah wuttinneumohkauau nunneukontunkoh, neh 8shoh wodtinninneumuhkauompoh, kah nah 8wowussumoh.
E.21.21 And he walked in all the way that his father walked in, and served the idols that his father served, and worshipped them:

α.21.22 Kah nukkonau Jehovah neh um-Manitt8moh 8shoh, kah matta pomushau ummayit Jehovah.
E.21.22 And he forsook the LORD God of his fathers, and walked not in the way of the LORD.

α.21.23 Kah wuttinneumoh Ammon 8nombeukonóuh, kah nusháog ketass8toh ut nehenwonche wekit.
E.21.23 And the servants of Amon conspired against him, and slew the king in his own house.

α.21.24 Kah ohkée missinninnuog nushaog, wame neh wunnombeukononcheg ketass8toh Ammonoh, kah ohkée missinninnuog, Josiasoh wunnompe ketass8tomwéhkonauh.
E.21.24 And the people of the land slew all them that had conspired against king Amon; and the people of the land made Josiah his son king in his stead.

α.21.25 Kah onkatoganash wutusseongash Ammon nish asechish, sunnummatta wussukwhosinóash Judae ketass8tamwog ummehquontamóe wussukwhongan8óut.
E.21.25 Now the rest of the acts of Amon which he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?

α.21.26 Kah posekinau 8wenohkéimut Uzzae tanohketeaonganit, kah Josiahoh wunnaumonuh wunnompass8tam8mukquoh.
E.21.26 And he was buried in his sepulchre in the garden of Uzza: and Josiah his son reigned in his stead.

α.22.1 IOsiah shwosuk tahshe kodtumwohkomup n8che ketass8tam8it, kah shwinchag kah nequt kodtumwáe ketass8tam88 ut Jerusalem, kah ohkasoh ussowesuoh Jedidah wuttaunoh Adajah wutch Boscath.
E.22.1 Josiah was eight years old when he began to reign, and he reigned thirty and one years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Jedidah, the daughter of Adaiah of Boscath.

α.22.2 Kah usseu ne sampwag ut anaquabit Jehovah, kah pomushau wame ummayit Davidoh 8shoh, kah matta quinnuppu en unninohkôunat asuh menadcheanit.
E.22.2 And he did that which was right in the sight of the LORD, and walked in all the way of David his father, and turned not aside to the right hand or to the left.

α.22.3 Kah nniyeup, nabo shwosuk wutteashe kodtum8mut ketass8t Josias, ketass8t ann8nau Shaphanoh wunnaumonuh Azaliah, wunnaumonuh Meshullam noh Scribe, en wekit Jehovah, n8wau,
E.22.3 And it came to pass in the eighteenth year of king Josiah, that the king sent Shaphan the son of Azaliah, the son of Meshullam, the scribe, to the house of the LORD, saying,

α.22.4 Kuhkuhquish en Hilkiahut kehchesephausuen, onk woh ogketam silver, ne paudtomuk wekit Lord, nish nanausquontamácheg makinnumohetticheh wutch missinninnúut.
E.22.4 Go up to Hilkiah the high priest, that he may sum the silver which is brought into the house of the LORD, which the keepers of the door have gathered of the people:

α.22.5 Kah magunach wunnutch[e]gan8óut anakausuenúog, neg nanawunukeg wek Jehovah, kah aninnumauahettich asenutcheh anakausuonk, ne wekit Jehovah, onchteauunat tauwutch[a]shunkish ut wetuómut.
E.22.5 And let them deliver it into the hand of the doers of the work, that have the oversight of the house of the LORD: and let them give it to the doers of the work which is in the house of the LORD, to repair the breaches of the house,

α.22.6 En Carpentersut, kah wekitteaenuut, kah Masonsog, kah adtoônat timber, kah wunnehtham8e qussukquanash wunnehteauunat wetu.
E.22.6 Unto carpenters, and builders, and masons, and to buy timber and hewn stone to repair the house.

α.22.7 Qut matta wunnompagunnum8onk papaume teaguas, ne magumuk en wunnutchegan8óut, newutche pabahtánumwe usseog.
E.22.7 Howbeit there was no reckoning made with them of the money that was delivered into their hand, because they dealt faithfully.

α.22.8 Kah Hilkiah sephausuen unnau Shaphanoh noh Scribe, nunnamteoh naumatue b8k, ut wekit Lord, kah Hilkiah aninnumauau b8k Shaphanoh, kah wutogketamun.
E.22.8 And Hilkiah the high priest said unto Shaphan the scribe, I have found the book of the law in the house of the LORD. And Hilkiah gave the book to Shaphan, and he read it.

α.22.9 Kah Shaphan Scribe peyaonau ketass8tamwoh, kah wonk paudaunchem8kauau ketass8toh, kah n8wau, kittinneummog moenumwog teaguas nish ohtagish wetu[ô]mut, kah uppunamunáoash wunnutchegan8óut neg anakausuitcheg, neg nanawunukeg wek Jehovah.
E.22.9 And Shaphan the scribe came to the king, and brought the king word again, and said, Thy servants have gathered the money that was found in the house, and have delivered it into the hand of them that do the work, that have the oversight of the house of the LORD.

α.22.10 Kah Shaphan Scribe wuttinnon ketass8toh, n8wau, Hilkiah sephausuen nuttinnumunk b8k: kah Shaphan wutogketamun ut anaquabit ketass8t.
E.22.10 And Shaphan the scribe shewed the king, saying, Hilkiah the priest hath delivered me a book. And Shaphan read it before the king.

α.22.11 Kah nniyeup, ketass8t n8tog naumatuongane batu kutt8ongash, nehnekikom wutogk8unash.
E.22.11 And it came to pass, when the king had heard the words of the book of the law, that he rent his clothes.

α.22.12 Kah ketass8t ann8nau Hilkiah sephausuen, kah Ahikam wunnaumonuh Shaphan, kah Achbor wunnaumonuh Micajah, kah Shaphan Scribe, kah Asahiah wuttinneumoh ketass8t, n8wau,
E.22.12 And the king commanded Hilkiah the priest, and Ahikam the son of Shaphan, and Achbor the son of Michaiah, and Shaphan the scribe, and Asahiah a servant of the king's, saying,

α.22.13 Monchek nat8tamok Jehovah wutche nen, kah wutch missinninnúog, kah wutch wame Judah, papaume kutt8wongash yeu b8kut ne nameteómuk, newutche missi ummusquanittam8onk Jehovah ne nashqunaietunkqueog, newutche k8shinónog matta kukk[e]htamóog kutt8ongash yeu ut b8kut, ussenat neansukwhosik papaume kenawun.
E.22.13 Go ye, enquire of the LORD for me, and for the people, and for all Judah, concerning the words of this book that is found: for great is the wrath of the LORD that is kindled against us, because our fathers have not hearkened unto the words of this book, to do according unto all that which is written concerning us.

α.22.14 Neit Hilkiah sepha[u]suen kah Ahikam, kah Achbor, kah Shaphan, kah Asahiah auog Huldahut mittamwossisse quoshodtumwaen, ummittamwussoh Shallum, wunnaumonuh Tikvah, wunnaumonuh Harhas nanawehteunk hogk8wongash, kah noh ayeu Jerusalem, ut Colledgeut, kah ukkeket8hkauau.
E.22.14 So Hilkiah the priest, and Ahikam, and Achbor, and Shaphan, and Asahiah, went unto Huldah the prophetess, the wife of Shallum the son of Tikvah, the son of Harhas, keeper of the wardrobe; (now she dwelt in Jerusalem in the college;) and they communed with her.

α.22.15 Kah noh nah wuttinuh, yeu wussin Jehovah um-Manitt8moh Israel, unnok wosketomp noh ann8nukqueóg en nuhhogkat.
E.22.15 And she said unto them, Thus saith the LORD God of Israel, Tell the man that sent you to me,

α.22.16 Yeu wussin Jehovah, kusseh, nuppaudto machuk yeuut ayeuonganit, kah neg noh wadohkitcheg, wame b8k kutt8wongash nish Judae ketass8t agkétogish.
E.22.16 Thus saith the LORD, Behold, I will bring evil upon this place, and upon the inhabitants thereof, even all the words of the book which the king of Judah hath read:

α.22.17 Newutche nutohquanumukquog, kah chiko[k]sumauáog weetemungquok onkatogeh manittoh, woh numm8m8sqhikqunnaóont en musquanittamunat, nashpe wame wunnutchegane anakausuongan8oash, newajeh nummusquanitteaonk pish ayeuuhkonittue nashquneau yeuut ayeuonganit, kah matta pish ontán8.
E.22.17 Because they have forsaken me, and have burned incense unto other gods, that they might provoke me to anger with all the works of their hands; therefore my wrath shall be kindled against this place, and shall not be quenched.

α.22.18 Qut Judae ketass8t, noh ann8nukqueog nat8tamauónat Jehovah, yeu woh kuttinnóneau, yeu wussin Jehovah um-Manitt8moh Israel, papaume kutt8wongash nish n8tamanish:
E.22.18 But to the king of Judah which sent you to enquire of the LORD, thus shall ye say to him, Thus saith the LORD God of Israel, As touching the words which thou hast heard;

α.22.19 Newutche kuttah n8hki, kah ken kutóhhohpah kuhhog ut anaquabit Jehovah, n8tam[o]n ne ayeuuhkonittue ádtam yeu ayeuonk, kah ayeuuhkonittue neg na wadóhkitcheg, nag pish touishinne kutohke, kah matanatuonganú8, kah kenenekikom kuttogk8unash kah kummóh ut anaquabeh, nen wonk ken8toush, n8wau Jehovah.
E.22.19 Because thine heart was tender, and thou hast humbled thyself before the LORD, when thou heardest what I spake against this place, and against the inhabitants thereof, that they should become a desolation and a curse, and hast rent thy clothes, and wept before me; I also have heard thee, saith the LORD.

α.22.20 Newutche kusseh, pish kummukinush en k8shut, kah wunnohteae pish kummukinit en k8weenohkeet, kah kuskesukqutaash matta pish naum8 wame machuk ne paudtau yeu ut ayeuonganit: kah n[à]g wonk paudaunchem8kauwaog ketass8toh.
E.22.20 Behold therefore, I will gather thee unto thy fathers, and thou shalt be gathered into thy grave in peace; and thine eyes shall not see all the evil which I will bring upon this place. And they brought the king word again.

α.23.1 KAh ketass8t ann8team8, kah ummukkinnumauóuh wame Judae kah Jerusaleme Eldersoh.
E.23.1 And the king sent, and they gathered unto him all the elders of Judah and of Jerusalem.

α.23.2 Kah ketass8t kuhkuhqueu en wekit Jehovah, kah wame Judae wosketompaog, kah wame wadohkitcheg Jerusalem weeche nagum, kah sephausuenuog, kah quoshodtumwenúog, kah wame missinninnúog, papeissisitcheg kah matikkénukeg; kah ogketam ut wehtauogk8óut, wame kutt8wongash ut wunn8wae b8kut, ne namehteómuk ut wekit Jehovah.
E.23.2 And the king went up into the house of the LORD, and all the men of Judah and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem with him, and the priests, and the prophets, and all the people, both small and great: and he read in their ears all the words of the book of the covenant which was found in the house of the LORD.

α.23.3 Kah ketass8t neepau kishke pillar, kah wunn8wau ut anaquabit Jehovah, asuhkauónat Jehovah, kah nanawehteauunat wuttinnaumatuongash, kah 8wauwaongash, kah 8sittum8ongash, nashpe mamusse wuttahhou, kah mamusse ukketeahogkôun8uh, ussenat 8nowae kutt8wongash nish wasukuhwhosikish yeu ut b8kut; kah wame missinninnúog neepóe wunn8wáog.
E.23.3 And the king stood by a pillar, and made a covenant before the LORD, to walk after the LORD, and to keep his commandments and his testimonies and his statutes with all their heart and all their soul, to perform the words of this covenant that were written in this book. And all the people stood to the covenant.

α.23.4 Kah ketass8t ann8nau Hilkiahoh kehchesephausuenúh, kah nahohtôeu sephausuénuog, kah nanawehteunkig ushquont, sohwuttauunat wutch wut-templumut Jehovah, wame auwohteaongash, nish ayimauitche Baal, kah wutch kuppi, kah wutch wame kesukque kenauwameonk, kah noh wutchikkoswoh, poquodchit ut Jerusalem, ut Kidroneh ohteuhkonit, kah nag uppukqueim8 wutuss8wuttauuneau Bethel.
E.23.4 And the king commanded Hilkiah the high priest, and the priests of the second order, and the keepers of the door, to bring forth out of the temple of the LORD all the vessels that were made for Baal, and for the grove, and for all the host of heaven: and he burned them without Jerusalem in the fields of Kidron, and carried the ashes of them unto Bethel.

α.23.5 Kah wohkukquôsumau neukontunkane sephausuenúh, neh Judae ketass8twamwog kohquttummohettit chikkohsumunat, weetemungquok ut qunuhqui ayeuonganehtu, ut Judae kitotanáhtu, kah wáéene ayeuonganehtu ut Jerusalem: nag wonk chagossumauoncheg weetemungquok Baaloh, nepauzoh, nanepôushadt, kah chipanogqussog, kah wame kesukque kenauwameonk.
E.23.5 And he put down the idolatrous priests, whom the kings of Judah had ordained to burn incense in the high places in the cities of Judah, and in the places round about Jerusalem; them also that burned incense unto Baal, to the sun, and to the moon, and to the planets, and to all the host of heaven.

α.23.6 Kah sohh8wuttau kuppi wutch wekit Jehovah, en poquodchieu Jerusalem, en Kidronne sepuissit, kah wutchikkossumun kishke Kidrone sepuissut, kah wuttahtaskuhkomwe sukquohkomun, kah seahhamun ne pasquag, ut 8wenohkéeuóut wunnaumonáuh missinninnúog.
E.23.6 And he brought out the grove from the house of the LORD, without Jerusalem, unto the brook Kidron, and burned it at the brook Kidron, and stamped it small to powder, and cast the powder thereof upon the graves of the children of the people.

α.23.7 Kah soquttahham wek8óash Sodomitsog nish kishkohtogish wekit Jehovah, uttoh adt mittamwussissog ayimmohettit waahshunkish wutch kuppi.
E.23.7 And he brake down the houses of the sodomites, that were by the house of the LORD, where the women wove hangings for the grove.

α.23.8 Kah sohh8wunau wame sephausuenùh wutch Judae keitotanehtu, kah nishketeau qunuhqui ayeuongash uttoh sephausuenuog adt chikkohsumwehettit wetemungquok, wutch Geba wehque Beersheba, kah pohquetahham squontame qunushqui ayeuongash, nish ahhut petutteamuk wusquontamut Joshua, nanánuwaen ne ut otanat, nish menadcheinniyeu keitotanae squontamut.
E.23.8 And he brought all the priests out of the cities of Judah, and defiled the high places where the priests had burned incense, from Geba to Beersheba, and brake down the high places of the gates that were in the entering in of the gate of Joshua the governor of the city, which were on a man's left hand at the gate of the city.

α.23.9 Qut qunuhqui ayeuongane sephausuénuog, matta kuhkuhqueog en wut-altarumut Lord, ut Jerusalem, qut nag meechwog mat seane petukqunnunk ut kenugke wematt8out.
E.23.9 Nevertheless the priests of the high places came not up to the altar of the LORD in Jerusalem, but they did eat of the unleavened bread among their brethren.

α.23.10 Kah nishketeau Tophet, ne wut8nouhkoiyeumut wunnaumonuh Hinnom, onk matta howan wunnaumonuh asuh wuttaunoh woh uppannupwusháheónat n8taut en Molechut.
E.23.10 And he defiled Topheth, which is in the valley of the children of Hinnom, that no man might make his son or his daughter to pass through the fire to Molech.

α.23.11 Kah amaunau horsesoh, neh Judae ketass8tamwog anumauáhetticheh nepâuzsoh, ahhut petutteamuk ut wekit Jehovah, kishke wut-chamberumut Nathan-Melech, chambere nanawunnuaénin, noh apit nohkôiyeuut, kah chikossum nepauze chariotsash n8taut.
E.23.11 And he took away the horses that the kings of Judah had given to the sun, at the entering in of the house of the LORD, by the chamber of Nathanmelech the chamberlain, which was in the suburbs, and burned the chariots of the sun with fire.

α.23.12 Kah Altarsash nish woskeche wohqut onohtag wut-chamberum Ahaz, nish Judae ketass8tamwog kesteahettupash, kah altarsash nish Manasses kesteunkupash ut neese wutchippinnútunkanit ut wekit Jehovah yeush ketass8t wunn8ketahhamunash, kah na wutch n8ketahhamun, kah uppuppissiyeum8 wuttinnuhkou Kidrone sepuissut.
E.23.12 And the altars that were on the top of the upper chamber of Ahaz, which the kings of Judah had made, and the altars which Manasseh had made in the two courts of the house of the LORD, did the king beat down, and brake them down from thence, and cast the dust of them into the brook Kidron.

α.23.13 Kah qunuhqui ayeuo[gn]ash nish anaquohtag Jerusalem, nish enninnuhkôunniyeu anninn8e wadchuut, ne Solomon ayimauomp Ashterothoh, wunnishkeneunkquott8m8 Zidoniansog, kah Chemoshoh, wunnishqueneunkquott8m8 Moabitsog, kah Milkomoh wunnishqueneunkquott8m8 wunnaumonuh Ammon, yeush ketass8t wunnishketeauunash.
E.23.13 And the high places that were before Jerusalem, which were on the right hand of the mount of corruption, which Solomon the king of Israel had builded for Ashtoreth the abomination of the Zidonians, and for Chemosh the abomination of the Moabites, and for Milcom the abomination of the children of Ammon, did the king defile.

α.23.14 Kah soquetahwau nunneukontunkoh, kah tummehtham kuppiyeuash, kah wunnumwohtin ayeuonganit, wosketompae wuskónash.
E.23.14 And he brake in pieces the images, and cut down the groves, and filled their places with the bones of men.

α.23.15 Nano, ne Altar ut Bethel, qunuhqui ayeuonk ne Jeroboam wunnaumonuh Nebat, noh matcheseáheomp Israelloh, ayikup, ne Altar kah qunuhqui ayeuonk wussoquttahhamun, kah chikossum qunuhqui ayeuonk, kah wussukukkomwe tahtashkukomun, kah chikohsum kuppi.
E.23.15 Moreover the altar that was at Bethel, and the high place which Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin, had made, both that altar and the high place he brake down, and burned the high place, and stamped it small to powder, and burned the grove.

α.23.16 Kah Josias quanuppeit, naum wenohkeash nish na ohtagish wadchuut, kah ann8team8 neemunumunat wuskonash wutch weenohkeet, kah wutchikossumunash ut Altarut, kah wunnishketeauun neaunak wuttinn8waonk Jehovah, Manitt8womp wahteauwáhuwop, wahteauwahuadt yeush kutt8wongash.
E.23.16 And as Josiah turned himself, he spied the sepulchres that were there in the mount, and sent, and took the bones out of the sepulchres, and burned them upon the altar, and polluted it, according to the word of the LORD which the man of God proclaimed, who proclaimed these words.

α.23.17 Neit n8wau teague wussuk ne naum? kah kitotanáe wosketompaog wuttinôneau, ne 8wenohkem manittowomp noh wag Judah, kah wahteauwahuau yeush asea[n]ish, ayeuhkonittue Bethelle Altarut.
E.23.17 Then he said, What title is that that I see? And the men of the city told him, It is the sepulchre of the man of God, which came from Judah, and proclaimed these things that thou hast done against the altar of Bethel.

α.23.18 
E.23.18 And he said, Let him alone; let no man move his bones. So they let his bones alone, with the bones of the prophet that came out of Samaria.

α.23.19 
E.23.19 And all the houses also of the high places that were in the cities of Samaria, which the kings of Israel had made to provoke the Lord to anger, Josiah took away, and did to them according to all the acts that he had done in Bethel.

α.23.20 
E.23.20 And he slew all the priests of the high places that were there upon the altars, and burned men's bones upon them, and returned to Jerusalem.

α.23.21 
E.23.21 And the king commanded all the people, saying, Keep the passover unto the LORD your God, as it is written in the book of this covenant.

α.23.22 
E.23.22 Surely there was not holden such a passover from the days of the judges that judged Israel, nor in all the days of the kings of Israel, nor of the kings of Judah;

α.23.23 
E.23.23 But in the eighteenth year of king Josiah, wherein this passover was holden to the LORD in Jerusalem.

α.23.24 
E.23.24 Moreover the workers with familiar spirits, and the wizards, and the images, and the idols, and all the abominations that were spied in the land of Judah and in Jerusalem, did Josiah put away, that he might perform the words of the law which were written in the book that Hilkiah the priest found in the house of the LORD.

α.23.25 
E.23.25 And like unto him was there no king before him, that turned to the LORD with all his heart, and with all his soul, and with all his might, according to all the law of Moses; neither after him arose there any like him.

α.23.26 
E.23.26 Notwithstanding the LORD turned not from the fierceness of his great wrath, wherewith his anger was kindled against Judah, because of all the provocations that Manasseh had provoked him withal.

α.23.27 
E.23.27 And the LORD said, I will remove Judah also out of my sight, as I have removed Israel, and will cast off this city Jerusalem which I have chosen, and the house of which I said, My name shall be there.

α.23.28 
E.23.28 Now the rest of the acts of Josiah, and all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?

α.23.29 
E.23.29 In his days Pharaohnechoh king of Egypt went up against the king of Assyria to the river Euphrates: and king Josiah went against him; and he slew him at Megiddo, when he had seen him.

α.23.30 
E.23.30 And his servants carried him in a chariot dead from Megiddo, and brought him to Jerusalem, and buried him in his own sepulchre. And the people of the land took Jehoahaz the son of Josiah, and anointed him, and made him king in his father's stead.

α.23.31 
E.23.31 Jehoahaz was twenty and three years old when he began to reign; and he reigned three months in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Hamutal, the daughter of Jeremiah of Libnah.

α.23.32 
E.23.32 And he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD, according to all that his fathers had done.

α.23.33 
E.23.33 And Pharaohnechoh put him in bands at Riblah in the land of Hamath, that he might not reign in Jerusalem; and put the land to a tribute of an hundred talents of silver, and a talent of gold.

α.23.34 
E.23.34 And Pharaohnechoh made Eliakim the son of Josiah king in the room of Josiah his father, and turned his name to Jehoiakim, and took Jehoahaz away: and he came to Egypt, and died there.

α.23.35 
E.23.35 And Jehoiakim gave the silver and the gold to Pharaoh; but he taxed the land to give the money according to the commandment of Pharaoh: he exacted the silver and the gold of the people of the land, of every one according to his taxation, to give it unto Pharaohnechoh.

α.23.36 
E.23.36 Jehoiakim was twenty and five years old when he began to reign; and he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Zebudah, the daughter of Pedaiah of Rumah.

α.23.37 
E.23.37 And he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD, according to all that his fathers had done.

α.24.1 
E.24.1 In his days Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came up, and Jehoiakim became his servant three years: then he turned and rebelled against him.

α.24.2 
E.24.2 And the LORD sent against him bands of the Chaldees, and bands of the Syrians, and bands of the Moabites, and bands of the children of Ammon, and sent them against Judah to destroy it, according to the word of the LORD, which he spake by his servants the prophets.

α.24.3 
E.24.3 Surely at the commandment of the LORD came this upon Judah, to remove them out of his sight, for the sins of Manasseh, according to all that he did;

α.24.4 
E.24.4 And also for the innocent blood that he shed: for he filled Jerusalem with innocent blood; which the LORD would not pardon.

α.24.5 
E.24.5 Now the rest of the acts of Jehoiakim, and all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?

α.24.6 
E.24.6 So Jehoiakim slept with his fathers: and Jehoiachin his son reigned in his stead.

α.24.7 
E.24.7 And the king of Egypt came not again any more out of his land: for the king of Babylon had taken from the river of Egypt unto the river Euphrates all that pertained to the king of Egypt.

α.24.8 
E.24.8 Jehoiachin was eighteen years old when he began to reign, and he reigned in Jerusalem three months. And his mother's name was Nehushta, the daughter of Elnathan of Jerusalem.

α.24.9 
E.24.9 And he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD, according to all that his father had done.

α.24.10 
E.24.10 At that time the servants of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came up against Jerusalem, and the city was besieged.

α.24.11 
E.24.11 And Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came against the city, and his servants did besiege it.

α.24.12 
E.24.12 And Jehoiachin the king of Judah went out to the king of Babylon, he, and his mother, and his servants, and his princes, and his officers: and the king of Babylon took him in the eighth year of his reign.

α.24.13 
E.24.13 And he carried out thence all the treasures of the house of the LORD, and the treasures of the king's house, and cut in pieces all the vessels of gold which Solomon king of Israel had made in the temple of the LORD, as the LORD had said.

α.24.14 
E.24.14 And he carried away all Jerusalem, and all the princes, and all the mighty men of valour, even ten thousand captives, and all the craftsmen and smiths: none remained, save the poorest sort of the people of the land.

α.24.15 
E.24.15 And he carried away Jehoiachin to Babylon, and the king's mother, and the king's wives, and his officers, and the mighty of the land, those carried he into captivity from Jerusalem to Babylon.

α.24.16 
E.24.16 And all the men of might, even seven thousand, and craftsmen and smiths a thousand, all that were strong and apt for war, even them the king of Babylon brought captive to Babylon.

α.24.17 
E.24.17 And the king of Babylon made Mattaniah his father's brother king in his stead, and changed his name to Zedekiah.

α.24.18 
E.24.18 Zedekiah was twenty and one years old when he began to reign, and he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Hamutal, the daughter of Jeremiah of Libnah.

α.24.19 
E.24.19 And he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD, according to all that Jehoiakim had done.

α.24.20 
E.24.20 For through the anger of the LORD it came to pass in Jerusalem and Judah, until he had cast them out from his presence, that Zedekiah rebelled against the king of Babylon.

α.25.1 KAh n$niyeup, pasuk8gun adtahshe kodtumwae ketass8tam8it, ut uppiogque kodtum8mut piogqkukquinuhhog nepauz, Nebuchadnezzar Babylone ketass8t ayeuuhkonittue peyau Jerusalem, kah wame ukkenauwameonk, & wuttuppukissinn8wontamuneau, kah wutayeuuhkonittue wonkon8sinúhkontamuneau waéene.
E.25.1 And it came to pass in the ninth year of his reign, in the tenth month, in the tenth day of the month, that Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came, he, and all his host, against Jerusalem, and pitched against it; and they built forts against it round about.

α.25.2 Kah keitotan wéenuhkomun pajeh nabo wunnequtte kodtum8mut Zedechiah.
E.25.2 And the city was besieged unto the eleventh year of king Zedekiah.

α.25.3 Kah pasuk8gun adtahshikquinuhhog, yau8ut nepauz, mahshagquod sohkohsu ut otanat, kah na matta petukqunnunkaninno wutche missinninnúog ne ohkeit.
E.25.3 And on the ninth day of the fourth month the famine prevailed in the city, and there was no bread for the people of the land.

α.25.4 Kah ketitotan poksheau, kah wame ayeuteae missinninnúog nukonae wussem8og, squontame mayut, nashaue neeseneutunkanit, ne kishke ketass8t wuttittanohketeaonganit, (kah Caldeansog wéenuhkomwog keitotan) kah ketass8t au ne may, nogque mukoshquttaut.
E.25.4 And the city was broken up, and all the men of war fled by night by the way of the gate between two walls, which is by the king's garden: (now the Chaldees were against the city round about:) and the king went the way toward the plain.

α.25.5 Kah ukkenauwaeongan8 Caldeansog n8swehtahwhaog ketass8toh, kah ummattanóuh ut Jerichoe mukoshquttaut: kah wame ukkenauwamemoh seahshau wutch wuhhogkat.
E.25.5 And the army of the Chaldees pursued after the king, and overtook him in the plains of Jericho: and all his army were scattered from him.

α.25.6 Neit nag tohqunáog ketass8toh, kah uppas8óuh Babylone ketass8tamwut, en Riblah, kah 8sumouh.
E.25.6 So they took the king, and brought him up to the king of Babylon to Riblah; and they gave judgment upon him.

α.25.7 Kah nushaog Zedechiah wunnaumonuh anaquohtag wuskesukqutash, kah kodtinnumwog wuskesukquash Zedechiah, kah wuttohtogkuppinóuh nashpe brasṣe fettersash, kah wutuss8unóuh Babylon.
E.25.7 And they slew the sons of Zedekiah before his eyes, and put out the eyes of Zedekiah, and bound him with fetters of brass, and carried him to Babylon.

α.25.8 Kah napanna adtahsuit nepâuz (ne nabo pask8gun wutteashe kodtum8m Nebuchadnezzar Babylone ketass8t:) Nebuzaradan wadchanuae mugquomp, wuttinneumoh ketass8t Babilon, peyau Jerusalem.
E.25.8 And in the fifth month, on the seventh day of the month, which is the nineteenth year of king Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, came Nebuzaradan, captain of the guard, a servant of the king of Babylon, unto Jerusalem:

α.25.9 Kah chikossum wek Jehovah, kah ketass8t wek kah wame Jerusalem wetuomash, kah nishnoh mishauau wek wutchikossumunash nashpé n8tau.
E.25.9 And he burnt the house of the LORD, and the king's house, and all the houses of Jerusalem, and every great man's house burnt he with fire.

α.25.10 Kah wame Caldeanse kenauwameonk neh wetomukqutcheh wadchanuáe mugquomp, sohquetahhamwog Jerusaleme pummeneutunk waéenu.
E.25.10 And all the army of the Chaldees, that were with the captain of the guard, brake down the walls of Jerusalem round about.

α.25.11 Kah onkatogig missinninnúog, neg asqunutcheg ut keitotanat, kah waseemwutcheg, neg wadshoncheg Babilone ketass8tamwut, kah neg sequnutcheg wutch mátaanukeg, Nebuzáradan wadchanu[á]e mugquomp ummonchanuh.
E.25.11 Now the rest of the people that were left in the city, and the fugitives that fell away to the king of Babylon, with the remnant of the multitude, did Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard carry away.

α.25.12 Qut wadchanu[á]e mugquomp, sequnau matchekuénu ut ohkit, wenominneohketeaénuunneat, kah ohketeaenûunneat.
E.25.12 But the captain of the guard left of the door of the poor of the land to be vinedressers and husbandmen.

α.25.13 Kah brasse nepattunkquongash nish ohtagish weekit Jehovah, kah basesash, kah brasse keitoh ne ohtag wekit Jeh[ó]vah, Caldeansog wussukquetahhamunneau, kah monchatóog ne brasse en Babilon.
E.25.13 And the pillars of brass that were in the house of the LORD, and the bases, and the brasen sea that was in the house of the LORD, did the Chaldees break in pieces, and carried the brass of them to Babylon.

α.25.14 Kah wishquash kah shovelsash kah snuffersash, kah kenamóog, kah wame wompuhshagque auwohteaongash, nish nashpe wowussummuáhetticheh, nish wutamaunumunáoash.
E.25.14 And the pots, and the shovels, and the snuffers, and the spoons, and all the vessels of brass wherewith they ministered, took they away.

α.25.15 Kah tanishinneae kuppuhheganog, kah wunnongash, kah nish goldeu8gish, ne gold, kah nish silvereu8gish, ne silver, wadchanuáe mugquomp wunneemunnumunash.
E.25.15 And the firepans, and the bowls, and such things as were of gold, in gold, and of silver, in silver, the captain of the guard took away.

α.25.16 Neesinash pillarsash, pasuk keitoh, kah basesash nish Solomon ayikupash wutche wek Jehovah, wame yeush brasse auwohteaongash, w[a]nne wáeu quttuhwhósin8ash.
E.25.16 The two pillars, one sea, and the bases which Solomon had made for the house of the LORD; the brass of all these vessels was without weight.

α.25.17 Nesohkunkquok pasuk pillar, nabo shwosuk tashishquanogkod, kah wabuhkuhk8uk, ne brasse, kah ne sohkunkquok uppuhkuk nishwesquanogkod, pepémusqunumwe anakausuonk, kah pomgranatsash, ut uppuhkukqut waéene wame wompuhshog; kah netatuppe yeush, nahohtoeu pillar, nashpe pe[m]squnnumwe anakausuonk.
E.25.17 The height of the one pillar was eighteen cubits, and the chapiter upon it was brass: and the height of the chapiter three cubits; and the wreathen work, and pomegranates upon the chapiter round about, all of brass: and like unto these had the second pillar with wreathen work.

α.25.18 Kah wadchanuáe mugquomp tohqunau Serajahoh kéiche[-]sephausuénúh, & Zephania nahohtôeu sephausuénin, kah nishuog nanawehteunkig ushquont.
E.25.18 And the captain of the guard took Seraiah the chief priest, and Zephaniah the second priest, and the three keepers of the door:

α.25.19 Kah neemunau wutch otanat anninnohsuen[u]h, noh nanawunumwáhit ayeuteuh, kah napanna tahsuog wosketompaog neg anaquabit ketass8t, neg namehitcheg ut otanat, kah keihche Scribe ayeuteáut, noh agkemont missinninnúh ne ut ohkeit, kah nequtta tahshinchagkodtog wosketompaog missinninnuog ne ut ohkeit, neg namehetcheg ut keitotanat.
E.25.19 And out of the city he took an officer that was set over the men of war, and five men of them that were in the king's presence, which were found in the city, and the principal scribe of the host, which mustered the people of the land, and threescore men of the people of the land that were found in the city:

α.25.20 Kah Nebuzaradan wadchanuáe mugquomp yeuh wunneemun[o]h, kah uppas8oh Babilone [kt]ass8tamwut, ut Riblah.
E.25.20 And Nebuzaradan captain of the guard took these, and brought them to the king of Babylon to Riblah:

α.25.21 Kah Babilone ketass8t nah wuttogkomuh, kah nah wunnushuh ut Riblah, kah Hamathe ohkeit, neit Judah monchanau wutch wutohkeit.
E.25.21 And the king of Babylon smote them, and slew them at Riblah in the land of Hamath. So Judah was carried away out of their land.

α.25.22 Kah missinninnuog neg apitcheg ne ohkeit Judah, neh Nebukad-nezzar Babilone ketass8t asqunnompuh, Gedaliah wunnaumonuh Ahikam, wunnaumonuh Shaphan, wunnanawunnumwaheuh.
E.25.22 And as for the people that remained in the land of Judah, whom Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon had left, even over them he made Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, the son of Shaphan, ruler.

α.25.23 Kah wame mugquompaog kenauwameunnútu, nag, kah wuttinneum8uh, n8tamwehettit, Babilone ketass8t nanawunnumwaheau Gedaliahoh, nag peyaog Gedaliahut ut Mizpah, Ishmael wunnaumonuh Nethaniah, kah Johanan wunnaumonuh Chareah, kah Sarajah wunnaumonuh Tanhumeth, wun-Netophathit, nag kah wuttinneum8uh, kah Iaazaniah wunnaumonuh um-Maachathit, nag kah wuttinneumoh.
E.25.23 And when all the captains of the armies, they and their men, heard that the king of Babylon had made Gedaliah governor, there came to Gedaliah to Mizpah, even Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, and Johanan the son of Careah, and Seraiah the son of Tanhumeth the Netophathite, and Jaazaniah the son of a Maachathite, they and their men.

α.25.24 Kah Gedaliah nah wutchadchekeimuh, kah wuttinneum8uh, kah wuttinuh, ahque wabuunuk8k 8tinninneumunneaóont Caldeansog: ayek ohkeit, kah wuttinneumuhkok Babilone ketass8t, kah pish k8niyeuwontamuneau.
E.25.24 And Gedaliah sware to them, and to their men, and said unto them, Fear not to be the servants of the Chaldees: dwell in the land, and serve the king of Babylon; and it shall be well with you.

α.25.25 Qut nniyeup nesausuk adtahs8it nepâuz, Ishmael wunnaumonuh Nethaniah, wunnaumonuh Elishama, wutch ketass8t 8skannemunneuh, peyau, kah piogqussuoh wosketompuh weeche, kah togkomaog Gedaliah newaj nuppuk, kah Jewsog kah Caldeansog neg wetomoncheg ut Mizpah.
E.25.25 But it came to pass in the seventh month, that Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, the son of Elishama, of the seed royal, came, and ten men with him, and smote Gedaliah, that he died, and the Jews and the Chaldees that were with him at Mizpah.

α.25.26 Kah wame missinninnúog papeississitcheg kah matukkenukeg, kenauwamee mugquompaog nepoog kah peyaog Egypt, newutche qushaog Caldeansoh.
E.25.26 And all the people, both small and great, and the captains of the armies, arose, and came to Egypt: for they were afraid of the Chaldees.

α.25.27 Kah nniyeup, shwinchage kah nesausuk tahshe kodtum8mut ut ummissinn[á]inneat Johojachin Judae ketass8t, ut nabo nees8it nep[â]uz nesnehchage kah nesausuk adtahshikquinuhhog nepauz, Evil-Merodach Babilone ketass8t, ut kodtum8ut ne adt n8che nanawunnuadt, tohshinnumauau uppuhkuh Jehojachinoh wutch kuppishshagkinnittuonganit.
E.25.27 And it came to pass in the seven and thirtieth year of the captivity of Jehoiachin king of Judah, in the twelfth month, on the seven and twentieth day of the month, that Evilmerodach king of Babylon in the year that he began to reign did lift up the head of Jehoiachin king of Judah out of prison;

α.25.28 Kah 8womoausont8ánumauau, kah upponawoh wutappuonk, waabe wutappuongan8oash ketass8tamwoh neh wetomukqutcheh ut Babilon.
E.25.28 And he spake kindly to him, and set his throne above the throne of the kings that were with him in Babylon;

α.25.29 Kah wutôs8wunumauoh ukkuppishagkinae hogk8unash, kah meechwoh petukqunnunk ut anaquabit n[á]gwutteae, nisohke pomantaminit.
E.25.29 And changed his prison garments: and he did eat bread continually before him all the days of his life.

α.25.30 Kah ummenehkheaonk nagwutteae menehkheaonk wuttinnumauoh ketass8t as[è]kes[u]kokodae ôadtuhkauaonk nisohke pomontog.
E.25.30 And his allowance was a continual allowance given him of the king, a daily rate for every day, all the days of his life.