
α.1.1 KAh nnih, mahche nupuk Saul, David qushkeu wutch pagua[n]ónaóont Amalekitsog, kah David neesequinne apit Ziklak.
E.1.1 Now it came to pass after the death of Saul, when David was returned from the slaughter of the Amalekites, and David had abode two days in Ziklag;

α.1.2 Nnih nashikquinogok, kusseh, wosketomp peyau wutch neadt tañinneanithettit wutch Saulut, wuthogk8unash nehneekshaash, kah ohkeyeu8 uppuhk8, kah nnih paaónont Davidoh, penushau en ohkekontu, kah wonkqutteam8.
E.1.2 It came even to pass on the third day, that, behold, a man came out of the camp from Saul with his clothes rent, and earth upon his head: and so it was, when he came to David, that he fell to the earth, and did obeisance.

α.1.3 Kah David wuttinuh, tohnoh k8m? kah wuttinuh, wutch wuttuppukussinn8wonganit Israel nuppohquohham.
E.1.3 And David said unto him, From whence comest thou? And he said unto him, Out of the camp of Israel am I escaped.

α.1.4 Kah David wuttinuh, toh n$nih, k8wehquetumoush usseh? kah namp8ham, missinninnuog wussem8og wutch ayeuwuttuonganit, kah wonk monaog missinninnuog penusháog kah nupp8og, kah Saul kah Jonathanoh wunnaúmonuh wonk nupp8og.
E.1.4 And David said unto him, How went the matter? I pray thee, tell me. And he answered, That the people are fled from the battle, and many of the people also are fallen and dead; and Saul and Jonathan his son are dead also.

α.1.5 Kah D[a]vid unnau wuskenuh neh anukqutcheh, uttoh kittinne wahteoun Saul kah Jonathanoh wunnaumonuh nupp8og.
E.1.5 And David said unto the young man that told him, How knowest thou that Saul and Jonathan his son be dead?

α.1.6 Kah wusken noh anont n8wau, ne ayoi ut wadchuut Gilboa, kusseh, Saul ompatussin ukqunnuhtuk, kah kusseh Chariotsash, kah horsesoh na8m[n]kqutcheg ummenuhke n8sukauouh.
E.1.6 And the young man that told him said, As I happened by chance upon mount Gilboa, behold, Saul leaned upon his spear; and, lo, the chariots and horsemen followed hard after him.

α.1.7 Kah ompamukquáit nunnok, kah n8wehkomuk: kah nunnamp8ham, nen yeu.
E.1.7 And when he looked behind him, he saw me, and called unto me. And I answered, Here am I.

α.1.8 Kah nuttinuk howan ken? kah nunnamp8hamauop nen Amalekit.
E.1.8 And he said unto me, Who art thou? And I answered him, I am an Amalekite.

α.1.9 Wonk nuttinuk k8wehquetumoush quesukkompauush nuhhog kah nusheh, newutche unkapunnaonk nunnuhkukonk, newutche nukketeaonk ash mussit.
E.1.9 He said unto me again, Stand, I pray thee, upon me, and slay me: for anguish is come upon me, because my life is yet whole in me.

α.1.10 Neit nukquesukkompauinneuh, kah nunnush, newutche n8wahteoh matta woh pomantam8 mahche penushont: kah nunneemunum chetuhquab ne ohtagkup uppuhkukqut, kah kéhtipputtenapeash, kah nuppaudta[u]onash nussontimom. 
E.1.10 So I stood upon him, and slew him, because I was sure that he could not live after that he was fallen: and I took the crown that was upon his head, and the bracelet that was on his arm, and have brought them hither unto my lord.

α.1.11 Neit David mussinnum wuthogk8unash kah wunne nekshadtauunash, kah wonk wosketompuh neh weechayeumukqutcheh.
E.1.11 Then David took hold on his clothes, and rent them; and likewise all the men that were with him:

α.1.12 Kah nag mauemóog kah mauog, kah mat meetseog nô pajeh wunnonk88ut, wutche Saul kah Jonathanoh wunnaumonuh, kah wutche ummissinninneumoh Jehovah, kah wutch wek Israel newutche nag penushaog nashpe togkodteg.
E.1.12 And they mourned, and wept, and fasted until even, for Saul, and for Jonathan his son, and for the people of the LORD, and for the house of Israel; because they were fallen by the sword.

α.1.13 Kah David unnau wuskenuh neh anukqutcheh, toh noh k8chi? kah namp8ham nen wunnaumonuh pen8wot, wut-Amalékit.
E.1.13 And David said unto the young man that told him, Whence art thou? And he answered, I am the son of a stranger, an Amalekite.

α.1.14 Kah David wuttinuh tohwutch mat[-]wabeseás kussummagunumunat kenutcheg, nushonat Jehovah sasequnoncheh?
E.1.14 And David said unto him, How wast thou not afraid to stretch forth thine hand to destroy the LORD's anointed?

α.1.15 Kah David wehkomau pasuk8 wuskenuh kah n8wau, pas8sukau, kah quentau, kah wuttogkomuh, newaj nuppuk.
E.1.15 And David called one of the young men, and said, Go near, and fall upon him. And he smote him that he died.

α.1.16 Kah David wuttinuh, k8sqheonk ohtaj kuppuhkukqut: newutche kutt8n k8wauwaonuk, kussim nunnush Jehovah sasequnoncheh.
E.1.16 And David said unto him, Thy blood be upon thy head; for thy mouth hath testified against thee, saying, I have slain the LORD's anointed.

α.1.17 Kah David yeu wuttinne mauemo[n] Sauloh kah Jonathanoh wunnaumonuh.
E.1.17 And David lamented with this lamentation over Saul and over Jonathan his son:

α.1.18 (Kah wonk wuttinuh kuhk8tomok wunnaumonuh Judah ahtompeh, kusseh wussukwhosu ut upb8kumut Jasher.)
E.1.18 (Also he bade them teach the children of Judah the use of the bow: behold, it is written in the book of Jasher.)

α.1.19 8netuonk Israel nehtauun ukkukqunnunkqui ayeuonganehtu: uttoh wuttin manuhkesitcheg penushoneau;
E.1.19 The beauty of Israel is slain upon thy high places: how are the mighty fallen!

α.1.20 Ahque n8wagk ut Gath ahque wahteauwahuwagk ut Ashkalóne taumaogquehtu, ishkont Philistiansog wuttaun8oh, wekontamwog, ishkont wuttaun8oh mat quosqusausegig muskouanatamwog.
E.1.20 Tell it not in Gath, publish it not in the streets of Askelon; lest the daughters of the Philistines rejoice, lest the daughters of the uncircumcised triumph.

α.1.21 Kenaau Gilboa wadchuash neechippog appehtunkquéhteóg, sokanon appehtunkquehteog,[:] asuh sephausue ohteakonash: newutche na$ut, wutogqunneg manuhkesit matche pogkenoi, wutógqunneg Saul, onatuh matta sasequnontus pummee.
E.1.21 Ye mountains of Gilboa, let there be no dew, neither let there be rain, upon you, nor fields of offerings: for there the shield of the mighty is vilely cast away, the shield of Saul, as though he had not been anointed with oil.

α.1.22 Wutch 8sqheonk noh noshit, wutch 8nogk8onganit masukkenuk, wutohtompeh Jonathan matta qushkeoh, kah wuttogkódteg Saul matta mahcheu qushkemun8h.
E.1.22 From the blood of the slain, from the fat of the mighty, the bow of Jonathan turned not back, and the sword of Saul returned not empty.

α.1.23 Saul Kah Jónathan, womonoog kah weeteanumoog pamontomwehettit, kah ut wunnupp8wongan8out matta chachabehtoadteog: anue kokenupshowaóg wo[m]sikukquoh, anue menuhkeseumaog qunnon8oh.
E.1.23 Saul and Jonathan were lovely and pleasant in their lives, and in their death they were not divided: they were swifter than eagles, they were stronger than lions.

α.1.24 Kenaau wuttaun8oh Israel mauemuk Saul, noh hogquanukqueogkup mask8kag, nashpe weekontam8ongash, noh ponukup Golde wunn8whosuongash kuthogk8ongànn8out.
E.1.24 Ye daughters of Israel, weep over Saul, who clothed you in scarlet, with other delights, who put on ornaments of gold upon your apparel.

α.1.25 Utt[o]h wuttin manuhkesitcheg penushoneau ut nashaue ayeuwu[t]teuonganit woi Jonathan, kenushitteap ut kukqunuhqui áyeuonganehtu.
E.1.25 How are the mighty fallen in the midst of the battle! O Jonathan, thou wast slain in thine high places.

α.1.26 Nen nukquequenauanum wutche ken neemat Jonthan, mo k8womonukqus ut nuhhogkat, k8womoausuonk monchanumukquodt, paumukom8m8 womonaonk mittamwossissog.
E.1.26 I am distressed for thee, my brother Jonathan: very pleasant hast thou been unto me: thy love to me was wonderful, passing the love of women.

α.1.27 Uttoh wuttinne manuhkesitcheg penushoneau, kah ayeuteae auwohteaongash matchehteáuunash.
E.1.27 How are the mighty fallen, and the weapons of war perished!

α.2.1 KAh n$nih, yeu mahche n$nag, David nat8tomauau Jeho[u]ah, n8wau, sun woh nukkuhkukquem en ne teague Judae keitotanat? kah Jehovah wuttinuh kukkuhquish kah David n8wau, uttoh woh nutinne kuhkuhquem? kah n8wau, en Hebron.
E.2.1 And it came to pass after this, that David enquired of the LORD, saying, Shall I go up into any of the cities of Judah? And the LORD said unto him, Go up. And David said, Whither shall I go up? And he said, Unto Hebron.

α.2.2 Neit na$en kuhkukqueu, kah nees8oh ummittamwussoh wonk Abinoam wut-Jezrellitte, kah Abigail, ummittamwussoh Nabal, uk-Carmelitte,
E.2.2 So David went up thither, and his two wives also, Ahinoam the Jezreelitess, and Abigail Nabal's wife the Carmelite.

α.2.3 Kah wuttinneumoh neh weetomukqutcheh, David uhkuhkuhk8unuh, nish$noh wosketomp nashpe wutteashinunneonk, kah ayeuog Hebrone keitotanehtu.
E.2.3 And his men that were with him did David bring up, every man with his household: and they dwelt in the cities of Hebron.

α.2.4 Kah Judae wosketompaog peyaog, kah na wuttit sussequnoneau Davidoh ketass8t ut wekit Judah: kah unnaog Davidoh JabeshGileade wosketompaog, nag posekinaog Sauloh.
E.2.4 And the men of Judah came, and there they anointed David king over the house of Judah. And they told David, saying, That the men of Jabeshgilead were they that buried Saul.

α.2.5 Kah ann8nau ann8naenuh, en Jabesh-Gileade wosketompaog kah noh wuttinuh, wunnanumuk8k Jehovah, newutche yeu kittinne womoausue unneheoneau kussontimomw8, Saul, kah kupposekinau.
E.2.5 And David sent messengers unto the men of Jabeshgilead, and said unto them, Blessed be ye of the LORD, that ye have shewed this kindness unto your lord, even unto Saul, and have buried him.

α.2.6 Kah yeuyeu Jehovah womoausue kah wunnamuhkuteyeue unnehik8k, kah nen wonk kutonkquttauanumw8 yeu womoausuonk, newutche yeu kutusseneau.
E.2.6 And now the LORD shew kindness and truth unto you: and I also will requite you this kindness, because ye have done this thing.

α.2.7 Newutche yeuyeu kenutcheganooash menuhkaj, kah menuhkesek: newutche kussontimomw8 Saul nupp8i, kah wonk wek Judah nussesequnuk nukketass8tam8uneat na$ut.
E.2.7 Therefore now let your hands be strengthened, and be ye valiant: for your master Saul is dead, and also the house of Judah have anointed me king over them.

α.2.8 Qut Abner wunnaumonuh Ner, mummugquomp ut Saul wutayeuwehteomut, nemunau Ishbosheth wunnaumonuh Saul, kah uppas8oh Mahanaim.
E.2.8 But Abner the son of Ner, captain of Saul's host, took Ishbosheth the son of Saul, and brought him over to Mahanaim;

α.2.9 Kah ukketass8tamwaheuh ut Gilead, kah ut Asheritsut, kah ut Jezreel, kah ut Ephraim, kah ut Benjamin, kah ut wame Israel.
E.2.9 And made him king over Gilead, and over the Ashurites, and over Jezreel, and over Ephraim, and over Benjamin, and over all Israel.

α.2.10 Ishboshet wunnaumonuh Saul yauunchage kodtumwohkom, n8che ketass8tam8it ut Israel kah neese kodtumwae ketass8tam88: qut wek Judah asuhkauaog Davidoh.
E.2.10 Ishbosheth Saul's son was forty years old when he began to reign over Israel, and reigned two years. But the house of Judah followed David.

α.2.11 (Kah nisahke David ketass8tam8it ut Hebron, ut wekit Judah, nésausuk tahshe kodtumwae, kah nequtta tahsuoh nep[á]uzoh.)
E.2.11 And the time that David was king in Hebron over the house of Judah was seven years and six months.

α.2.12 Kah Abner wunnaumonuh Ner, kah wuttinneumoh Ishbosheth wunnaumonuh Saul, wutch sohhamwog Mahanaim, en Gibeon.
E.2.12 And Abner the son of Ner, and the servants of Ishbosheth the son of Saul, went out from Mahanaim to Gibeon.

α.2.13 Kah Joab wunnaumonuh Zerviah, kah wuttinneumoh David sohhamwog, kah nogkushkoatuog kishke Gibeone nippissepagwut: kah nummatappuog, nequtchippissuog yôai nippissepagwut, kah nequtchipissuog ogkomai nuppissepagwut.
E.2.13 And Joab the son of Zeruiah, and the servants of David, went out, and met together by the pool of Gibeon: and they sat down, the one on the one side of the pool, and the other on the other side of the pool.

α.2.14 Kah Abner unnau Joaboh, wuskenuog neepauwehettich, kah pomphettich anaquabeog, & Joab n8wau neepauwehettich.
E.2.14 And Abner said to Joab, Let the young men now arise, and play before us. And Joab said, Let them arise.

α.2.15 Neit naboneesuog wutch Benjamin neepoog kah qushkodteaog, neg wadchiitcheg Ishbosheth wunnaumonuh Saul, kah naboneesuog wuttineumoh David.
E.2.15 Then there arose and went over by number twelve of Benjamin, which pertained to Ishbosheth the son of Saul, and twelve of the servants of David.

α.2.16 Kah anninnittuog uppuhkukk8out, kah kogkonukehtawhuttuog wuttogkodteganooash, newaj moae penushahettit newaj ne ayeuonk hettamuk Helkathhazzerim, ne ohtag Gibeon.
E.2.16 And they caught every one his fellow by the head, and thrust his sword in his fellow's side; so they fell down together: wherefore that place was called Helkathhazzurim, which is in Gibeon.

α.2.17 Kah na mo mishe ayeuwuttuonk ne kekesukok: kah Abner mo sohkauau, kah Israelle wosketompaog anaquabenit wuttinneumoh David.
E.2.17 And there was a very sore battle that day; and Abner was beaten, and the men of Israel, before the servants of David.

α.2.18 Kah na mo nishuoh wunn[à]umonuh Zerviah, Joab kah Abishai kah Asahel, kah Asahel anunonkussittau ahtuhqut.
E.2.18 And there were three sons of Zeruiah there, Joab, and Abishai, and Asahel: and Asahel was as light of foot as a wild roe.

α.2.19 Kah Asahel n8suttahwuáu Abneroh, kah neayont matta quinnuppeen unninnuohkouneiyeu asuh menadcheineiyeu, wutch n8sittahwhonat Abner.
E.2.19 And Asahel pursued after Abner; and in going he turned not to the right hand nor to the left from following Abner.

α.2.20 Neit Abner ompamuhquaeu, kah n8wau, ken Asahel? kah namp8ham, nen.
E.2.20 Then Abner looked behind him, and said, Art thou Asahel? And he answered, I am.

α.2.21 Kah Abner wuttinuh, quinnupish en unninohkouneiyeu asuh menadcheaneiyeu, kah tohqun howae wuskenen. kah amaunsh ukkenauwameonk, qut Asahel matta matta qunnuppu wutch wutasukaonat.
E.2.21 And Abner said to him, Turn thee aside to thy right hand or to thy left, and lay thee hold on one of the young men, and take thee his armour. But Asahel would not turn aside from following of him.

α.2.22 Kah Abner wonk uñau Asaheloh, quinnupish wutch kutasukiinneat: tohwutch woh togkomun en ohkekontu? uttoh woh nuttin neit mononneauon Joab kemat.
E.2.22 And Abner said again to Asahel, Turn thee aside from following me: wherefore should I smite thee to the ground? how then should I hold up my face to Joab thy brother?

α.2.23 Qut sekeneam ukquinnuppenat, newajeh Abner, n[á]shpe wohkutchee ukqunuhtug wuttantahwoh agwe napanna tahshe wahpeteagunit, newaj qunuhtug sohwashunk uppusquanit, kah na wuttit penushau, kah na wuttit nupun, káh n$nih, neadtahshe peahettit ayeuonganit ne Asahel adt kepshont, kah adt nuppuk, chequnikkompoog.
E.2.23 Howbeit he refused to turn aside: wherefore Abner with the hinder end of the spear smote him under the fifth rib, that the spear came out behind him; and he fell down there, and died in the same place: and it came to pass, that as many as came to the place where Asahel fell down and died stood still.

α.2.24 Joab wonk, kah Abishai, n8suttahwhoog Abneroh: kah wayau paahettit wadchuut Ammah, ne anaquohtag Giah, kishke touohkomukque may en Gibeon.
E.2.24 Joab also and Abishai pursued after Abner: and the sun went down when they were come to the hill of Ammah, that lieth before Giah by the way of the wilderness of Gibeon.

α.2.25 Kah wunnaumonuh Be[n]jamin miayeog asuhkauonat Abner, kah nequt chippan8og: kah neepoóg koduhkoag.
E.2.25 And the children of Benjamin gathered themselves together after Abner, and became one troop, and stood on the top of an hill.

α.2.26 Neit Abner wehkomau Joaboh, kah n8wau, sun woh togkodteg micheme mahchep8om8? sunnummatta k8wahteoou pish weesogkon maumajish neit toh ut$t8che ash auoop missinninnuog qushkek wutch n8swuttohwhonat kematt8óog;
E.2.26 Then Abner called to Joab, and said, Shall the sword devour for ever?  knowest thou not that it will be bitterness in the latter end? how long shall it be then, ere thou bid the people return from following their brethren?

α.2.27 Kah Joab n8wau pomantog God, kuttumma keket8kôás, neit wunnamuhkut mohtompog, missinninnuog woh kukkuhk8panneg wutch wunn8suttahwhonaoont weematt8oh.
E.2.27 And Joab said, As God liveth, unless thou hadst spoken, surely then in the morning the people had gone up every one from following his brother.

α.2.28 Neit Joab puhpequohtou monopuhpeg, kah wame missinninnuog chequnikkompauog, kah matta wonk n8swuttahwho8og Israeloh, kah matta wonk ayeuwutteog.
E.2.28 So Joab blew a trumpet, and all the people stood still, and pursued after Israel no more, neither fought they any more.

α.2.29 Kah Abner kah wuttinneumoh pomushaog wompanne pannuppe mukoshquttaut, kah qushkodteaog Jordan, kah papashpishaog wame Bithron, kah peyaog Mahanaim.
E.2.29 And Abner and his men walked all that night through the plain, and passed over Jordan, and went through all Bithron, and they came to Mahanaim.

α.2.30 Kah Jo[à]b qushkeu wutch n8swuttahwhonat Abner, kah miyanont wame missinninuh, mat wutappeineau nabo pask8gun tahs8oh wuttineumoh David, kah Asahel.
E.2.30 And Joab returned from following Abner: and when he had gathered all the people together, there lacked of David's servants nineteen men and Asahel.

α.2.31 Kah wuttinneumoh [ᴅ]avid togkomaog Benjaminitsog, kah wuttinneumoh Abner, kah nishwudt pasuk88oh kah nequtta tahshinchag kussuog wosketompaog nupp8og.
E.2.31 But the servants of David had smitten of Benjamin, and of Abner's men, so that three hundred and threescore men died.

α.2.32 Kah nag nemunaog Asahel, kah upposekinouh ut 8shoh 8weenohkemut, ne ohtag Bethlehem kah Joab kah wuttinneumoh, wompanishaog, kah peyaog Hebron mohtompog.
E.2.32 And they took up Asahel, and buried him in the sepulchre of his father, which was in Bethlehem. And Joab and his men went all night, and they came to Hebron at break of day.

α.3.1 KAh na mo sepe ayeuwuttuonk nashaue wekit Saul, kah wekit David, qut David nano menuhkesu, kah wek Saul nano n8chumwi.
E.3.1 Now there was long war between the house of Saul and the house of David: but David waxed stronger and stronger, and the house of Saul waxed weaker and weaker.

α.3.2 Kah David wunnaumonuh neetuoh ut Hebron, mohtommegheoncheh Ammon, wutch Ahinoam wut-Jezreelit.
E.3.2 And unto David were sons born in Hebron: and his firstborn was Amnon, of Ahinoam the Jezreelitess;

α.3.3 Kah nahohtôeu, Chileab, wutch Abigal ummittamwussoh Nabal uk-Carmelit, kah nash8ut Absolom, wunnaumonuh Maacah, wuttaunoh Telmi ketass8t ut Geshut.
E.3.3 And his second, Chileab, of Abigail the wife of Nabal the Carmelite; and the third, Absalom the son of Maacah the daughter of Talmai king of Geshur;

α.3.4 Kah yau8ut Adonijah, wunnaumonuh Haggith, kah napanna adtahs8ut Shephatiah, wunnaumonuh Abital.
E.3.4 And the fourth, Adonijah the son of Haggith; and the fifth, Shephatiah the son of Abital;

α.3.5 Kah nequtta adtahs8it, Ithream nashpe Eglah, ummittamwussoh David, yeug neetuog ut Davidut ut Hebron.
E.3.5 And the sixth, Ithream, by Eglah David's wife. These were born to David in Hebron.

α.3.6 Kah nnih ayeuwuttuonganúuk nashaue wek Saul kah wek David, Abner menuhkheau wuhhogkuh wutch wek Saul
E.3.6 And it came to pass, while there was war between the house of Saul and the house of David, that Abner made himself strong for the house of Saul.

α.3.7 Kah Saul wadchanóp 8wishqueneuh, ussowesu Rizpah, wuttaunoh Ah[í]ah, kah Ishbosheth unnau Abneroh, tohwutch petutteaónat n8sh 8skappeumoh [j]
E.3.7 And Saul had a concubine, whose name was Rizpah, the daughter of Aiah: and Ishbosheth said to Abner, Wherefore hast thou gone in unto my father's concubine?

α.3.8 Neit Abner m8cheke musquantam, wutche ukkutt8wongash Ishbosheth, kah n8wau, sun nen uppuhkukquoh anum, nen ayeuuhkone Judah, womoausue nuttin[é]oh Saul k8sh wek yeu pajeh kesukok, en wematut, kah en wetompaut, kah asq kuppomunno wunnutcheganit David, woh ken k8chumeuh pogkodchittuonk papaume yeuoh mittamwossis?
E.3.8 Then was Abner very wroth for the words of Ishbosheth, and said, Am I a dog's head, which against Judah do shew kindness this day unto the house of Saul thy father, to his brethren, and to his friends, and have not delivered thee into the hand of David, that thou chargest me to day with a fault concerning this woman?

α.3.9 Ne neheonch God Abneroh, kah wonk m8cheke, kuttumma, nean chadchekeimont Jehovah Davidoh, ne nuttinheon:
E.3.9 So do God to Abner, and more also, except, as the LORD hath sworn to David, even so I do to him;

α.3.10 Quinnuppinnumunat ass8tamoonk wutch wekit Saul, kah wunohtauunat nanaánuwae wutappuonk David, ut Israelut, kah ut Judahut, wutch Dan wehque Beersheba.
E.3.10 To translate the kingdom from the house of Saul, and to set up the throne of David over Israel and over Judah, from Dan even to Beersheba.

α.3.11 Kah n8nanum8 namp8hamauónat Abneroh pasuk kutt8onk, newutche ukqushuh.
E.3.11 And he could not answer Abner a word again, because he feared him.

α.3.12 Kah Abner ann8nau ann8naenúh en Davidut wutche nagum, n8wau, howan yeu wutóhke? n8wau, wunn8womeh, kah kusseh nunnutcheg pish k8wetomuk, nukquinnuppinnonat wame Israel en kuhhogkat.
E.3.12 And Abner sent messengers to David on his behalf, saying, Whose is the land? saying also, Make thy league with me, and, behold, my hand shall be with thee, to bring about all Israel unto thee.

α.3.13 Kah n8wau, wunnegen, k8n8womun; qut pasuk kutann8nsh, ne[,] matta pish kenaum8 nuskesuk, kuttumma negonne pas8adt Michal wutta[u]noh Saul peyoan naumunat nuskesuk.
E.3.13 And he said, Well; I will make a league with thee: but one thing I require of thee, that is, Thou shalt not see my face, except thou first bring Michal Saul's daughter, when thou comest to see my face.

α.3.14 Kah David ann8nau ann8naenúh en Ishbosheth wunnaumonuh Saul, n8wau, aninnumah Michal nummittamwus, noh ta[h]whogkup wutch nequt pasuk8e Philistianse uhquaeu wadúhquab.
E.3.14 And David sent messengers to Ishbosheth Saul's son, saying, Deliver me my wife Michal, which I espoused to me for an hundred foreskins of the Philistines.

α.3.15 Kah Ishbosheth ann8team8 kah wutámáunuh wutch wessukuk, wutch Phaltiel wunnaumonuh Leish.
E.3.15 And Ishbosheth sent, and took her from her husband, even from Phaltiel the son of Laish.

α.3.16 Kah wessukeh weechók, ummaue asuhkongquoh en Bahurim: neit Abner wuttinuh, monchish qushkish, kah qushkeu.
E.3.16 And her husband went with her along weeping behind her to Bahurim. Then said Abner unto him, Go, return. And he returned.

α.3.17 Kah Abner weogquttumuneau Israele eldersog n8wau, kenatinnehamumwop unnadteuh, David ukketass8tam8inneat ut kuhhogkaóont.
E.3.17 And Abner had communication with the elders of Israel, saying, Ye sought for David in times past to be king over you:

α.3.18 Yowutche yeuyeu ussek, newutche Jehovah kutt8 papaume David, n8wau, nashpe wunnutcheg nuttinneum David, nuttomweh nummissinninnumog Israel, wutch wunnutchegan8óut Philistiansog, kah wutch wunnutchegan8óut wame ummatwom8uh.
E.3.18 Now then do it: for the LORD hath spoken of David, saying, By the hand of my servant David I will save my people Israel out of the hand of the Philistines, and out of the hand of all their enemies.

α.3.19 Kah wonk Abner ket8kau ut wuhtauogk8óut Benjaminoh: kah wonk Abner monchu ket8kau ut wehtauogkut [ᴅ]avid, út Hebron, wame ne an tapeneunkquok Israel, kah wame ne tapeneunkquok wame wek Benjamin.
E.3.19 And Abner also spake in the ears of Benjamin: and Abner went also to speak in the ears of David in Hebron all that seemed good to Israel, and that seemed good to the whole house of Benjamin.

α.3.20 Neit Abner peyaónou Davidoh ut Hebron, kah neesneehchagkussuoh wosketompuh weechók: kah David mishadtupweheau Abneroh kah wosketompuh neh weechogqutcheh.
E.3.20 So Abner came to David to Hebron, and twenty men with him. And David made Abner and the men that were with him a feast.

α.3.21 Kah Abner unnau Davidoh, nunnepoh kah nummonchem kah nummóunumau wame Israelloh nussontimom ketass8t, onk woh k8weteomukquog, onk woh kena[u]anunum wame ne kuttah an kodtantog. Kah David moncheaheau Abneroh, kah wunohteae monchu.
E.3.21 And Abner said unto David, I will arise and go, and will gather all Israel unto my lord the king, that they may make a league with thee, and that thou mayest reign over all that thine heart desireth. And David sent Abner away; and he went in peace.

α.3.22 Kah kusseh wuttinneumoh David, kah Joab peyaog wutch n8swuttahwhonaóont chippan8og, kah paudtóog mishe sequttahhamóonk (qut Abner matta weetomauau Davidoh ut Heb[t]on, newutche ummoncheahéouh, kah wunohteae monchéi)
E.3.22 And, behold, the servants of David and Joab came from pursuing a troop, and brought in a great spoil with them: but Abner was not with David in Hebron; for he had sent him away, and he was gone in peace.

α.3.23 Joab kah wame ayeuteoh neh weechógqutcheh, paónit, unnáog Joaboh, n8waog, Abner wunnaumonuh Ner peyaónau ketass8tamwoh, kah ummoncheaheouh, & wunohteae monchei.
E.3.23 When Joab and all the host that was with him were come, they told Joab, saying, Abner the son of Ner came to the king, and he hath sent him away, and he is gone in peace.

α.3.24 Neit Joab peyaonau ketass8toh, kah n8wau, toh kutussem? kusseh, Abner kuppeyaonuk, tohwutch moncheheadt? kah monchei.
E.3.24 Then Joab came to the king, and said, What hast thou done? behold, Abner came unto thee; why is it that thou hast sent him away, and he is quite gone?

α.3.25 K8waeh Abner wunnaumonuh Ner, peyau k8nombeukonukqunat, wahteauunat kussohhamóonk, kah kuppetutt[è]aonk, kah wahteauunat wame ne asean.
E.3.25 Thou knowest Abner the son of Ner, that he came to deceive thee, and to know thy going out and thy coming in, and to know all that thou doest.

α.3.26 Kah Joab sohhog wutch Davidut, asuhkaue ann8nau ann8naenúh en Abnerut, neh ukquehchuwunóuh wutch Siriah tohkekommuut, qut David matta 8wahteo8un.
E.3.26 And when Joab was come out from David, he sent messengers after Abner, which brought him again from the well of Sirah: but David knew it not.

α.3.27 Kah Abner quashkeit en Hebron, Joab uppenshe uss8unuh ut squontamu, 8nohteáe ken8nonat, kah na wuttit togkomon agwe napanna tahshe upheteagunit, newaj nuppuk, newutche 8sqheonk Asahel wematuh.
E.3.27 And when Abner was returned to Hebron, Joab took him aside in the gate to speak with him quietly, and smote him there under the fifth rib, that he died, for the blood of Asahel his brother.

α.3.28 Kah ompetak, David n8tog, n8wau, nen kah nutass8tamóonk matcheseonganneumun8 ut anaquabit Jehovah micheme, wutch 8sqheonganit Abner wunnaumonuh Ner.
E.3.28 And afterward when David heard it, he said, I and my kingdom are guiltless before the LORD for ever from the blood of Abner the son of Ner:

α.3.29 Ohtaj ut uppuhkukqut Joab, & wame 8shoh week, kah matta quenauadtinn8itch pasuk ut wekit Joab, noh kehkechesit, asuh noh wadchequit, asuh noh ompatussuk anwohhou, as[ú]h noh panus[h]ont nashpe togkodteg, asuh noh quenauhikqut petukqunnunk.
E.3.29 Let it rest on the head of Joab, and on all his father's house; and let there not fail from the house of Joab one that hath an issue, or that is a leper, or that leaneth on a staff, or that falleth on the sword, or that lacketh bread.

α.3.30 Nemehkuh Joab kah Abishai weematuh, nushaaog Abneroh, newutche nashau Asahel wemat8oh, ut Gibeon ut ayeuwuttinneat.
E.3.30 So Joab, and Abishai his brother slew Abner, because he had slain their brother Asahel at Gibeon in the battle.

α.3.31 Kah David unnau Joaboh, kah wame missinninnuh neh weetomukqutcheh, nehnekukom8k kah puttukquobpissek man8tionagk, kah mau8k anaquabit Abner, kah David ketass8t nagum asuhkausu.
E.3.31 And David said to Joab, and to all the people that were with him, Rend your clothes, and gird you with sackcloth, and mourn before Abner. And king David himself followed the bier.

α.3.32 Kah nag posekinaog Abneroh ut Hebron kah ketass8t mishont8wae nau ut Abner 8weenohkeet, kah wame missinninnuog Mauog.
E.3.32 And they buried Abner in Hebron: and the king lifted up his voice, and wept at the grave of Abner; and all the people wept.

α.3.33 Kah ketass8t mauémau Abneroh, kah n8wau, sun Abner nupp8 onatuh neáhen nuppuk mattammog?
E.3.33 And the king lamented over Abner, and said, Died Abner as a fool dieth?

α.3.34 Kenutchegash matta kishpissin8ash, asuh kusseetash fettersun8ash: onatuh wosketomp p[á]nshont ut anaquabhettit matchet8óg, ne kittinne penusho[n]. Kah wame missinninnúog wónk ummauémóuh.
E.3.34 Thy hands were not bound, nor thy feet put into fetters: as a man falleth before wicked men, so fellest thou. And all the people wept again over him.

α.3.35 Kah wame missinninnúog paahettit meeseheonat David, ash pame kesukok: David chadchekeyeuau, n8wau, ne unnéhitch God, kah wonk m8cheke qutchehtamon petukqunneg, asuh ne teag, nô pajeh 8wayónat.
E.3.35 And when all the people came to cause David to eat meat while it was yet day, David sware, saying, So do God to me, and more also, if I taste bread, or ought else, till the sun be down.

α.3.36 Kah wame missinninnúog ukkehkinneásineau, kah wuttapeneámuneau, kah uttoh ásit ketass8t, wuttapeneámuneau wame missinninnúog.
E.3.36 And all the people took notice of it, and it pleased them: as whatsoever the king did pleased all the people.

α.3.37 Néwutche wame missinninnúog, káh wame Israel wahteauog ne kesukok, matta ketass8t wutusseonk nushon[á]t Abner wunnaumonuh Ner.
E.3.37 For all the people and all Israel understood that day that it was not of the king to slay Abner the son of Ner.

α.3.38 Kah ketass8t unnáu wuttinneumoh, sunnummatta k8waheomw8 Sontim kah missugken yeu kesukok penushau ut Israel?
E.3.38 And the king said unto his servants, Know ye not that there is a prince and a great man fallen this day in Israel?

α.3.39 Kah yeu kesukok nunn8chumwes, tohkonogque nussusséqunitteanat ketass8tamóonk, kah yeug wunnaumonuh Zerviah, nutánuúnuhkeséumukquog, Jehovah pish onquttauau matchesenutcheh, neaunak ummatcheseonk.
E.3.39 And I am this day weak, though anointed king; and these men the sons of Zeruiah be too hard for me: the LORD shall reward the doer of evil according to his wickedness.

α.4.1 KAh wunnaumonuh Saul n8tog Abner nupp8 ut Hebron, wunnutchegash n8chumwiyeuash, kah wame Israelitsog wuttamanatamwog.
E.4.1 And when Saul's son heard that Abner was dead in Hebron, his hands were feeble, and all the Israelites were troubled.

α.4.2 Kah wunnaumónuh Saul neesosheau wosketompuh chippan8e mugquompuh, pasuk us[s]owenau Baanah, onkatog us[s]owenau Rechab, wunnaumonuh Rimmon, up-Beerothit, wutch wunnaumonat Benjamin, (newutche Beeroth wonk wetogkemop Benjamin.
E.4.2 And Saul's son had two men that were captains of bands: the name of the one was Baanah, and the name of the other Rechab, the sons of Rimmon a Beerothite, of the children of Benjamin: (for Beeroth also was reckoned to Benjamin.

α.4.3 Kah Beerothitsog spuhh8waog Gittáim, kah na wuttit nôn8sósinneáu pajeh yeu kesukok)
E.4.3 And the Beerothites fled to Gittaim, and were sojourners there until this day.)

α.4.4 Kah Jonathan wunnaumonuh Saul, wunnaumoniyeup, noh n8chumwesu ut wusseetut, kah mo napanna tahshe kodtumwohkom, padaunch[e]m8onit Saul kah Jonathan wutch Jezreel, kah n8sónukqutche wunnemunuh, kah wus[s]em8, kah n$nih kánuppe wus[s]emwit, penushau, kah qunnukquesun, kah noh us[s]owenau Mephibosheth,
E.4.4 And Jonathan, Saul's son, had a son that was lame of his feet. He was five years old when the tidings came of Saul and Jonathan out of Jezreel, and his nurse took him up, and fled: and it came to pass, as she made haste to flee, that he fell, and became lame. And his name was Mephibosheth.

α.4.5 Kah wunnaumonuh Rimmon ub-Beerôthit, Rachab kah Baanah, moncheog, kah peyaog papaume kâsittag, weekit Ishbosheth, noh seepsuk wutappinneát pohshequodt.
E.4.5 And the sons of Rimmon the Beerothite, Rechab and Baanah, went, and came about the heat of the day to the house of Ishbosheth, who lay on a bed at noon.

α.4.6 Kah nag peyaog, ut nôeu komuk, onatuh néem[k]omuk wheat: kah wuttantahwhóuh agwe napanna tahshe uppeteaganit, kah Rachab kah Baanah wematoh pohquohhamwog.
E.4.6 And they came thither into the midst of the house, as though they would have fetched wheat; and they smote him under the fifth rib: and Rechab and Baanah his brother escaped.

α.4.7 Newutche petutteahettit wetuomut, sepsin wutappinneat, wutappinneáe chamberut, kah wuttogkomouh kah wunnushóuh, kah tummehthamwog uppuhkuk, kah neemunnumwog uppuhkuk, kah moncheog, pannuppe mukoshquttaut wompanne.
E.4.7 For when they came into the house, he lay on his bed in his bedchamber, and they smote him, and slew him, and beheaded him, and took his head, and gat them away through the plain all night.

α.4.8 Kah paudtauog uppuhkok Ishbosheth Davidut, út Hebron, kah unnaog kehtas[s]8toh, kus[s]eh uppuhkuk Ishbosheth wunnáumonuh Saul, kummatwom, noh natinneahhog kuppomantamoonk, k[a]h Jehováh ann8tauanshau nussontimomoh ketass8t, yeu kesukok, Sauloh kah 8skannemunneoh.
E.4.8 And they brought the head of Ishbosheth unto David to Hebron, and said to the king, Behold the head of Ishbosheth the son of Saul thine enemy, which sought thy life; and the LORD hath avenged my lord the king this day of Saul, and of his seed.

α.4.9 Kah David namp8hamaúau Reshab káh Baanah wematoh wunnaumonuh Rimmon up-Berethit, kah wuttinuh, pomontog Jehovah noh tomheont nukketeahogkounoh wutch wame wuttamehpunnaonganit.
E.4.9 And David answered Rechab and Baanah his brother, the sons of Rimmon the Beerothite, and said unto them, As the LORD liveth, who hath redeemed my soul out of all adversity,

α.4.10 Pasuk asit, n8wau, Saul nupp8i, unnantog paudto wúnaúnchem8kao[n]k, nuttohqunop, kah nunnushap ut Ziklag, noh unnantog, woh nutonkquatau wutch wutaunchem8kaonk.
E.4.10 When one told me, saying, Behold, Saul is dead, thinking to have brought good tidings, I took hold of him, and slew him in Ziklag, who thought that I would have given him a reward for his tidings:

α.4.11 Ut$toh an m8chekewonk matchetoenuog nushahettit sampeusseinneuh, út nehenwonche wekit, ut wutappinneat? sunnummatta woh k8chemitteauneau 8sqheonk ut kenutchegan8out; kah kutamaunúkqunnaout wutch ohkeit.
E.4.11 How much more, when wicked men have slain a righteous person in his own house upon his bed? shall I not therefore now require his blood of your hand, and take you away from the earth?

α.4.12 K[á]h David ann8nau 8skeneumoh, kah nag wunnushouh, kah tummethamw[ò]g wunnutchegann8ash, kah wusseet8ash, kah 8washadtauunaoash waabe Hebrone nippissepagwut: qut nag neemunnumwog uppuhkuk Ishbosheth, kah upposekinnumuneau Abner 8weenohkeet ut Hebron.
E.4.12 And David commanded his young men, and they slew them, and cut off their hands and their feet, and hanged them up over the pool in Hebron. But they took the head of Ishbosheth, and buried it in the sepulchre of Abner in Hebron.

α.5.1 NEit wame Israelle chippan8wongash peyaonaog Davidoh ut Hebron, kah kutt8wog n8waog, kusseh neenawun kushkón, kah k8weyaus.
E.5.1 Then came all the tribes of Israel to David unto Hebron, and spake, saying, Behold, we are thy bone and thy flesh.

α.5.2 Kah wonk unnadteuh Saul kohtahs8tam8it ut nuhhogkanonut, ken kussohwe[u] sagkompanóog, kah kuppethu[u]nomp Israel, kah Jehovah kuttugkup, pish kussohkomm8n nummissinninneumog Israel, kah pish ken kukkeitass8tam8 ut Israel.
E.5.2 Also in time past, when Saul was king over us, thou wast he that leddest out and broughtest in Israel: and the LORD said to thee, Thou shalt feed my people Israel, and thou shalt be a captain over Israel.

α.5.3 Neit wame Israelle Eldersog peyaunaog ketass8toh ut Hebron, kah David ketass8t 8n8wonauh ut Hebron, anaquabit Jéhovah, kah sussequnaog Davidoh ketass8t ut Israel.
E.5.3 So all the elders of Israel came to the king to Hebron; and king David made a league with them in Hebron before the LORD: and they anointed David king over Israel.

α.5.4 David nishwinchage kodtumwohkomup n8che nanawunnuadt, kah yauunchage kodtumwae nanawunnu[à]u.
E.5.4 David was thirty years old when he began to reign, and he reigned forty years.

α.5.5 Ut Hebron nanawuna[u] Judahoh nesausuk tahshe kodtumwae, kah nequtta tahsuoh nepauzsóh, kah ut Jerusalem nanawunnuau nishwinchage kah nishwe kodtumwae, ut Israelut, kah ut Judah.
E.5.5 In Hebron he reigned over Judah seven years and six months: and in Jerusalem he reigned thirty and three years over all Israel and Judah.

α.5.6 Kah ketass8t, kah wuttinneumoh auog Jérusalem en Jeb[u]sitsut, wadohkitcheg ne ohkeit, neg kon8noncheg Davidoh, n8waog, kuttum̃a ámaunadt quan8quesitcheg, kah pagkenukeg, matta yeu woh kuppetutte[a]an, anantamohettit, David n8nanum8 yeu petukonat.
E.5.6 And the king and his men went to Jerusalem unto the Jebusites, the inhabitants of the land: which spake unto David, saying, Except thou take away the blind and the lame, thou shalt not come in hither: thinking, David cannot come in hither.

α.5.7 Qut David sohkom menuhkonogq Sion, ne ukkeitotan David.
E.5.7 Nevertheless David took the strong hold of Zion: the same is the city of David.

α.5.8 Kah David n8wau ne kesukok, howan kôkuhqueit pohsohtheganit, kah togkomont Jébusitsoh, quonukquésitcheg, kah pagkenukeg, neh ukketeahogkounoh David wussekeneauoh: newajeh n8wahettit, pogkenukeg, kah quanukquesitcheg matta pish petutteau8og wetuomut.
E.5.8 And David said on that day, Whosoever getteth up to the gutter, and smiteth the Jebusites, and the lame and the blind that are hated of David's soul, he shall be chief and captain. Wherefore they said, The blind and the lame shall not come into the house.

α.5.9 Neit David ayeuh wonkon8sinit, kah wuttissowetamúneau ukkeitotan David, kah David wéekitteau quinnuppu, wutch Millo, kah anomiyeu.
E.5.9 So David dwelt in the fort, and called it the city of David. And David built round about from Millo and inward.

α.5.10 Kah David kitchittoushau, kah mishetu, kah Jéhovah umManitt8m8uh ayeteaóg 8weetomuh.
E.5.10 And David went on, and grew great, and the LORD God of hosts was with him.

α.5.11 Kah Hiram ketass8t ut Tyre nan8nau ann8naenuh en Davidut, kah utchikupoh, kah Carpentersoh, kah Masonsoh, kah ayimaunaog Davidoh wetú.
E.5.11 And Hiram king of Tyre sent messengers to David, and cedar trees, and carpenters, and masons: and they built David an house.

α.5.12 Kah David wahteou Jehovah ummenuhkeheuh ukketass8tam8inneat ut Israel, kah mishehteaou ukketass8tamoonk wutche úmmissinninneumoh Israel:
E.5.12 And David perceived that the LORD had established him king over Israel, and that he had exalted his kingdom for his people Israel's sake.

α.5.13 Kah David wonk nemunau 8skappeumoh, kah mittamwussissoh wutch Jerusalem, mahche w8k Hebron, kah nano wunnaumoniinneunk, kah wuttauneunk neetuog ut Davidut.
E.5.13 And David took him more concubines and wives out of Jerusalem, after he was come from Hebron: and there were yet sons and daughters born to David.

α.5.14 Kah yeush 8wesuonganoash neh nékinitcheh ut Jerusalem, Shammua, kah Sho[l]ab, kah Nathan kah Solomon.
E.5.14 And these be the names of those that were born unto him in Jerusalem; Shammuah, and Shobab, and Nathan, and Solomon,

α.5.15 Wonk Ibhar, kah Elishua, kah Nepheg kah Jophia.
E.5.15 Ibhar also, and Elishua, and Nepheg, and Japhia,

α.5.16 Kah Elishama, kah Eliada, kah Eliphalet.
E.5.16 And Elishama, and Eliada, and Eliphalet.

α.5.17 Qut Philistiansog n8tamwehettit neg sussequnaog Davidoh ketass8t ut Israel, wame Philistiansog kuhkúhqueog natinneawhonat Da[u]id, kah David wunn8tamun, kah w8msu en wonogqut.
E.5.17 But when the Philistines heard that they had anointed David king over Israel, all the Philistines came up to seek David; and David heard of it, and went down to the hold.

α.5.18 Kah wonk Philistiansog peyaog, kah sepakeog ut 8nóuhkoiyeuut Rephaim.
E.5.18 The Philistines also came and spread themselves in the valley of Rephaim.

α.5.19 Kah David nat8tomauau Jehovah, n8wau sun woh nukkuhkukquem en Philistiansut, sun woh nag kupponoog ut nunnutcheganit: kah Jehováh unnau Davidoh kuhkuhquish, newutceh matta chananatamwe, nuppon Philistiansog ut kenutcheganit.
E.5.19 And David enquired of the LORD, saying, Shall I go up to the Philistines? wilt thou deliver them into mine hand? And the LORD said unto David, Go up: for I will doubtless deliver the Philistines into thine hand.

α.5.20 Kah David peyau en Baalperazim, kah David na wuttit togkomon kah n8wau, Jehovah yeonteohkauau nummatwomoh, negonae nen, onatuh pohquodchuog nippeash newaj hettog ayeuonk Baalperazim.
E.5.20 And David came to Baalperazim, and David smote them there, and said, The LORD hath broken forth upon mine enemies before me, as the breach of waters. Therefore he called the name of that place Baalperazim.

α.5.21 Kah na wuttit nukkonnoneau wuttinneuke[n]tunkan8oh, kah David kah wuttinneumoh wutchikkosswouh.
E.5.21 And there they left their images, and David and his men burned them.

α.5.22 Kah wonk Philistiansog peyaog, kah sépakéog ut 8nouhkoiyeuut Rephaim.
E.5.22 And the Philistines came up yet again, and spread themselves in the valley of Rephaim.

α.5.23 Kah David nat8tomauont Jehováh, n8wau, matta pish kukkuhkuhk8h, qut quin[nu]puhkaú ut uppusquan8out, kah queentau piuhsuke Mulberyuhtugquehtu.
E.5.23 And when David enquired of the LORD, he said, Thou shalt not go up; but fetch a compass behind them, and come upon them over against the mulberry trees.

α.5.24 Kah nnaj, n8taman pomushaongane wadtauatonkqussuonk, wanashquonk mulbery-uhtugquehtu, neit wohkouish, newutche neit pish Jehovah kenegonne sohwehtunk, togkomonat Philistianse ayeuhteaog.
E.5.24 And let it be, when thou hearest the sound of a going in the tops of the mulberry trees, that then thou shalt bestir thyself: for then shall the LORD go out before thee, to smite the host of the Philistines.

α.5.25 Kah David ne wutussen, ne ánann8nont Jehovah, kah togkomau Philistiansoh, wutch Geba nô pajeh kuppeyonat Gazer.
E.5.25 And David did so, as the LORD had commanded him; and smote the Philistines from Geba until thou come to Gazer.

α.6.1 WOnk David miyanau wame Israelle pepénamwe wosketompaog nishwinchage muttannonganogkussuog.
E.6.1 Again, David gathered together all the chosen men of Israel, thirty thousand.

α.6.2 Kah David nepau; kah weecháau wame missinninnúh neh weechogqutcheh, wutch Baal ut Judah, na wutch kuhkuhk8tauunat wut-Arkum God, noh as8wesit nashpe ne weesuonk, Jehovah ayeuteaunit, noh apit nashaue Cherubimsut.
E.6.2 And David arose, and went with all the people that were with him from Baale of Judah, to bring up from thence the ark of God, whose name is called by the name of the LORD of hosts that dwelleth between the cherubims.

α.6.3 Kah ponamwog wut-Arkum God, ut wuske cartut, kah wussohwuttauuneau wutch wekit Abinadab, ne ohtag ut Gibeah, kah Uzzah kah Ahio, wunnaumonuh Abinadab, nag kutt8kamwog wuske cart.
E.6.3 And they set the ark of God upon a new cart, and brought it out of the house of Abinadab that was in Gibeah: and Uzzah and Ahio, the sons of Abinadab, drave the new cart.

α.6.4 Kah wussoh8wuttauuneau wutch wekit Abinadab, ne ut Gibeah, weecháuttamwog wutArkum God, kah Ahio negonuhkom Ark
E.6.4 And they brought it out of the house of Abinadab which was at Gibeah, accompanying the ark of God: and Ahio went before the ark.

α.6.5 Kah David kah wame wek Israel, puhpequaog ut anaquabit Jehovah, nashpe eiyáne auwohteaonganit, ne ayimuk wutch k8wau, harpsash, kah psalterysash, kah timbrilsash, kah cornetsash, kah cimbalsash.
E.6.5 And David and all the house of Israel played before the LORD on all manner of instruments made of fir wood, even on harps, and on psalteries, and on timbrels, and on cornets, and on cymbals.

α.6.6 Kah paahettit Nachon ahhuttannuppoghog, Uzzah summagunnum en wutArkumut God, kah ummissunnumun, newutche oxinog mushkauwussinwog.
E.6.6 And when they came to Nachon's threshingfloor, Uzzah put forth his hand to the ark of God, and took hold of it; for the oxen shook it.

α.6.7 Kah ummusquantam8onk Jehovah ayeuuhkonittue nashquneau Uzzah, kah God na wuttit togkomon, wutch uppanneusseonk, kah na wuttit nuppun kishke wut-Arkumut God.
E.6.7 And the anger of the LORD was kindled against Uzzah; and God smote him there for his error; and there he died by the ark of God.

α.6.8 Kah David neuantam, newutche Jehovah tauwetahwau Uzzah, kah wutussowetamun ne ayeuonk Perez-Uzzah, pajeh yeu kesukok.
E.6.8 And David was displeased, because the LORD had made a breach upon Uzzah: and he called the name of the place Perezuzzah to this day.

α.6.9 Kah David qushau Jehovah ne kesukok, kah n8wau, uttoh woh en wut-Arkum Jehovah peyógqun?
E.6.9 And David was afraid of the LORD that day, and said, How shall the ark of the LORD come to me?

α.6.10 Nemehkuh, matta ontohtoou wutArkum Jehovah en wuhhogkat, en ukkeitotanat David: qut David uppanne uss8wuttauun en wekit Obed-Edom, uk-Gittit.
E.6.10 So David would not remove the ark of the LORD unto him into the city of David: but David carried it aside into the house of Obededom the Gittite.

α.6.11 Kah wutArkum Jehovah ohteau wekit ObedEdom, ukGittit, nishuoh nepauzsoh: kah Jehovah wunnanumau Obed$Edom, kah wame wek.
E.6.11 And the ark of the LORD continued in the house of Obededom the Gittite three months: and the LORD blessed Obededom, and all his household.

α.6.12 Kah unnon ketass8t David, n8won, Jehovah wunnantam wek ObedEdom kah wame ne wadchiinitcheh wuhhogkat, wutche wut-Arkum God, neit David monchu, kah paudtau wut-Arkum God, wutch wekit ObedEdom, en ukkeitotanat David, nashpe wekontamoonk.
E.6.12 And it was told king David, saying, The LORD hath blessed the house of Obededom, and all that pertaineth unto him, because of the ark of God. So David went and brought up the ark of God from the house of Obededom into the city of David with gladness.

α.6.13 Kah nnih, nag kôunukeg wutArkum Jehovah nequtta tashanehtúe monchehettit, sephausu oxinoh, k[á]h wanogqunutcheh.
E.6.13 And it was so, that when they that bare the ark of the LORD had gone six paces, he sacrificed oxen and fatlings.

α.6.14 Kah David pumukau ut anaquabit Jehovah nashpe mamusse ummenuhkesuonk, kah David puttukquobpissu womponakine ephod.
E.6.14 And David danced before the LORD with all his might; and David was girded with a linen ephod.

α.6.15 Neit David kah wame wek Israel[.] kuhkuhk8wuttauog wutArkum Jehovah náshpe mishont8waongash, kah nashpe monopuhpequone mishont8waongash.
E.6.15 So David and all the house of Israel brought up the ark of the LORD with shouting, and with the sound of the trumpet.

α.6.16 Kah wutArkum Jehovah paóm8uk ukkeitotanat David, Michal wuttaúnoh Saul natauwompu ut kenogkaneganit, kah náau Davidoh quequeshónit kah pámukonit ut anaquabit Jehovah, kah wutjishanumuh ut wuttahut.
E.6.16 And as the ark of the LORD came into the city of David, Michal Saul's daughter looked through a window, and saw king David leaping and dancing before the LORD; and she despised him in her heart.

α.6.17 Kah petukodtauog wutArkum Jehovah, kah upponamuneau wutáyeuonganit, ut nashaue Tabernakleut, ne David wonohtunkup, kah David sephausu chikohteae mag8ongash, kah wunohteae mag8ongash ut anaquabit Jehovah.
E.6.17 And they brought in the ark of the LORD, and set it in his place, in the midst of the tabernacle that David had pitched for it: and David offered burnt offerings and peace offerings before the LORD.

α.6.18 Kah quenau David mahche sephausit chikohteae mag8ongash, kah wunohteae mag8ongash, wunnanumau missinninnúh ut 8wesuonganit Jehovah ayeuhteaunit.
E.6.18 And as soon as David had made an end of offering burnt offerings and peace offerings, he blessed the people in the name of the LORD of hosts.

α.6.19 Kah aninnumauau kenugke wame missinninnúut, ut kenugke mámusse ummuttaán8ongan8 Israel, naneeswe mittamwussissoh, kah wosketompuh, nishnoh pasuk petukqunneg, kah mishinneái weyaus, kah wisqui wine: neit wame missinninnúog monch[e]og nishnoh pasuk wekit.
E.6.19 And he dealt among all the people, even among the whole multitude of Israel, as well to the women as men, to every one a cake of bread, and a good piece of flesh, and a flagon of wine. So all the people departed every one to his house.

α.6.20 Neit David qushkeu, wunnantamunat wek, kah Michal wuttaunoh Saul sohham wunnogskauónat Davidoh, kah n8wau, uttoh wuttin sohsumweinneunkqussin Israelle ketass8t yeu kesukok, upposkinnónat wuhhogkuh yeu kesukok, ut wuskesuk8óut ummaidumoh wuttinneum8uh, onatuh tahn8che wuskenesit pohquae upposkinonat wuhhogkuh.
E.6.20 Then David returned to bless his household. And Michal the daughter of Saul came out to meet David, and said, How glorious was the king of Israel to day, who uncovered himself to day in the eyes of the handmaids of his servants, as one of the vain fellows shamelessly uncovereth himself!

α.6.21 Kah David unnau Michal, ne ut anaquabit Jehovah, noh nen ain pepeniit onk noh k8sh, kah wame wek, nukkehtimukqunat nanawunónat ummissinninneumoh Jehovah Israel, newajeh pohmpee ut anaquabit J[o]hovah.
E.6.21 And David said unto Michal, It was before the LORD, which chose me before thy father, and before all his house, to appoint me ruler over the people of the LORD, over Israel: therefore will I play before the LORD.

α.6.22 Kah wonk pish umm8cheke jishánumukqus, kah pish numméshanéyeu ut nehenwonche nuttenantam8wonganit: kah nashpe yeug mittamwussisse wuttinneumuneunk, neg an8waaneg, pish n8ch quehtiánumehteanunk.
E.6.22 And I will yet be more vile than thus, and will be base in mine own sight: and of the maidservants which thou hast spoken of, of them shall I be had in honour.

α.6.23 Newajeh Michal wuttaunoh Saul, matta wunneechanek nô pajeh wunnuppunat.
E.6.23 Therefore Michal the daughter of Saul had no child unto the day of her death.

α.7.1 KAh n$nih ketass8t apit wekit, kah Jehovah wutanwosinéheuh waéenu wutch wame ummátwomut.
E.7.1 And it came to pass, when the king sat in his house, and the LORD had given him rest round about from all his enemies;

α.7.2 Ketass8t Nathanoh quoshodtumwe[n]ùh, yeuyeu naish, nen nutai ut chikupukkomukqut, qut wut-Arkum God ayeum8 agwe onkwhonganit.
E.7.2 That the king said unto Nathan the prophet, See now, I dwell in an house of cedar, but the ark of God dwelleth within curtains.

α.7.3 Kah Nathan un[u]au ketass8toh, monchish ussish wame ne kuttahut newutche Jehovah k8wetomuk.
E.7.3 And Nathan said to the king, Go, do all that is in thine heart; for the LORD is with thee.

α.7.4 Kah n$nih, nohkog, wuttinnowaonk Jehovah peyaonuk Nathan, n8wau.
E.7.4 And it came to pass that night, that the word of the LORD came unto Nathan, saying,

α.7.5 Monchish us nuttinneum David, yeu wussin Jehovah, sun woh ken kutayimah wetu, ayinneat?
E.7.5 Go and tell my servant David, Thus saith the LORD, Shalt thou build me an house for me to dwell in?

α.7.6 Asquam ayéon ne teagwe wetuómut, nadteuh kohkuhk8unog wunnaumonuh Israel wutch Egipt, pajeh yeu kesukok, qut nuppomusham wetuomut, kah pummewuttauwae komukqut.
E.7.6 Whereas I have not dwelt in any house since the time that I brought up the children of Israel out of Egypt, even to this day, but have walked in a tent and in a tabernacle.

α.7.7 Ut wame ayeuonganéhtu, uttoh adt weecháuog wunnaumonuh Israel, sun nussimus kutt8onk en howae wutchippan8ongane Israel, neg ann8nogig sohkomm8s nummissinninneumog Israel, nussimus? tohwutch matta ayimmieóg chippukikkomuk?
E.7.7 In all the places wherein I have walked with all the children of Israel spake I a word with any of the tribes of Israel, whom I commanded to feed my people Israel, saying, Why build ye not me an house of cedar?

α.7.8 Newutche yeuyeu, yeu woh kuttinnon nuttinneum David, yeu wussin JEhovah ayeuhteaunit, kenemununup wutch shipse komukqut, wutch asuhkauónat shepsog, kenánawunónat nummissinninnuog Israel.
E.7.8 Now therefore so shalt thou say unto my servant David, Thus saith the LORD of hosts, I took thee from the sheepcote, from following the sheep, to be ruler over my people, over Israel:

α.7.9 Kah k8wecháunup en uttoh ôôop, kah nuttummetah wame kummatwomog wutch anaquabean, kah kummishe 8wesuonganuhkoush, netatuppe 8wesuongan8 matikkénukeh ut ohkeit.
E.7.9 And I was with thee whithersoever thou wentest, and have cut off all thine enemies out of thy sight, and have made thee a great name, like unto the name of the great men that are in the earth.

α.7.10 [(]Nano wonk nukkuhquttum ayeuonk wutch nummissinninneumog Israel, kah nag nutohtéukonunk, onk woh ayeuwog nehenwonche wutayeuwongan8óut, kah matta wonk ontappéog, asuh matta wonk pish wunnaumoniinneunk ummatcheseongan8 onkapunánuk8og, neane negonaeu.
E.7.10 Moreover I will appoint a place for my people Israel, and will plant them, that they may dwell in a place of their own, and move no more; neither shall the children of wickedness afflict them any more, as beforetime,

α.7.11 Kah neane nadteuh ann8nog wussittumwaenuog, wunnanawunnónaóont nummissinninneumoh Israel, kah kutanwosinnuwahush wutch wame kummatwomut) wonk Jehovah kuttinuk, noh pish kutayimuk wetu.
E.7.11 And as since the time that I commanded judges to be over my people Israel, and have caused thee to rest from all thine enemies. Also the LORD telleth thee that he will make thee an house.

α.7.12 Kah kukkesukkodtumash numwohtag, kah weechequom8madt k8shog, pish nuttahshahtóh k8skannem nahohtôeu ken noh sohhog wutch kenogkusut, kah pish nummenuhkehteoh wutass8tamóonk.
E.7.12 And when thy days be fulfilled, and thou shalt sleep with thy fathers, I will set up thy seed after thee, which shall proceed out of thy bowels, and I will establish his kingdom.

α.7.13 Noh pish ayim wetu wutch n8wesuonk, kah pish nummenuhkehteoh ukkehtas[s]8tamóe appuonk micheme.
E.7.13 He shall build an house for my name, and I will stablish the throne of his kingdom for ever.

α.7.14 Nen pish 8shoh, kah noh pish nunnaumon, matchesit, nuttadtogkom nashpe wosketompae pogomungash, kah nashpe wosketompae wunnaumon[è]uh sumohk[ô]whuttuongash.
E.7.14 I will be his father, and he shall be my son. If he commit iniquity, I will chasten him with the rod of men, and with the stripes of the children of men:

α.7.15 Qut nummonanitteaonk matta pish nukkonuk8h, neane amaunumomp wutch Saulut; noh amaunog wutch anaquabean.
E.7.15 But my mercy shall not depart away from him, as I took it from Saul, whom I put away before thee.

α.7.16 Kah kek, kah kukketass8tam8onk pish micheme menehketeauun ut anaquabean: kutappuonk pish micheme menuhketeauun.
E.7.16 And thine house and thy kingdom shall be established for ever before thee: thy throne shall be established for ever.

α.7.17 Neaunak wame yeush kutt8wongash, kah neaunak wame yeu monomansuonk, ne Nathan wuttin ken8non Davidoh.
E.7.17 According to all these words, and according to all this vision, so did Nathan speak unto David.

α.7.18 Neit ketass8t David petutteau, kah appu anaquabit Jehovah, kah n8wau, howan nen woi Lord Jehovah? kah teaguas nek, waj yeu pas8wéan?
E.7.18 Then went king David in, and sat before the LORD, and he said, Who am I, O Lord GOD? and what is my house, that thou hast brought me hitherto?

α.7.19 Kah yeu webe peasin ut anaquabean woi Lord Jehovah, qut wonk kukken8tam kittinneum wek, ne chéke pish aunagk, kah sun yeu wittinniyeuonk wosketomp woi Lord Jehovah?
E.7.19 And this was yet a small thing in thy sight, O Lord GOD; but thou hast spoken also of thy servant's house for a great while to come. And is this the manner of man, O Lord GOD?

α.7.20 Kah toh wonk woh kittinuk David? newutche ken Lord Jehovah k8wáeh kittinneum.
E.7.20 And what can David say more unto thee? for thou, Lord GOD, knowest thy servant.

α.7.21 Wutche kuttinn8waonk, kah neaunag nehenwonche kuttah, yeush wame kutussenash magogish, nish k8wahuónat kittinneum.
E.7.21 For thy word's sake, and according to thine own heart, hast thou done all these great things, to make thy servant know them.

α.7.22 Newutche ken kummissugken woi Lord God: newutche wanne howan kuttinnunk8, asuh howae manit qut webe ken, neaunag wame nehtaúoge nunn8tam8onganun.
E.7.22 Wherefore thou art great, O LORD God: for there is none like thee, neither is there any God beside thee, according to all that we have heard with our ears.

α.7.23 Kah ne teague pasuk wutohtimóin, agqueneunkquok kummissinninneumut, agqueneunkquok Israellut, neh God monchit uppohquohwhuttonat missinninnúh en wuhhogkat, kah 8wesuonganúhkauónat, kah unkqueneunkquokish, wutche kutóhk, ut anaquabhettit kummissiñinneumog, neg pohquohwhuttauoneg wutch Egypt, wutch wutohtimoneahtu, kah wutch umManitt8m8óut?
E.7.23 And what one nation in the earth is like thy people, even like Israel, whom God went to redeem for a people to himself, and to make him a name, and to do for you great things and terrible, for thy land, before thy people, which thou redeemedst to thee from Egypt, from the nations and their gods?

α.7.24 Newutche kummenuhkéheam kummissinninneumog Israel, kummissinninneumog micheme, kah ken Lord nag umMaitt8m8uh.
E.7.24 For thou hast confirmed to thyself thy people Israel to be a people unto thee for ever: and thou, LORD, art become their God.

α.7.25 Kah yeuyeu woi Jehovah Manit, kutt8wonk ne án8wáan papaume kittinneum, kah papaume wek, menuhketeaush micheme, kah ussish ne án8wáan,
E.7.25 And now, O LORD God, the word that thou hast spoken concerning thy servant, and concerning his house, establish it for ever, and do as thou hast said.

α.7.26 Káh k8wesu[ou]k mishehteauunaj micheme, n8wahettich, JEHOV[Á]H aye[u]teaunit noh umManitt8moh Israel, kah wek kittinneum David menuhketeauunaj ut anaquabean micheme.
E.7.26 And let thy name be magnified for ever, saying, The LORD of hosts is the God over Israel: and let the house of thy servant David be established before thee.

α.7.27 Newutche ken Jehovah ayeuhteaunit umManitt8moh Israel, k8wahteauwáh kittinneum, kussim, kutáyimosh wetu, newajeh kittinneum namehteunk ut wuttahut unnuppeantamunat yeu peantamóonk ut anaquábean.
E.7.27 For thou, O LORD of hosts, God of Israel, hast revealed to thy servant, saying, I will build thee an house: therefore hath thy servant found in his heart to pray this prayer unto thee.

α.7.28 Kah yeuyeu, woi Lord Jehovah, (ken noh Manit, kah kukkutt8wongash wunnamuhkuteyeu8ash, kah kukquoshom yeu wanegik kittinneum)
E.7.28 And now, O Lord GOD, thou art that God, and thy words be true, and thou hast promised this goodness unto thy servant:

α.7.29 Newutche yeuyeu, tapeneash wunnantamunat wek kittinneum, onk woh n[a]gwutteohteau ut anaquabean micheme: newutche ken, woi Lord Jehovah, kussim, kah nashpe k8nanitteaonk kittinn[n]eum wek micheme wunantamunach.
E.7.29 Therefore now let it please thee to bless the house of thy servant, that it may continue for ever before thee: for thou, O Lord GOD, hast spoken it: and with thy blessing let the house of thy servant be blessed for ever.

α.8.1 KAh mahche yeu nnag, nnih, David togkomau Philistiansoh, kah wussohkauuh, kah David neemunum Metheg-Ammah wutch wunnutchegan8óut Philistiansog.
E.8.1 And after this it came to pass that David smote the Philistines, and subdued them: and David took Methegammah out of the hand of the Philistines.

α.8.2 Kah togkomau Moaboh, kah ukkogkohkohwhoh nashpe pemunneat, wuttinuhkonat ohkeit, nashpe neesinash pemunneatonash, ukqutwhosin nah wunnushonáóont, & nashpe pasuk mamusse pemunneat uppomantamunnaóont, neit Moabitsog 8tinneumuneuh David, kah paudtoog mag8ongash.
E.8.2 And he smote Moab, and measured them with a line, casting them down to the ground; even with two lines measured he to put to death, and with one full line to keep alive. And so the Moabites became David's servants, and brought gifts.

α.8.3 Kah wonk David togkomau Hadadezer, wunnaumonuh Rehob, ketass8t ut Zobah, aont wunnompe wonk missinnuminat wussissepoiyeum kishke sepuut Euphrates.
E.8.3 David smote also Hadadezer, the son of Rehob, king of Zobah, as he went to recover his border at the river Euphrates.

α.8.4 Kah David wunneemunnumauuh nequt muttannungkodtash chariotsash, & nesausuk tahshe pasuk88oh horsesoh na8mukqutcheg kah neesnehchage muttannonganogkussuoh ahkeishánutcheh, kah David tummutchottahwhau wame chariotsash, qut wadchanum nequt pasuk88ash chariotsash.
E.8.4 And David took from him a thousand chariots, and seven hundred horsemen, and twenty thousand footmen: and David houghed all the chariot horses, but reserved of them for an hundred chariots.

α.8.5 Kah Syriansog wutch Damaskus paahettit aninnumauónat Hadadezer ketass8t ut Zobah, David nushau wutch Syriansut neesnehchage & neese muttannunganogkussuoh, wosketompuh.
E.8.5 And when the Syrians of Damascus came to succour Hadadezer king of Zobah, David slew of the Syrians two and twenty thousand men.

α.8.6 Neit David ponau wadchanuaénúh ut Syriae Damaskus: kah Syriansog 8tinninneumuneuh David, kah paudtauog mag8ongash: kah Jehovah wadchanau Davidoh uttoh áont.
E.8.6 Then David put garrisons in Syria of Damascus: and the Syrians became servants to David, and brought gifts. And the LORD preserved David whithersoever he went.

α.8.7 Kah David nemunum golde ogqunnegash, nish ohtauwéhetticheh wuttinneumoh Hadadezer, kah uppaudtinnáoash Jerusalem.
E.8.7 And David took the shields of gold that were on the servants of Hadadezer, and brought them to Jerusalem.

α.8.8 Kah wutch Be[r]ah, kah wutch Berothai, ukkeitotanash Haddadezur, ketass8t David nemunum muttae m8cheke brasse.
E.8.8 And from Betah, and from Berothai, cities of Hadadezer, king David took exceeding much brass.

α.8.9 Toi ketass8t ut Hamath, n8tog David togkomau wame wutayeuwehteomoh Hadadézer,
E.8.9 When Toi king of Hamath heard that David had smitten all the host of Hadadezer,

α.8.10 Neit Toi ann8nau Joram wunnàumonuh, en ketass8tamwut Davidut, 8wonkumónat, kah 8nanumónat, newutche ayeuuhkonau Hadadezer, kah wuttogkomuh, (newutche Hadadezer ayeuuhkonop Toi) kah Joram paudto ut wunnutcheganit, silvere wishquash kah golde wishquash, kah brasse wishquash.
E.8.10 Then Toi sent Joram his son unto king David, to salute him, and to bless him, because he had fought against Hadadezer, and smitten him: for Hadadezer had wars with Toi. And Joram brought with him vessels of silver, and vessels of gold, and vessels of brass:

α.8.11 Nish wonk ketass8t David anumauwompash Jehovah, weeche ne silver & gold ne maguk wutch wame wutohtimóineash nish sohkogish.
E.8.11 Which also king David did dedicate unto the LORD, with the silver and gold that he had dedicated of all nations which he subdued;

α.8.12 Wutch Syria, kah wutch Moab, kah wutch wunnaumonuh Ammon, kah wutch Philistiansut, kah wutch Amalek, wutch wussequttahham8ongash Hadadezer wunnaumonuh Rehob ketass8t ut Zobah.
E.8.12 Of Syria, and of Moab, and of the children of Ammon, and of the Philistines, and of Amalek, and of the spoil of Hadadezer, son of Rehob, king of Zobah.

α.8.13 Kah David woweenomukqussu, quashkeit wutch togkomonat Syriansog, ut salte 8nouhkoiyeuut, neg nabo shwosuk adtahshu muttannonganogkussehettit.
E.8.13 And David gat him a name when he returned from smiting of the Syrians in the valley of salt, being eighteen thousand men.

α.8.14 Kah ponau wadchanuaénuh ut Edom, papannuppe wame Edom ponau wadchanuaénúh, kah wame nag ut Edom 8tinninneumuneuh David, kah Lord wadchanau David uttoh áont.
E.8.14 And he put garrisons in Edom; throughout all Edom put he garrisons, and all they of Edom became David's servants. And the LORD preserved David whithersoever he went.

α.8.15 Kah David nanawunau wame Israeloh, kah David ussu wussittum8ongash kah sampwagish en wame missinninnutu.
E.8.15 And David reigned over all Israel; and David executed judgment and justice unto all his people.

α.8.16 Kah Joab wunnaumonuh Zeruiah mugquompoou ayeuteaut, kah Jehósophat wunnaumonuh Ahilud noh mehquontamwaen.
E.8.16 And Joab the son of Zeruiah was over the host; and Jehoshaphat the son of Ahilud was recorder;

α.8.17 Kah Zadok wunnaumonuh Ahitub, kah Ahimelech wunnaumonuh Abiathar, sephausuenuog, kah Seraiah noh wussukwhosuen.
E.8.17 And Zadok the son of Ahitub, and Ahimelech the son of Abiathar, were the priests; and Seraiah was the scribe;

α.8.18 Kah Benaiah wunnaumonuh Jehoiada noh nanawunau Charithitsoh, & Pelethitsoh kah wunnaumonuh David sontimó8og.
E.8.18 And Benaiah the son of Jehoiada was over both the Cherethites and the Pelethites; and David's sons were chief rulers.

α.9.1 KAh David n8wau, sun howan ushqunau ut wekit Saul, onk woh n8womoausue unneh, wutche Jonathan?
E.9.1 And David said, Is there yet any that is left of the house of Saul, that I may shew him kindness for Jonathan's sake?

α.9.2 Kah na mo wutch wekit Saul, wuttinneumin ussowesu Ziba; kah noh wehkomit en Davidut ketass8t wuttinuh, ken Ziba? kah n8wau, nen kittinneum.
E.9.2 And there was of the house of Saul a servant whose name was Ziba. And when they had called him unto David, the king said unto him, Art thou Ziba?  And he said, Thy servant is he.

α.9.3 Kah ketass8t n8wau, sun howan ash na wutapin wutch wekit Saul, onk woh n8womoausue unneh 8womoausuonk God? kah Ziba unnau ketass8toh, Jonathan ash wunnamoniyeu, noh qunnukquesit ut wusseetut.
E.9.3 And the king said, Is there not yet any of the house of Saul, that I may shew the kindness of God unto him? And Ziba said unto the king, Jonathan hath yet a son, which is lame on his feet.

α.9.4 Kah ketass8t wuttinuh, uttoh wutapin? kah Ziba unnau ketass8toh, kusseh, appu wekit Machir wunnaumonuh Ammiel, ut Lodebar.
E.9.4 And the king said unto him, Where is he? And Ziba said unto the king, Behold, he is in the house of Machir, the son of Ammiel, in Lodebar.

α.9.5 Neit ketass8t David ann8team8, kah neemskauau wutch wekit Machir wunnaumonuh Ammiel, wutch Lodebar.
E.9.5 Then king David sent, and fetched him out of the house of Machir, the son of Ammiel, from Lodebar.

α.9.6 Kah Mephibosheth wunnaumonuh Jonathan, wunnaumonuh Saul, paont David penushadtam wuskesuk, kah ukquehtiánumuh, kah David n8wau, Mephibosheth, kah namp8ham, kusseh, kittinneum.
E.9.6 Now when Mephibosheth, the son of Jonathan, the son of Saul, was come unto David, he fell on his face, and did reverence. And David said, Mephibosheth. And he answered, Behold thy servant!

α.9.7 Kah David wuttinuh, ahque wabesish, newutche wunnamuhkut k8womoausue néhesh wutche Jonathan k8sh, kah kenompenumoush wame wutohke Saul k8sh, kah ken pish kummeech petukqunnunk ut nuttableumut nagwutteaeu.
E.9.7 And David said unto him, Fear not: for I will surely shew thee kindness for Jonathan thy father's sake, and will restore thee all the land of Saul thy father; and thou shalt eat bread at my table continually.

α.9.8 Kah nauwaeu kah n8wau, teaguas kittinneum, woh kummoneaiinnet nen netatuppe nupp8 anum?
E.9.8 And he bowed himself, and said, What is thy servant, that thou shouldest look upon such a dead dog as I am?

α.9.9 Neit ketass8t wehkomau Ziba, wuttinneumoh Saul, kah wuttinuh, nuttinnumau wunnaumonuh kussontimom, wame ne wadchiik Saulut, kah wame wek.
E.9.9 Then the king called to Ziba, Saul's servant, and said unto him, I have given unto thy master's son all that pertained to Saul and to all his house.

α.9.10 Newutche ken, kah kenaumonunk, kah kittinneumog pish kutauoneau ohke wutche nagum, kah pish kuppetukodtoh meechummuonk, onk woh kussontimom wunnaumonuh ummeechumumeu: qut Mephibosheth kussontimom wuñaumonuh, pish nagwutteae meech petukqunnunk ut nuttableumut. kah Zibah nabo napanna tohsuoh wunnaumonuh, kah neesnechagkodtoh wuttinneumoh.
E.9.10 Thou therefore, and thy sons, and thy servants, shall till the land for him, and thou shalt bring in the fruits, that thy master's son may have food to eat: but Mephibosheth thy master's son shall eat bread alway at my table. Now Ziba had fifteen sons and twenty servants.

α.9.11 Neit Ziba unnau ketass8toh, neaunak wamé nussontimom ketass8t neanann8nont wuttinneumoh, ne pish wuttussen kittinneum? (Mephibboshéth pish meetsu ut nuttableumut onatuh pasuk8 ketass8t wunnaúmonuh.)
E.9.11 Then said Ziba unto the king, According to all that my lord the king hath commanded his servant, so shall thy servant do. As for Mephibosheth, said the king, he shall eat at my table, as one of the king's sons.

α.9.12 Kah Mephibosheth wunnaumoniésu, noh áhenit Micha, káh wame neg apitcheg wekit Ziba, wuttinneumoh Mephibosheth.
E.9.12 And Mephibosheth had a young son, whose name was Micha. And all that dwelt in the house of Ziba were servants unto Mephibosheth.

α.9.13 Nemekhuh Mephibosheth ayeu Jerusalem: newutche nagwutteáe meetsu wuttableumut ketass8t, kah mo kukquinukqushau.
E.9.13 So Mephibosheth dwelt in Jerusalem: for he did eat continually at the king's table; and was lame on both his feet.

α.10.1 KAh n$nih, mahche yeu, ukketass8tamom wunnaumonuh Ammon nupp8 kah Hanun wunnaumonuh wunnompu nanawunnuómukquoh.
E.10.1 And it came to pass after this, that the king of the children of Ammon died, and Hanun his son reigned in his stead.

α.10.2 Neit David n8wau, n8womoausue enneh Hanun wunnaumonuh Nahash, neane 8shoh womoaúsue nehikqueomp: kah David ann8team8 8wekontamwaheónat wutche 8shoh, nashpe wunnutchéganit wuttinneumoh, & wuttinneúmoh David peyaoh wutohkit wunnaumonuh Ammón.
E.10.2 Then said David, I will shew kindness unto Hanun the son of Nahash, as his father shewed kindness unto me. And David sent to comfort him by the hand of his servants for his father. And David's servants came into the land of the children of Ammon.

α.10.3 Kah wussontimom8uh wunnaumonuh Ammon uñaog Hanunoh wussontimóm8oh: sun David quehtiánumáu k8shoh ut kuskesukqut, wutann8nónat wekontamwáhuwaénuh en kuhhogkat? sunnummatta David teâoge ann8nau wuttinneumoh en kuhhogkat, natinneakontamunat keitotan. kah natauwóhtinat, kah kepuhkónat?
E.10.3 And the princes of the children of Ammon said unto Hanun their lord, Thinkest thou that David doth honour thy father, that he hath sent comforters unto thee? hath not David rather sent his servants unto thee, to search the city, and to spy it out, and to overthrow it?

α.10.4 Newajeh Hanun neemunont wúttinneumoh David, kah púhshe chequodweham 8weeshitt8un8ash, káh wuttummussumauuh wuthogk8un8ash piuhsukq woppésquaóont, kah ummoncheaheouh.
E.10.4 Wherefore Hanun took David's servants, and shaved off the one half of their beards, and cut off their garments in the middle, even to their buttocks, and sent them away.

α.10.5 Aunáhettit Davidoh ann8team8 wunnogskauônat, newutche wosketompaog mishe akodchuog? kah ketass8t n8wau, appék Jericho nô p[e]jeh k8weeshitt8un8oash sonkinit, neit qushkek.
E.10.5 When they told it unto David, he sent to meet them, because the men were greatly ashamed: and the king said, Tarry at Jericho until your beards be grown, and then return.

α.10.6 Kah wunnaumonuh Ammon nauáhéttit aninwog ut anaquabit David, wunnaumonuh Ammon ann8team8og kah ann8náog Syriansoh wutch Beth-[R]ehob, kah Syriansog wutch Zoba, nesnehchage muttanunoganog kussoh ahkéishánitcheh, kah wutch k[é]tass8t Maachah nequt muttannonganog kussuoh wosketompuh[.] kah w[u]tch Ishtob nabo neese muttannongánog kussuoh.
E.10.6 And when the children of Ammon saw that they stank before David, the children of Ammon sent and hired the Syrians of Bethrehob and the Syrians of Zoba, twenty thousand footmen, and of king Maacah a thousand men, and of Ishtob twelve thousand men.

α.10.7 Kah David n8tog, ann8nau Joab, kah wame menuhkésue ayeuhteaénúh.
E.10.7 And when David heard of it, he sent Joab, and all the host of the mighty men.

α.10.8 Kah wunnaumonuh Ammon sohhamwog, kah wunohtóog ayeuwúttuonk, ahhut petutteamuk squontamut, kah wus-Syriansog wutch Zoba, kah wutch Rehobut, kah Ishtobut kah Maachahut, chippeu ut ohteakonit.
E.10.8 And the children of Ammon came out, and put the battle in array at the entering in of the gate: and the Syrians of Zoba, and of Rehob, and Ishtob, and Maacah, were by themselves in the field.

α.10.9 Joab nag* wadtuhquáeu ayeuwuttuonk uppiuhsukuhkongqun ut negonnáe, kah wutt[a]eiyeu, pepenamau wutch wame pepenauutcheg Israelitsog, kah 8nahóuh ayeuuhkonittue Syriansoh.
E.10.9 When Joab saw that the front of the battle was against him before and behind, he chose of all the choice men of Israel, and put them in array against the Syrians:

α.10.10 Kah onkatogeh missinninnúh upponuh wunnutcheganit Abishai wematoh, onk woh 8náshuh ayeuhkônittue wunnaumonuh Ammon
E.10.10 And the rest of the people he delivered into the hand of Abishai his brother, that he might put them in array against the children of Ammon.

α.10.11 Kah n8wau, Syriansog anuúnukkeseumukqueon, kah pish kutanunnumah; qut wunnaumonuh Ammon anuunukkeseumukquean, neit kenonche aninnumoush.
E.10.11 And he said, If the Syrians be too strong for me, then thou shalt help me: but if the children of Ammon be too strong for thee, then I will come and help thee.

α.10.12 Wutt8anatam8k ogquesehtuh wosketompaut, wutche kummissinninneumunónog, kah wutche ukkeitotanash kumManitt8mun, kah Jehovah ussitch uttoh an tapeneog.
E.10.12 Be of good courage, and let us play the men for our people, and for the cities of our God: and the LORD do that which seemeth him good.

α.10.13 Kah Joab pas8tshau, kah missinninnúh neh wetomukqutcheh, en ayeuwuttinneat ayeuuhkone Syriansog: kah nag wussemoog ut anaquabit.
E.10.13 And Joab drew nigh, and the people that were with him, unto the battle against the Syrians: and they fled before him.

α.10.14 Kah wunnaumonuh Ammon nauáhettit Syriansog wussem8og, neit nag wonk wussem8og wutch anaquabit Abishai kah petutteaog otanat: neit Joab qushkeu wutch wunnaumonuh Ammon, kah peyau Jerusalem.
E.10.14 And when the children of Ammon saw that the Syrians were fled, then fled they also before Abishai, and entered into the city. So Joab returned from the children of Ammon, and came to Jerusalem.

α.10.15 Kah Syriansog namohettit neg togkomóog ut anaquabhettit Israel, nag miya[é]og.
E.10.15 And when the Syrians saw that they were smitten before Israel, they gathered themselves together.

α.10.16 Kah Haddarezer ann8team8 kah pas8waog Syriansog neg ogkomayeuutcheg sepuut, kah peyaonog Helam, kah Shobach ummugquomp ut wutayeuwehteomut Hadarezer wunnegonuhkauoh.
E.10.16 And Hadarezer sent, and brought out the Syrians that were beyond the river: and they came to Helam; and Shobach the captain of the host of Hadarezer went before them.

α.10.17 Kah [á]nit David miy[à]nau wame Israeloh, kah qushkodteaog Jordan, kah peyaog Helam: kah wus-Syrianseog wunohtoog ayeuwuttuonk ayeuuhkonittue David, kah wutayeuwuttinnea[u]h.
E.10.17 And when it was told David, he gathered all Israel together, and passed over Jordan, and came to Helam. And the Syrians set themselves in array against David, and fought with him.

α.10.18 Kah Syriansóg wussém8og ut anaquabit David, kah Da[u]id nehtóou, nesausuk tahshe pasuk88ash Syrianse chariotsash, kah yauunchage muttannonganogkussuog nayeumukqutcheg horsesoh, kah togkomau Shobach ummugquompoh ut wutayeuwehteom8óut, noh naut nupuk.
E.10.18 And the Syrians fled before Israel; and David slew the men of seven hundred chariots of the Syrians, and forty thousand horsemen, and smote Shobach the captain of their host, who died there.

α.10.19 Kah wame ketass8tamwog neh wadtinninneumutcheh Hadarezer, naumohettit nag togkomóog ut anaquabit Isr[a]el; wunohkon[á]og Israeloh, kah nah 8tinninneumuhkauóuh: neit Syriansog wabesuog wonk anninnumauónat wunnaumonuh Ammon.
E.10.19 And when all the kings that were servants to Hadarezer saw that they were smitten before Israel, they made peace with Israel, and served them. So the Syrians feared to help the children of Ammon any more.

α.11.1 KAh nnih, kodtum8 mohtshunk, ahquompak ketass8tamwog sohhamwéhettit en ayeuwuttinneat, David ann8nau Joaboh, kah wuttinneumoh weeche, kah wame Israel: kah nag nushaog wunnaumonuh Ammon, kah wéenuhkomwog Rabbah: qut David ash appu ut Jerusalem.
E.11.1 And it came to pass, after the year was expired, at the time when kings go forth to battle, that David sent Joab, and his servants with him, and all Israel; and they destroyed the children of Ammon, and besieged Rabbah. But David tarried still at Jerusalem.

α.11.2 Kah nnih, wanonkquae, David omku wutch wutapinneat, kah pomushau woskechekommuk ketass8t wekit: kah wutch woskechekommuk naau mittamwossissoh kutchissum8oh, kah mittamwossis muttae wunnetu monunneauónat.
E.11.2 And it came to pass in an eveningtide, that David arose from off his bed, and walked upon the roof of the king's house: and from the roof he saw a woman washing herself; and the woman was very beautiful to look upon.

α.11.3 Kah David ann8team8, kah nat8tamwehteau mittamwussissoh, kah pasuk n8wau, sunnummatta yeuoh Bathsheba wuttaunoh Eliam, ummittamwussoh Uriah wut-Hittit?
E.11.3 And David sent and enquired after the woman. And one said, Is not this Bathsheba, the daughter of Eliam, the wife of Uriah the Hittite?

α.11.4 Kah David ann8nau ann8naenúh, kah wunnemunuh, kah noh uppetukauoh, kah 8wehpamuh, (newutche pahkesu wutch ukquissinausuonganit) kah qushkeu en wekit.
E.11.4 And David sent messengers, and took her; and she came in unto him, and he lay with her; for she was purified from her uncleanness: and she returned unto her house.

α.11.5 Kah mittamwossis wompequoou, kah ann8team8 kah unnau Davidoh, & n8wau n8wompequau,
E.11.5 And the woman conceived, and sent and told David, and said, I am with child.

α.11.6 Kah David ann8team8 Joabut, negonshhuash en nuhhogkat Uriah wut-Hittit, kah Joab negonshhuau Uriahoh, en Davidut.
E.11.6 And David sent to Joab, saying, Send me Uriah the Hittite. And Joab sent Uriah to David.

α.11.7 Kah Uriah payóonont Davidoh wunnat8tamauoh, uttoh ániit Joab, kah uttoh aniéhettit missinninnúog, kah uttoh an ayeuwuttuonk wunniyeum8uk.
E.11.7 And when Uriah was come unto him, David demanded of him how Joab did, and how the people did, and how the war prospered.

α.11.8 Kah D[á]vid unnau Uriahoh, monchish en kekit, kah kutchissittaush kusseetash; Kah Uriah sohham wutch ketass8t wekit, kah noh 8ch asuhkongqun meechum wutch ketass8tut.
E.11.8 And David said to Uriah, Go down to thy house, and wash thy feet. And Uriah departed out of the king's house, and there followed him a mess of meat from the king.

α.11.9 Qut Uriah koueu ut squontamut ketass8t wekit, kenugke wame wuttinneumut wussontimomuh, & matta w8msu en wekit.
E.11.9 But Uriah slept at the door of the king's house with all the servants of his lord, and went not down to his house.

α.11.10 Kah áunit David, n8wahettit Uriah matta w8msu en wekit, David unnau Uriahoh, sunnummatta k8m8 wutch kuppomushaonganit? tohwutch matta w8musséas en kekit?
E.11.10 And when they had told David, saying, Uriah went not down unto his house, David said unto Uriah, Camest thou not from thy journey? why then didst thou not go down unto thine house?

α.11.11 Kah Uriah unnau Davidoh, ne Ark, kah Israel, kah Judah appuog wekuóut, & nussontimom Joab, kah wuttinneumoh nussontimom tuppuksinwog ut pohquae ohteakonit sun neit woh nuttom neekit, meetsinneat, kah wuttattamunat, kah n8wehpamónat nummittamwus? neane pomantam, & neane pomantog kukketeahogkou, matta yeu nutussen.
E.11.11 And Uriah said unto David, The ark, and Israel, and Judah, abide in tents; and my lord Joab, and the servants of my lord, are encamped in the open fields; shall I then go into mine house, to eat and to drink, and to lie with my wife? as thou livest, and as thy soul liveth, I will not do this thing.

α.11.12 Kah David unnau Uriah, yeu apsh wonk yeu kesukok, kah saup pish kuttenanumush nohnushash, neit Uriah appu Jerusalem ne kesukok, kah nompohkeik.
E.11.12 And David said to Uriah, Tarry here to day also, and to morrow I will let thee depart. So Uriah abode in Jerusalem that day, and the morrow.

α.11.13 Kah David wehkomont, meetsu kah wuttattam ut anaquabenit, kah ukkogkeussippamweheuh: kah wanonk88k sohham ukkouenat wutapinneat, weeche wuttinneumoh wussontimomoh, qut matta au8 wekit.
E.11.13 And when David had called him, he did eat and drink before him; and he made him drunk: and at even he went out to lie on his bed with the servants of his lord, but went not down to his house.

α.11.14 Kah n[u]ih mohtompog, David wussukhum en Joabut, kah wunnegonshhuon nashpe wunnutcheganit Uriah.
E.11.14 And it came to pass in the morning, that David wrote a letter to Joab, and sent it by the hand of Uriah.

α.11.15 Kah wussukhum ut wussukwhoonganit n8wau, pon Uriah negonumeiyeu adt menuhkag ayeuwuttimuk, kah asuheehtok, onk woh togkomau, kah nup,
E.11.15 And he wrote in the letter, saying, Set ye Uriah in the forefront of the hottest battle, and retire ye from him, that he may be smitten, and die.

α.11.16 Kah n$nih, Joab kuhkinneasit keitotan, kehtimau Uriahoh, en ayeuonganit ne wahteunk menukesuenuog wutapinneau.
E.11.16 And it came to pass, when Joab observed the city, that he assigned Uriah unto a place where he knew that valiant men were.

α.11.17 Kah wosketompaóg ne keitotanat sohhamwog, kah ayeuuhkon8og Joaboh, kah nawhutch wuttinneumoh David penushauh kah Uriah wut-Hittite wonk nup.
E.11.17 And the men of the city went out, and fought with Joab: and there fell some of the people of the servants of David; and Uriah the Hittite died also.

α.11.18 Neit Joab negonshhuau, kah wuttinnon Davidoh wame ne aunag papaume ayeuwuttuonk.
E.11.18 Then Joab sent and told David all the things concerning the war;

α.11.19 Kah meechumuhkonat ann8naenuh n8wau mahche aunchem8hkauont ketass8tamwoh nish aunagish ut ayeuwuttuonganit.
E.11.19 And charged the messenger, saying, When thou hast made an end of telling the matters of the war unto the king,

α.11.20 Kah waapem8uk ummusquanittam8onk ketass8t, unnukquean, tohwaj nene pas8sukomòg keitotan ayeuwutteog? sunnummatta k8wahteauomw8, nag pummuog wutch pummeneutunkanit?
E.11.20 And if so be that the king's wrath arise, and he say unto thee, Wherefore approached ye so nigh unto the city when ye did fight? knew ye not that they would shoot from the wall?

α.11.21 Kah howan togkomont Abimelech wunnaumonuh Jerubesheth, sunnummatta mittumwossis uppenuhkauou[s]sohhoh kodchuhki togguhwonganompsk wutch pummeneutunkanit, newaj nuppuk ut Thebez? tohwutch pas8sukomòg pummeeneutunk? neit n8wash kittinneum Uriah wut-Hittite wonk nupp8i.
E.11.21 Who smote Abimelech the son of Jerubbesheth? did not a woman cast a piece of a millstone upon him from the wall, that he died in Thebez? why went ye nigh the wall? then say thou, Thy servant Uriah the Hittite is dead also.

α.11.22 Neit ann8naen monchu, kah peyau, kah wuttinnon Dávid wame ne Joab waj an[n]8nont.
E.11.22 So the messenger went, and came and shewed David all that Joab had sent him for.

α.11.23 Kah ann8naenin unnau Dávidoh, wun[u]amuhkut wosketompaog nussohkongqunonog, kah nussohwetunkqunonog en ohteuhkonit, kah nukquentamunonup wehque ahhut petutteeamuk ussquont.
E.11.23 And the messenger said unto David, Surely the men prevailed against us, and came out unto us into the field, and we were upon them even unto the entering of the gate.

α.11.24 Kah pepemuwaenuog pummuog wutch pumméneutunkanit, ut kittinneumut kah nawhutch wuttinneumoh ketass8t nupp8h & kittinneum Uriah wutHittite wonk nupp8i.
E.11.24 And the shooters shot from off the wall upon thy servants; and some of the king's servants be dead, and thy servant Uriah the Hittite is dead also.

α.11.25 Neit David unnau ann8naenuh, yeu kuttinnon Joab, ahque yeu matchitch ut kuskesukqut: newutche togkodteg mahtupanau pasuk8 netátupe onkatoge: m8cheku menehketeáush ayeuwuttuonk ayeuhkonittue keitotan, kah kepuhteash, kah kuss8m
E.11.25 Then David said unto the messenger, Thus shalt thou say unto Joab, Let not this thing displease thee, for the sword devoureth one as well as another: make thy battle more strong against the city, and overthrow it: and encourage thou him.

α.11.26 Kah ummittamwussoh [V]riah n8tog wessukoh nupp8i, ma[u]emau wessukeh.
E.11.26 And when the wife of Uriah heard that Uriah her husband was dead, she mourned for her husband.

α.11.27 Kah mahche maumetog, David ann8team8, kah wunneemskauoh en wekit, kah neh 8mittamwossisiinneuh, kah wunnekitteauoh wunnaumonuh: kah David ne asit, ummatantamun Jehovah.
E.11.27 And when the mourning was past, David sent and fetched her to his house, and she became his wife, and bare him a son. But the thing that David had done displeased the LORD.

α.12.1 Kah Jehovah añ8náu Nathanoh en Davidut & uppeyaonuh, kah wuttinuh, na mo neesuog wosketompaog ut pasukquinnu otanat, pasuk wenauwetu onkatog matcheku
E.12.1 And the LORD sent Nathan unto David. And he came unto him, and said unto him, There were two men in one city; the one rich, and the other poor.

α.12.2 Wenauehtuen m8chekadchanau floksoh kah Heardsóh.
E.12.2 The rich man had exceeding many flocks and herds:

α.12.3 Qut matchekuen nont webé pasuk8 squoshimusse Lambsoh, neh kesukkeheonche kah assamoncheh: kah 8weeche kesitteumukquoh, kah weeche wunneechanoh, meech woh nehenwonche ummeetsuonk kah wuttattamwoh nehenwonche 8tattamwaitch, kah seepsin upp8chinnaonut, kah wutogquanumoh wuttaunit.
E.12.3 But the poor man had nothing, save one little ewe lamb, which he had bought and nourished up: and it grew up together with him, and with his children; it did eat of his own meat, and drank of his own cup, and lay in his bosom, and was unto him as a daughter.

α.12.4 Kah pomushaenin peyaonau weenauehtueuh, kah kushpam nemunnumunat nehenwonche ufflokum, kah nehenwonche wutheardum, ukquagwashwehtauonat pomushaenuh neh paâônukqutcheh, qut nemunau matcheku wullambsumoh, kah ukquagwoshwehtauonuh wosketompuh neh pauhonukqutcheh.
E.12.4 And there came a traveller unto the rich man, and he spared to take of his own flock and of his own herd, to dress for the wayfaring man that was come unto him; but took the poor man's lamb, and dressed it for the man that was come to him.

α.12.5 Kah ummusquantam8onk David mishe nashquneau ayeuuhkonittue wosketompaut, kah unnau Nathanoh, pomantog Jehováh wosketomp noh yeu asit, pish wunnamuhkut nup.
E.12.5 And David's anger was greatly kindled against the man; and he said to Nathan, As the LORD liveth, the man that hath done this thing shall surely die:

α.12.6 Kah pish yaue nómpenau lamboh, newutche yeu wutussen, kah newutche matta kitteamonteanittéao.
E.12.6 And he shall restore the lamb fourfold, because he did this thing, and because he had no pity.

α.12.7 Kah Nathan unnau Davidoh, ken noh wosketómp, yeu wussin Jehovah umManitt8mo[h] Israel nussussequnumup ketass8t ut Israel, kah kuppohquohwhununup wutch wunnutcheganit Saul.
E.12.7 And Nathan said to David, Thou art the man. Thus saith the LORD God of Israel, I anointed thee king over Israel, and I delivered thee out of the hand of Saul;

α.12.8 Kha kittinnumauunup kussontimom wek, kussontimom ummittamwussoh en kupp8chenaounat kah kittinnumauunup week Israel, kah Judah, kah ne peásik, woh nano kittinnumuaunup yeu, kah ayeuongash.
E.12.8 And I gave thee thy master's house, and thy master's wives into thy bosom, and gave thee the house of Israel and of Judah; and if that had been too little, I would moreover have given unto thee such and such things.

α.12.9 Tohwutch sekeneaman wutann8team8onk Jehovah, matcheussenat ut anaquabit? kenush Vriah wut-Hittite nashpe togkodteg, kah kenemunum ummittamwussoh k8mittamwossissinneat, kah kenush nashpe wuttogkodteg wunnaumonuh Ammon.
E.12.9 Wherefore hast thou despised the commandment of the LORD, to do evil in his sight? thou hast killed Uriah the Hittite with the sword, and hast taken his wife to be thy wife, and hast slain him with the sword of the children of Ammon.

α.12.10 Newaj yeuyeu, togkodteg matta pish amaemun8g wutch kekit, newutche kussekeneah, kah keneemun ummittamwussoh Vriah k8mittamwossissinneat.
E.12.10 Now therefore the sword shall never depart from thine house; because thou hast despised me, and hast taken the wife of Uriah the Hittite to be thy wife.

α.12.11 Yeu wussin Jehovah, kusseh kutayeuuhkonittue waabenumauosh machuk, wutch nehenwonche kekit, kah pish nuneemun kummittamwussog ut anaquabean, kah pish nuttinnumauonuh ketatteamung, kah noh pish wehpamau kumittamwussoh ut anáquabit nepauzsaut.
E.12.11 Thus saith the LORD, Behold, I will raise up evil against thee out of thine own house, and I will take thy wives before thine eyes, and give them unto thy neighbour, and he shall lie with thy wives in the sight of this sun.

α.12.12 Newutche keme kutussem qut nen yeu pish nutussen, anaquàbhettit wame Israel, kah anaquabit nepauz.
E.12.12 For thou didst it secretly: but I will do this thing before all Israel, and before the sun.

α.12.13 Kah David unnaau Nathánoh nummatcheéneh Jehovah, kah Nathan unnau Davidoh, Jehovah wonk amaunum kummatcheseonk, mátta pish kenupp8h.
E.12.13 And David said unto Nathan, I have sinned against the LORD. And Nathan said unto David, The LORD also hath put away thy sin; thou shalt not die.

α.12.14 Qut newutche náshpe yeu kutusseonk kitt[t]innumau ummatwomoh Jehovah ut toh wáj blasphemahettit, mukkies wonk noh nekit pish wunnamuhkut nup.
E.12.14 Howbeit, because by this deed thou hast given great occasion to the enemies of the LORD to blaspheme, the child also that is born unto thee shall surely die.

α.12.15 Kah Nathan monchu en wekit, kah Jehovah togkomau mukkiesoh, neh Uriah ummittamwussoh néekitteauoncheh Davidoh, kah mo m8cheke mahchinau.
E.12.15 And Nathan departed unto his house. And the LORD struck the child that Uriah's wife bare unto David, and it was very sick.

α.12.16 Newajéh David nanompássumont God wutche mukkies, kah David mat meetsu, kah petutteau, kah sepsin wompane ohkeit.
E.12.16 David therefore besought God for the child; and David fasted, and went in, and lay all night upon the earth.

α.12.17 Kah Eldersoh wekit nep8og, wutáonouh, wutómohkinonaóónt wutch ohkeit qut mattá wutussein, asuh matta 8wehpumuh.
E.12.17 And the elders of his house arose, and went to him, to raise him up from the earth: but he would not, neither did he eat bread with them.

α.12.18 Kah n$nih, nesausuk adtahshikquinogkok mukkies nup: kah wuttinneumoh David, wabesuog unnonat, mukkies nupp8, newutche n8waog, kusseh ash pamontog mukkies, nukken8nounonup, kah matta n8tam8 n8wadtauatonkqussuonganin, uttoh woh wuttin neit wuttamanatamun, uñogkut mukkies nupp8i.
E.12.18 And it came to pass on the seventh day, that the child died. And the servants of David feared to tell him that the child was dead: for they said, Behold, while the child was yet alive, we spake unto him, and he would not hearken unto our voice: how will he then vex himself, if we tell him that the child is dead?

α.12.19 Qut David nag* wuttinneumoh kehkemwauh, David wáhteau mukkies nup, newajeh David unnont wuttinneumoh, mukk[ié]si nupp8i? kah n8waog nupp8i.
E.12.19 But when David saw that his servants whispered, David perceived that the child was dead: therefore David said unto his servants, Is the child dead? And they said, He is dead.

α.12.20 Neit David neepau wutch ohkekontu, kah kutchissumo kah sussequeu, kah 8s8wunnum wuthogk8, kah petutteau wekit Jehovah, kah wowussumau, kah peyau nehenwonché wekit, kah ann8teamit ponamwog petukqunneg anaquabit kah meetsu.
E.12.20 Then David arose from the earth, and washed, and anointed himself, and changed his apparel, and came into the house of the LORD, and worshipped: then he came to his own house; and when he required, they set bread before him, and he did eat.

α.12.21 Neit wuttinneumoh unnuk, teaguas yeu asean? matta kummeetsup, kah kummauem8 mukkies ash pamontog, qut mukkies napuk, kutomohkem, kah kummeech petukqunnunk.
E.12.21 Then said his servants unto him, What thing is this that thou hast done? thou didst fast and weep for the child, while it was alive; but when the child was dead, thou didst rise and eat bread.

α.12.22 Kah n8wau, mukkies ash pamontog, mat nummeétseup, kah nummop, newutche nussip, hówan woh 8wauwon paguódche God nukkitteamonteanumuk, mukkies woh pomantam.
E.12.22 And he said, While the child was yet alive, I fasted and wept: for I said, Who can tell whether GOD will be gracious to me, that the child may live?

α.12.23 Qut yeuyeu nupp8i, tóhwaj woh mat metsu? sun woh wonk nukquehchuan? pish nutom wuhhogkat noh matta pish qushku en nuhhogkat.
E.12.23 But now he is dead, wherefore should I fast? can I bring him back again? I shall go to him, but he shall not return to me.

α.12.24 Kah David tapheau Bathshebahoh ummittamwussoh kah uppetutteauonuh, káh 8wehpamuh, káh wunnaumoniéu, kah wuttissowenuh Solomon, kah Jeh[ó]vah 8womonuh.
E.12.24 And David comforted Bathsheba his wife, and went in unto her, and lay with her: and she bare a son, and he called his name Solomon: and the LORD loved him.

α.12.25 Kah ann8team8 nashpe wunnutcheg Nathan quoshodtumwáen, kah wuttissowenuh Jedidiah, newutche Jehovah.
E.12.25 And he sent by the hand of Nathan the prophet; and he called his name Jedidiah, because of the LORD.

α.12.26 Kah Joab ayeuuhkontam Rabbah ut kenugke wunnaumonuh Ammon, kah sohkom ketass8tamwe otan.
E.12.26 And Joab fought against Rabbah of the children of Ammon, and took the royal city.

α.12.27 Kah Joab ann8nau ann8na[e]nuh en Davidut kah n8wau, nutayeuuhk[o]ntam Rabbah, kah nussohkom nippe keitotan.
E.12.27 And Joab sent messengers to David, and said, I have fought against Rabbah, and have taken the city of waters.

α.12.28 Newutche yeuyeu miyan onkatogig missinninnuog, kah ayeuuhkone tuppuksinn8wontash keitotan, kah sohkash: ishkont nussohkom otan, kah uss8wetamun ne as8wesee.
E.12.28 Now therefore gather the rest of the people together, and encamp against the city, and take it: lest I take the city, and it be called after my name.

α.12.29 Kah David mianau wáme missinninnuh, kah au Rabbah, kah wutayeuuhkontamun, kah wussohkomun.
E.12.29 And David gathered all the people together, and went to Rabbah, and fought against it, and took it.

α.12.30 Kah amaunum ketass8t wutchetuhquab wutch uppuhkukqut (neantuhkequog golde tallent, kah nashpe mishoadtue qussukquanash) kah ponumau ut uppuhkukqut David, & sohh8wutau sequttahham8ongash ne ut ótanat monatash.
E.12.30 And he took their king's crown from off his head, the weight whereof was a talent of gold with the precious stones: and it was set on David's head. And he brought forth the spoil of the city in great abundance.

α.12.31 Kah sohh8wunau missinninnuh neh na apinitcheh, kah wutagwapeheuh, pàss[is]waonganit, kah agwe missehche Harrowsut, kah agwe missehchue togkunganehtu, kah uppannupwushheonuh Brikkelnut, & yeu wuttinteauun wame wutotanash wunnaumonuh Ammon, neit David kah wame missinninnuog, qushkeog en Jerusalem$ut.
E.12.31 And he brought forth the people that were therein, and put them under saws, and under harrows of iron, and under axes of iron, and made them pass through the brick-kiln: and thus did he unto all the cities of the children of Ammon. So David and all the people returned unto Jerusalem.

α.13.1 KAh nnih mahche yeu nnag, Absolom wunnaumonuh David wunneetuoh weetompasu, noh as8wenit Tamar, kah Am[n]on wunnaumonuh David 8womonuh.
E.13.1 And it came to pass after this, that Absalom the son of David had a fair sister, whose name was Tamar; and Amnon the son of David loved her.

α.13.2 Kah Amnon m8cheke wuttamepunau, kah mahchinau wetompasit Tamaroh, newutche noh penomp, kah Amnon unnantam siógkod toh nuttinheónat.
E.13.2 And Amnon was so vexed, that he fell sick for his sister Tamar; for she was a virgin; and Amnon thought it hard for him to do anything to her.

α.13.3 Qut Amnon 8weetompoou noh as8wesit Jonadab, wunnaumonuh Shimeah, David weematoh: kah Jonadab, ahche nehtôompuwissuénú8.
E.13.3 But Amnon had a friend, whose name was Jonadab, the son of Shimeah David's brother: and Jonadab was a very subtil man.

α.13.4 Kah wuttinuh, tohwutch ken, ketass8t wunnaumonieu kuhhog, kuttôn8us asekesukokish? sunnummatta woh kutuss8un? kah Amnon wuttinuh, n8womon Tamar neemat Absolom weetompasu.
E.13.4 And he said unto him, Why art thou, being the king's son, lean from day to day? wilt thou not tell me? And Amnon said unto him, I love Tamar, my brother Absalom's sister.

α.13.5 Kah Jonadab wuttinuh, seepsish kutapinneat, kah mahchinah kuhhog, kah k8sh nonche nógquean, us, k8wehquet[u]moush, neetompas Tamar peyonch, kah assamukquttêi, kah wunnehteauitch meetsuonk ut anaquabeh, onk woh nunnaumun, kah woh nummeechin ut wunnutcheganit.
E.13.5 And Jonadab said unto him, Lay thee down on thy bed, and make thyself sick: and when thy father cometh to see thee, say unto him, I pray thee, let my sister Tamar come, and give me meat, and dress the meat in my sight, that I may see it, and eat it at her hand.

α.13.6 Neit Amnon sepsin, kah mahchinâheau wuhhogkuh, & ketass8t paont wunnauónat, Amnon unnau ketass8toh, k8wehquetumoush, Tamar neetompas peyonch, kah ayimiitch neesinash petukqunegash, ut anaquabeh, onk woh num̃eechin wutch wunnutcheganit
E.13.6 So Amnon lay down, and made himself sick: and when the king was come to see him, Amnon said unto the king, I pray thee, let Tamar my sister come, and make me a couple of cakes in my sight, that I may eat at her hand.

α.13.7 Neit David negon8au en wekit, en Tamarut, n8wau, yeuyeu monch en ketompas Amnon wekit, kah nadtupweh.
E.13.7 Then David sent home to Tamar, saying, Go now to thy brother Amnon's house, and dress him meat.

α.13.8 Neit Tamar au wekit wetompasu Amnonoh (kah noh seepsin) kah noh neemunum n8khik, kah wuttuttuppunnumun, kah petukqunnunganehteau ut anaquabit, kah apwau.
E.13.8 So Tamar went to her brother Amnon's house; and he was laid down. And she took flour, and kneaded it, and made cakes in his sight, and did bake the cakes.

α.13.9 Kah nemunau panoh, kah wussokanumun ut anaquabit, qut wussekeneamun meechinat: kah Amnon n8wau, sohhom8k wame wutch anaquabeh, kah wame sohhamwog wutch anaquabit.
E.13.9 And she took a pan, and poured them out before him; but he refused to eat. And Amnon said, Have out all men from me. And they went out every man from him.

α.13.10 Kah Amnon [u]nnau Tamaroh padtoush meetsuonk en chamberut, onk woh nummechin ut kenutcheganit: kah Tamar nemunum petukqunnegash nish kesteunkish: kah uppaudtauunash chamberut, en weetompasuut Amnonut.
E.13.10 And Amnon said unto Tamar, Bring the meat into the chamber, that I may eat of thine hand. And Tamar took the cakes which she had made, and brought them into the chamber to Amnon her brother.

α.13.11 Kah nish paudtauont ummechinat, wuttohqunoh, kah wuttinuh, peyaush k8wehpamsh, neetompas.
E.13.11 And when she had brought them unto him to eat, he took hold of her, and said unto her, Come lie with me, my sister.

α.13.12 Kah wunnamp8hamauoh, Matta neetompas ahque chétimeh, newutche matta woh ne nano ut Israel: usséhkon yeu as8tuonk.
E.13.12 And she answered him, Nay, my brother, do not force me; for no such thing ought to be done in Israel: do not thou this folly.

α.13.13 Kah nen woh nutaontamun nutakodchuonk? kah ken, pish pasuk mattammagwog ut Israel, newutche yeuyeu, k8wehquetumoush ken8s ketass8t, newutche matta nukkushpóg8 wutch kuhhogkat.
E.13.13 And I, whither shall I cause my shame to go? and as for thee, thou shalt be as one of the fools in Israel. Now therefore, I pray thee, speak unto the king; for he will not withhold me from thee.

α.13.14 Qut matta n8tam8 8wadtauatonkqussuonk, qut ánuwúnuhkeseumont, wutchekéheuh, 8wehpomuh.
E.13.14 Howbeit he would not hearken unto her voice: but, being stronger than she, forced her, and lay with her.

α.13.15 Neit Amnon umm8cheke sekeneauoh, newaj wussekeneauáonk ne an sekeneauont ánue missi onk ne womonáonk ne [á]n womonomp, kah Amnon wuttinuh, neepaush, monchish.
E.13.15 Then Amnon hated her exceedingly; so that the hatred wherewith he hated her was greater than the love wherewith he had loved her. And Amnon said unto her, Arise, be gone.

α.13.16 Kah wuttinuh, matta ne teag wutch, yeu kummatchenehuonk kummoncheahinneat, anue missi onk ne anhean, qut matta wunn8tauoh.
E.13.16 And she said unto him, There is no cause: this evil in sending me away is greater than the other that thou didst unto me. But he would not hearken unto her.

α.13.17 Neit wehkomau wuttineumoh, neh wadtinninneumitcheh, kah n8wau, yeuoh sohh8wus, kah asuhkaue kuppahhash squont.
E.13.17 Then he called his servant that ministered unto him, and said, Put now this woman out from me, and bolt the door after her.

α.13.18 Kah hogk88 m8chekenai monák, newutche nish hogk8ongash, ketass8t wuttaunoh, neg peenompáitcheg, wuthogquinneaoash. Neit wuttinneumoh wussohh8wunuh, kah asuhkaue kuppohham squont.
E.13.18 And she had a garment of divers colours upon her: for with such robes were the king's daughters that were virgins apparelled. Then his servant brought her out, and bolted the door after her.

α.13.19 Kah Tamar ponam pukquee uppuhkukqut káh nehnekikom m8chekenag hogk8ónk ne agquit kah ponam wunnutchegash uppuhkukqut, kah monchu kah mau.
E.13.19 And Tamar put ashes on her head, and rent her garment of divers colours that was on her, and laid her hand on her head, and went on crying.

α.13.20 Kah Absolom weetompasu wuttugquoh Amnon ketompás sun k8weetomoas? qut yeuyeu chequnapsh neetómpas, noh keetompas, ahque yeu tohhentupantash, nemehkuh Tamar appu kah nussiyeu wekit weetompasu A[h]solomoh.
E.13.20 And Absalom her brother said unto her, Hath Amnon thy brother been with thee? but hold now thy peace, my sister: he is thy brother; regard not this thing. So Tamar remained desolate in her brother Absalom's house.

α.13.21 Qut ketass8t David n8tog wame yeush m8cheke musquantam.
E.13.21 But when king David heard of all these things, he was very wroth.

α.13.22 Kah Absolom matta keket8kauau8 Amnonoh asuh wanegik asuh machuk: newutche Absolom sekenauau Amnonoh, newutche chekehéau wétompasu Támaroh.
E.13.22 And Absalom spake unto his brother Amnon neither good nor bad: for Absalom hated Amnon, because he had forced his sister Tamar.

α.13.23 Kah nnih mahche neese kodtum8k, Absolom m8swoog wutsheepsumoh ut Baal-Hazor, ne kishke Ephraim: kah Absolom wehkomau wame ketass8t wunnaumonuh
E.13.23 And it came to pass after two full years, that Absalom had sheepshearers in Baalhazor, which is beside Ephraim: and Absalom invited all the king's sons.

α.13.24 Kah Absolom peyaonau ketass8toh, kah n8wau, kusseh yeuyeu kittinneum m8sumauau wut-sheepsumoh: k8wehquetumoush, ketass8t káh wuttinneumoh weechauonch kittinneumoh.
E.13.24 And Absalom came to the king, and said, Behold now, thy servant hath sheepshearers; let the king, I beseech thee, and his servants go with thy servant.

α.13.25 Kah ketass8t unnau Absolomoh, matta nunnaumon ahque wame monchetuh, ishkont k8saumhenumun, kah wutchetimuh, qut matta monchu, qut 8nanumuh.
E.13.25 And the king said to Absalom, Nay, my son, let us not all now go, lest we be chargeable unto thee. And he pressed him: howbeit he would not go, but blessed him.

α.13.26 Neit Absolom n8wau, matta nan8g, k8wehquetumoush neemat Amnon wechogqutteuh? kah ketass8t wuttinuh, tohwutch woh weechógquéan?
E.13.26 Then said Absalom, If not, I pray thee, let my brother Amnon go with us. And the king said unto him, Why should he go with thee?

α.13.27 Qut Absolom wutchetimuh, kah unnanumau Amnonoh, & wame ketass8t wunnaumonuh 8weechauunnaóont.
E.13.27 But Absalom pressed him, that he let Amnon and all the king's sons go with him.

α.13.28 Kah Absolom áann8nóp wuttinneumoh, n8wop, kuhkinneasek yeuyeu Amnon wuttah weekontam8m8uk nashpe wine, kah unnunóg, togkomók Amnon, neit nush8k, ahque wabesek, sunnummatta nen kutann8nómw8? wut8anatam8k kah menuhkesék.
E.13.28 Now Absalom had commanded his servants, saying, Mark ye now when Amnon's heart is merry with wine, and when I say unto you, Smite Amnon; then kill him, fear not: have not I commanded you? be courageous, and be valiant.

α.13.29 Kah wuttinneumoh Absolom wuttinheonéau Amnonoh neánann8nont Absolom, kah wame ketass8t wunnaumonuh neepouh, kah nishnoh pasuk quenappu um-mulumoh, ah wussem8og.
E.13.29 And the servants of Absalom did unto Amnon as Absalom had commanded. Then all the king's sons arose, and every man gat him up upon his mule, and fled.

α.13.30 Kah nnih, ash aphettit mayut, unaunchem8kaonk peyaonuk David, n8won, Absolom nushau wame wunnaumonuh ketass8t, kah matta pasuk usquehtahwhóun.
E.13.30 And it came to pass, while they were in the way, that tidings came to David, saying, Absalom hath slain all the king's sons, and there is not one of them left.

α.13.31 Neit ketass8t nepau, kah nehneekukom wuthogk8unash, kah ohkekontu sepsin; kah wame wuttinneumoh noh kishke neepouh, wuthogk8unoash nehneekuhkausu.
E.13.31 Then the king arose, and tare his garments, and lay on the earth; and all his servants stood by with their clothes rent.

α.13.32 Kah Jonadab wunnaumonuh Shimeah wematoh David, namp8ham, ahque ketass8t unnantaj nushóg wame wuskenuog ketass8t wunnaumonuh, newutche webe Amnon nupp8i, newutche wutch wutt8nut Absolom, yeu pakodtantamunáh wutch na kesukok chekehéonit weetompasu Tamaroh.
E.13.32 And Jonadab, the son of Shimeah David's brother, answered and said, Let not my lord suppose that they have slain all the young men the king's sons; for Amnon only is dead: for by the appointment of Absalom this hath been determined from the day that he forced his sister Tamar.

α.13.33 Newutch nussontimom ketass8t ahque yeu neemunitch en wuttahhut unnantamunat wame ketass8t wunnaumonuh nupp88k: newutche webe Amnon nupp8i.
E.13.33 Now therefore let not my lord the king take the thing to his heart, to think that all the king's sons are dead: for Amnon only is dead.

α.13.34 Qut Absolom wusseemo: kah wusken askwheteadt tahshinum wuskesukquash, kah natauwompu, kah kusseh monaog missinninnuog peyaog, kishkontue mayut uppusquanit.
E.13.34 But Absalom fled. And the young man that kept the watch lifted up his eyes, and looked, and, behold, there came much people by the way of the hill side behind him.

α.13.35 Kah Jonadab unnau ketass8tamwoh, kusseh, wunnaumonuh ketass8t peyaoh, ne an8wop kittinneum nnih.
E.13.35 And Jonadab said unto the king, Behold, the king's sons come: as thy servant said, so it is.

α.13.36 Kah nnih, quenau mahche ket8hkont kusseh, wunnaumonuh ketass8t peyaoh, kah mishont8wáog kah mauog, kah ketass8t, kah wame wuttinneumoh m8cheke mauog.
E.13.36 And it came to pass, as soon as he had made an end of speaking, that, behold, the king's sons came, and lifted up their voice and wept: and the king also and all his servants wept very sore.

α.13.37 Qut Absolom wusseemo, kah au Talmai wunnaumonuh Ammihud ketass8[r] ut Gesher. Kah avid asekesukokish mauémau wunnaumonuh.
E.13.37 But Absalom fled, and went to Talmai, the son of Ammihud, king of Geshur. And David mourned for his son every day.

α.13.38 Neit Absolom wusseemo, kah au Gesher, kah na wuttayin nishwe kodtumwae.
E.13.38 So Absalom fled, and went to Geshur, and was there three years.

α.13.39 Kah wuttah ketass8t David, kodtanumau sohhamunat en Absolomut: newutche tapheau papaume Amnon, mahche nupuk.
E.13.39 And the soul of king David longed to go forth unto Absalom: for he was comforted concerning Amnon, seeing he was dead.

α.14.1 KAh Joab wunnaumonuh Zerviah wahteo wuttah ketass8t nogqueyeu8 Absolomut.
E.14.1 Now Joab the son of Zeruiah perceived that the king's heart was toward Absalom.

α.14.2 Kah Joab ann8teám8 en Tekoa, kah na wuss8wónat waantamwe mittamwossis, kah wuttinuh, k8wehquetumoush ogquesish maumuttamwu mittamwussissit, kah hogqush yeuyeu maumuttamwe hogk8onk, kah ahque susséqush pumme, qut onatuhéyeuish sepe maumuttamwe mittamwussisut wutch nup:
E.14.2 And Joab sent to Tekoah, and fetched thence a wise woman, and said unto her, I pray thee, feign thyself to be a mourner, and put on now mourning apparel, and anoint not thyself with oil, but be as a woman that had a long time mourned for the dead:

α.14.3 Kah peyaaus ketass8t, kah yeu us: neit Joab upponamauuh kutt8wongash wutt8nut,
E.14.3 And come to the king, and speak on this manner unto him. So Joab put the words in her mouth.

α.14.4 Kah Tekoae mitamwossis kón8nont ketass8tamwoh, penushadtam wuskesuk en ohkekontu, kah quttianumwe ussu, kah n8wau, aninnumah woi ketass8t.
E.14.4 And when the woman of Tekoah spake to the king, she fell on her face to the ground, and did obeisance, and said, Help, O king.

α.14.5 Kah ketass8t wuttinuh, toh kutushpinam? kah noh namp8ham, nen wunnamuhkut sekousq: kah nasuki nupp8i.
E.14.5 And the king said unto her, What aileth thee? And she answered, I am indeed a widow woman, and mine husband is dead.

α.14.6 Kah kittinneum neesiinnaimóniyau, kah nag neeswe mekonittuog ut ohteakonit, kah wanne wutappein kenáhamwaen, qut pasuk togkomau onkatogeh kah wunnushoh.
E.14.6 And thy handmaid had two sons, and they two strove together in the field, and there was none to part them, but the one smote the other, and slew him.

α.14.7 Kah kusséh mamusse teashiyeu8onk wutayeuuhkonittue waabehtunkqun kittinneum, kah n8waog magush noh nashunt wematoh, onk nunnushóun, wutche uppomantamóonk wematoh neh nashoncheh, & wonk nunnushómun noh nompenuk, kah nemehkuhnag onthamwog nummokuss8m, ne sequttahhamuk, kah matta sequnnumauwo8og nasukeh, wesuonk asuh noh sequttahwhut ut ohkeit.
E.14.7 And, behold, the whole family is risen against thine handmaid, and they said, Deliver him that smote his brother, that we may kill him, for the life of his brother whom he slew; and we will destroy the heir also: and so they shall quench my coal which is left, and shall not leave to my husband neither name nor remainder upon the earth.

α.14.8 Kah ketass8t unnau mittamwussisoh, âush kekit, kah pish nummeechumehteam papaume ken.
E.14.8 And the king said unto the woman, Go to thine house, and I will give charge concerning thee.

α.14.9 Kah Tekoae mittamwossis unnau ketass8tamwoh, nussontimom, woi ketá[s]s8t, matcheusséonk ohtauutti, kah n8sh wekit, kah ketass8t kah wutappuonk mat matcheseongannunn8utch.
E.14.9 And the woman of Tekoah said unto the king, My lord, O king, the iniquity be on me, and on my father's house: and the king and his throne be guiltless.

α.14.10 Kah ketass8t n8wau, howan teaguas unnukquean paudtah, kah matta pish wonk kummissunuk8h.
E.14.10 And the king said, Whoever saith ought unto thee, bring him to me, and he shall not touch thee any more.

α.14.11 Kah neit n8wau, k8wehquetumoush ketass8t mequanumonch Jehovah kum-Manitt8m, matta kutten[à]num8un an8tantog wusqueheonk howan onkatog paguanonat, ishkont nag nushaog nunnaumonuh, kah n8wau, pomantog Jehovah matta pish pasuk ummeesunk kenaumon penushano en ohkeit.
E.14.11 Then said she, I pray thee, let the king remember the LORD thy God, that thou wouldest not suffer the revengers of blood to destroy any more, lest they destroy my son. And he said, As the LORD liveth, there shall not one hair of thy son fall to the earth.

α.14.12 Neit mittamwossis n8wau, mittamwossisse kittinneum pasuk kutt8wonk unnonch nussontimomoh ketass8toh, kah n8wau, ket8kash.
E.14.12 Then the woman said, Let thine handmaid, I pray thee, speak one word unto my lord the king. And he said, Say on.

α.14.13 Kah mittamwossis n8wau, neit tohwutch ayeuuhkonittue ne unnanumont ketass8t ummissinninnúmoh God? newutche ketass8t yeu wussin, onatuh howan matchesit, newutche ketass8t matta wonk neemskauóou neh ama8hkauómukeh.
E.14.13 And the woman said, Wherefore then hast thou thought such a thing against the people of God? for the king doth speak this thing as one which is faulty, in that the king doth not fetch home again his banished.

α.14.14 Newutche mos kenupmun, kah nutogquenéunkqussimun nippeut ne quoúhteamuk ut ohkekontu, ne matta wonk woh mogkinnum8muk: asuh matta God ésheunánumóou howane, qut onch natwontam uttoh woh waj, neh ama8hkauutcheh, matta micheme áma8kauónat.
E.14.14 For we must needs die, and are as water spilt on the ground, which cannot be gathered up again; neither doth God respect any person: yet doth he devise means, that his banished be not expelled from him.

α.14.15 Newaj yeuyeu n8che peyom yeu nuttinnônat nussontimom ketass8t, newutche missinninnúog n8wabewunuk, & kittinneum n8wop, eyeu nukkinn8n ketass8t, paguodche ketass8t pish ussu 8wehquetum8onk wuttinneumoh.
E.14.15 Now therefore that I am come to speak of this thing unto my lord the king, it is because the people have made me afraid: and thy handmaid said, I will now speak unto the king; it may be that the king will perform the request of his handmaid.

α.14.16 Newutche ketass8t mos n8tam uppohquohwunónat wuttinneumoh wutch wunnutcheganit wosketomp noh kodnushikqu[e]h, kah weeche nunnaumon, wutch wutohtoonganit God.
E.14.16 For the king will hear, to deliver his handmaid out of the hand of the man that would destroy me and my son together out of the inheritance of God.

α.14.17 Neit kittinneum n8wop, ukkutt8wonk nussontimom ketass8t mos tapeneunkquot, newutche onatuh wutangelumoh God, ne wuttinniin nussontimom ketass8t, wahteauunat wanegik kah machuk, newajeh Jehovah kum$Manitt8m pish weetomukquean
E.14.17 Then thine handmaid said, The word of my lord the king shall now be comfortable: for as an angel of God, so is my lord the king to discern good and bad: therefore the LORD thy God will be with thee.

α.14.18 Neit ketass8t namp8ham kah unnau mittamwussisoh, k8wehquetumoush ahque adtohtah ne teaguas, ne mos nat8tomauun? kah mittamwossis n8wau, eyeu nussontimom ketass8t, ket8kaj.
E.14.18 Then the king answered and said unto the woman, Hide not from me, I pray thee, the thing that I shall ask thee. And the woman said, Let my lord the king now speak.

α.14.19 Kah ketass8t n8wau, sunnummatta wunnutcheg Joab k8weetomuk8h wame yeu$ut? kah mittamwossis namp8ham kah n8wau, pomantog kukketeahogkou, nussontimom ketass8t, matta woh howan ukquinnuppu en unninnohkôunniyeu asuh menadcheanniyeu, wutch ne teaguasinit nussontimom ketass8t ne an8wadt: newutche kittinneum Joab nuttukqun, kah noh ponam wame yeush kutt8wōgash ut wutt8nut kittiñeum
E.14.19 And the king said, Is not the hand of Joab with thee in all this?  And the woman answered and said, As thy soul liveth, my lord the king, none can turn to the right hand or to the left from ought that my lord the king hath spoken: for thy servant Joab, he bade me, and he put all these words in the mouth of thine handmaid:

α.14.20 Quinnuppnumunat yeu unn8wae kutt8wonk kittinneum Joab yeu wutussen, kah nussontimom waantam, neaunak 8waantam8onk wutangelumoh God, wahteauunat wame teanteaquassinish ut ohkeit.
E.14.20 To fetch about this form of speech hath thy servant Joab done this thing: and my lord is wise, according to the wisdom of an angel of God, to know all things that are in the earth.

α.14.21 Kah ketass8t unnau Joaboh, kusseh yeuyeu, yeu nummahche ussen, newutche monchish pas8 wonk wusken Absolom.
E.14.21 And the king said unto Joab, Behold now, I have done this thing: go therefore, bring the young man Absalom again.

α.14.22 Kah Joab penushadtam wuskesuk en ohkekontu, kah nauwaeu, kah tabuttantamauau ketass8tamwoh, kah Joab n8wau, yeu kesukok kittinneum wahteau, nunnamteóh kitteamonteanittuonk ut kuskesukqut nussontimom woi ketass8t, newutche ketass8t wutussen ne 8wehquetumóonk wuttinneumoh:
E.14.22 And Joab fell to the ground on his face, and bowed himself, and thanked the king: and Joab said, To day thy servant knoweth that I have found grace in thy sight, my lord, O king, in that the king hath fulfilled the request of his servant.

α.14.23 Neit Joab neepau, kah au Gesher, kah pas8au Absolomoh Jerusal[a]m.
E.14.23 So Joab arose and went to Geshur, and brought Absalom to Jerusalem.

α.14.24 Kah ketass8t n8wau, quinnupitch en nehenwonche wekit, kah matta naum8itch nuskesuk, neit Absolom quinnuppu en nehenwonche wekit, kah matta naum8 ketass8t wuskesuk.
E.14.24 And the king said, Let him turn to his own house, and let him not see my face. So Absalom returned to his own house, and saw not the king's face.

α.14.25 Qut ut wame Israel, wanne wonk howan ne in waeenomôun neane Absolomut wutche 8netuonk; wutch agwe wusseetut pajeh kodtontupont wanne cheneunkqussu.
E.14.25 But in all Israel there was none to be so much praised as Absalom for his beauty: from the sole of his foot even to the crown of his head there was no blemish in him.

α.14.26 Kah m8suk (newutche asekodtum8gish m8sum, newutch wuttuhkekqhukqun newaj m8suk) quttompagh8tau ummeesunk nese pasuk8e sheklesash, neaunag ketass8t ukquttompágh8tegash.
E.14.26 And when he polled his head, (for it was at every year's end that he polled it: because the hair was heavy on him, therefore he polled it:) he weighed the hair of his head at two hundred shekels after the king's weight.

α.14.27 Kah ut Absolomut na wuttit neekinneau, nishuog wunnamoniinneunk, kah pasuk wuttaunin, noh ahenit Tamar: noh mo wunnetue mittamwossis.
E.14.27 And unto Absalom there were born three sons, and one daughter, whose name was Tamar: she was a woman of a fair countenance.

α.14.28 Nemehkuh Absolom ayeu neese kodtumwae Jerusalem, kah matta naum8 ketass8t wuskesuk.
E.14.28 So Absalom dwelt two full years in Jerusalem, and saw not the king's face.

α.14.29 Newajeh Absolom ann8teamwit Joab, onk woh wutann8nuh en keta[ss]8tamut, qut matta uppeyaunuh, kah wonk ann8teamwit nahohtoeu, matta peyoou.
E.14.29 Therefore Absalom sent for Joab, to have sent him to the king; but he would not come to him: and when he sent again the second time, he would not come.

α.14.30 Newajeh unnont wuttinneumoh, naum8k wutohteuk Joab paswohteau nutayeuonganit, kah na ohteau upbarlyhumash, monchek chikkohsum8k: & wuttinneumoh Absolom chikohsumwog ohteuk.
E.14.30 Therefore he said unto his servants, See, Joab's field is near mine, and he hath barley there; go and set it on fire. And Absalom's servants set the field on fire.

α.14.31 Neit Joab nepau, kah peyaonau Absolom wekit kah wuttinuh, tohwaj kittinneumog chikohsumwehettit nutohteuk?
E.14.31 Then Joab arose, and came to Absalom unto his house, and said unto him, Wherefore have thy servants set my field on fire?

α.14.32 Kah Absolom namp8hamauau Joaboh, kusseh kutannonup n8wop, peyaush, onk woh kutan[n]8nsh en ketass8tamut, ussinneat towaj w8m Geshur? an wunnegik na ash nutayinneat: newutche yuyeu naumutti ketass8t wuskesuk, kah matcheseonk ohtauón nushikquttei.
E.14.32 And Absalom answered Joab, Behold, I sent unto thee, saying, Come hither, that I may send thee to the king, to say, Wherefore am I come from Geshur? it had been good for me to have been there still: now therefore let me see the king's face; and if there be any iniquity in me, let him kill me.

α.14.33 Neit Joab peyaonau ketass8toh, kah wuttinnon, kah wehkomont Absolomoh, peyaonau ketass8tamwoh, kah nauwaeu, wuskesuk en ohkekontu anaquabit ketass8t, kah ketass8t chipwutt8napwau Absolomoh.
E.14.33 So Joab came to the king, and told him: and when he had called for Absalom, he came to the king, and bowed himself on his face to the ground before the king: and the king kissed Absalom.

α.15.1 KAh nnih, yeu mahche nnag, Absolom quaquoshwunnum chariotsash, kah horsesoh, kah napanna tahshinchagkussuoh wosketompuh wunnegonae quogqueinneat.
E.15.1 And it came to pass after this, that Absalom prepared him chariots and horses, and fifty men to run before him.

α.15.2 Kah Absolom nompoaeu t8hku, kah neepau kishke squontame mayut, kah nnih, howan wadchann8onganit, pey[à]onont ketass8tamoh wutch wussittumoonk, neit Absolom 8wehkomuh, kah n8wau, utteiyeu kutotan wadchiean? kah n8wau kitinneum wadchiyeu pasuk wutchippan8onk Israel.
E.15.2 And Absalom rose up early, and stood beside the way of the gate: and it was so, that when any man that had a controversy came to the king for judgment, then Absalom called unto him, and said, Of what city art thou? And he said, Thy servant is of one of the tribes of Israel.

α.15.3 Neit Absolom wuttinuh, naish kuttinniyeuonk wunnegen kah sampoi, qut na matta howan wosketomp kehtimoun nashpe ketass8t ken8tunkqunat.
E.15.3 And Absalom said unto him, See, thy matters are good and right; but there is no man deputed of the king to hear thee.

α.15.4 Kah Absolom nano wonk n8wau, napehnont wussittumwáhimuk ut ohkeit, onk nishnoh wosketomp wadchann8wonganit woh nuppeyôg, kah woh nussamweenneh.
E.15.4 Absalom said moreover, Oh that I were made judge in the land, that every man which hath any suit or cause might come unto me, and I would do him justice!

α.15.5 Kah n$nih, howan pas8sukauoncheh ukquttianumwe unnehikqunat, summagunum wunnutcheg kah wunneemunuh, kah wutchipwutt8nup8.
E.15.5 And it was so, that when any man came nigh to him to do him obeisance, he put forth his hand, and took him, and kissed him.

α.15.6 Kah yeu wuttinheon Absolom wame Israeloh, neg paoncheg ketass8tamwut wutche wussittumóonk: nemehkuh Absolom komm8tou wuttahh8oàsh Israelle wosketompaog.
E.15.6 And on this manner did Absalom to all Israel that came to the king for judgment: so Absalom stole the hearts of the men of Israel.

α.15.7 Kah n$nih mahche yauunchage kodtum8k, Absolom unn[à]u ketass8toh, k8wehquetumoush, nohnushadti ussenat nukquoshwaonk en Jehovahut ut Hebron.
E.15.7 And it came to pass after forty years, that Absalom said unto the king, I pray thee, let me go and pay my vow, which I have vowed unto the LORD, in Hebron.

α.15.8 Newutche kittinneum nukquoshowae quoshowap apean ut Geshur ut Syria, nussip, Jehovah wunnamuhkut wonk pas8quean Jerusalem, neit pish n8wowussum Jehovah.
E.15.8 For thy servant vowed a vow while I abode at Geshur in Syria, saying, If the LORD shall bring me again indeed to Jerusalem, then I will serve the LORD.

α.15.9 Kah ketass8t wuttinuh, wunohteae monchish neit neepau, kah au Hebron,
E.15.9 And the king said unto him, Go in peace. So he arose, and went to Hebron.

α.15.10 Qut Absolom ann8nau natauwohaenuh pannuppe wáme wutchippan8ongann8ut Israel, n8waog, quenau n8tamòg mishont8wae monopuhpeg, neit pish kussimw8, Absolom ketass8tam88 ut Hebronut.
E.15.10 But Absalom sent spies throughout all the tribes of Israel, saying, As soon as ye hear the sound of the trumpet, then ye shall say, Absalom reigneth in Hebron.

α.15.11 Kah weechauuh neese pasuk88oh wosketompuh, wutche Jerusalem, neg ahennitcheg, neg mo wahteoe monchecheg, kah mat teag wahteau8og.
E.15.11 And with Absalom went two hundred men out of Jerusalem, that were called; and they went in their simplicity, and they knew not any thing.

α.15.12 Kah Absolom negont8au Achitophel uk-Gilonit, 8waantamweneumoh David, wutch wutotanat, wutch Giloh, noh sephausit, kah matchewunn8waonk menuhkiyeup newutche missinninnuog nagwutteae nano monaog ut Absolomut.
E.15.12 And Absalom sent for Ahithophel the Gilonite, David's counsellor, from his city, even from Giloh, while he offered sacrifices. And the conspiracy was strong; for the people increased continually with Absalom.

α.15.13 Kah na 8mun ann8naenin en Davidut, n8wau wuttahh8woash wosketompaog Israel asuhkauwaog Absolomoh.
E.15.13 And there came a messenger to David, saying, The hearts of the men of Israel are after Absalom.

α.15.14 Kah David unnau wame wuttinneumoh neh weetomukqutcheh ut Jerusalem, neepau[u]tteuh, kah wusseemutteuh, newutche matta pish nuppohquohhum8mun wutch Absolom: kenuppe amaeetuh, ishkont teanuk kummattanukqun, kah kuppaudtunkqun machuk, kah togkodtam keitotan nashpe an kenag togkodteg.
E.15.14 And David said unto all his servants that were with him at Jerusalem, Arise, and let us flee; for we shall not else escape from Absalom: make speed to depart, lest he overtake us suddenly, and bring evil upon us, and smite the city with the edge of the sword.

α.15.15 Kah wutinneumoh ketass8t, unnaog ketass8tamwoh, kittinneumog uttoh woh anukqueog nussontimomun ketass8t
E.15.15 And the king's servants said unto the king, Behold, thy servants are ready to do whatsoever my lord the king shall appoint.

α.15.16 Kah ketass8t sohham, kah wame wek asuhkaue: kah ketass8t nukkonau piogquss[u]oh mitamwussissoh, neg woskappuitcheg nanawéhtinneat wetu.
E.15.16 And the king went forth, and all his household after him. And the king left ten women, which were concubines, to keep the house.

α.15.17 Kah ketass8t sohham, kah wame missinninnúog wutasukauóuh, kah appuog ayeuonk ne nôohtag.
E.15.17 And the king went forth, and all the people after him, and tarried in a place that was far off.

α.15.18 Kah wame wuttinneumoh kutchittóushauh noh kishke, kah wame Cherethitsog, kah wame Pelethitsog, kah wame Gittitsog, nequtta tahshe pasuk88og wosketompaog, neg asukauoncheg wutch Gath, negonuhkauwaog ketas[s]8toh.
E.15.18 And all his servants passed on beside him; and all the Cherethites, and all the Pelethites, and all the Gittites, six hundred men which came after him from Gath, passed on before the king.

α.15.19 Neit ketass8t unnau Ittai uk-Gittite, tohwutch ken wonk weechaiéog? qushkish en kut[á]yeuonganit, kah weetom ketass8t: newutche kuppen8wohteau, kah wonk ama8kauwáen.
E.15.19 Then said the king to Ittai the Gittite, Wherefore goest thou also with us? return to thy place, and abide with the king: for thou art a stranger, and also an exile.

α.15.20 Kuppeyomp wunnonkou, sun woh kuppopomwusháhush weeche nenawun, yeu kesukok; ôôn uttoh woh áôi, qushkish ken, kah weechau kematog, monanetuonk, kah wunnamuhkutéyeu8k wetomukqush.
E.15.20 Whereas thou camest but yesterday, should I this day make thee go up and down with us? seeing I go whither I may, return thou, and take back thy brethren: mercy and truth be with thee.

α.15.21 Kah Ittai namp8hamauau ketas[s]8toh, kah n8wau, Jehovah pomantog, kah pomontog nus[s]ontimom ketas[s]8t, wunnamuhkut, uttiyeu ayeuonk nussontimom ketass8t apit, uttoh an pomantamóonk asuh nupp8onk, na wonk wutappin kittinneum.
E.15.21 And Ittai answered the king, and said, As the LORD liveth, and as my lord the king liveth, surely in what place my lord the king shall be, whether in death or life, even there also will thy servant be.

α.15.22 Kah David unnau Ittaioh, monch qushkodteash, kah Ittai uk-Gittite, qushkodteau, kah wame wuttinneumoh, kah wame mukkiésoh neh weechogqutcheh.
E.15.22 And David said to Ittai, Go and pass over. And Ittai the Gittite passed over, and all his men, and all the little ones that were with him.

α.15.23 Kah wame wutohtimóin mishont8wáe mauog, kah wame missinninnúog qushkodteâog sepuese Kidron, kah wame missinninnúog paumushauog en nogque touohkomukque mayut.
E.15.23 And all the country wept with a loud voice, and all the people passed over: the king also himself passed over the brook Kidron, and all the people passed over, toward the way of the wilderness.

α.15.24 Kah kusseh, Zadok wonk, kah wame Levitsog 8weechauóuh, kenunnumwog wunn8wae wut$arkum God, kah ponamwog wut-arkum: kah Abiathar kuhkuhqúeu, noh pajeh wame missinninnúog ummahche sohhamunaóont wutch otanat.
E.15.24 And lo Zadok also, and all the Levites were with him, bearing the ark of the covenant of God: and they set down the ark of God; and Abiathar went up, until all the people had done passing out of the city.

α.15.25 Kah ketass8t unnau Zadokoh, quehch8wuttau8k wut-arkum God en otanat, namehteauon kitteamonteanittuonk ut wuskesukqut Jehovah, pish wonk nuppas8k, kah pish nunnahtinuk, kah wuttaiyeuonk.
E.15.25 And the king said unto Zadok, Carry back the ark of God into the city: if I shall find favour in the eyes of the LORD, he will bring me again, and shew me both it, and his habitation:

α.15.26 Qut yeu n8wadt, matta kuttapeneauun8h, kusseh nen yeu, unnehitch uttoh an tapeneog.
E.15.26 But if he thus say, I have no delight in thee; behold, here am I, let him do to me as seemeth good unto him.

α.15.27 Ketass8t wonk unnau Zadokoh sephausuen[a]h, sunnummatta ken Naumwaenin? wunohteae qushkish en otanat, & nesuog kenaumonunk weeche ken, Ahimaaz kenaumon, kah Jonathan wunnaumonuh Abiathar.
E.15.27 The king said also unto Zadok the priest, Art not thou a seer? return into the city in peace, and your two sons with you, Ahimaaz thy son, and Jonathan the son of Abiathar.

α.15.28 Kusseh, nutap touohkomukque mukoshquttaut, nò pajeh kutaunchem8kainneaóont,
E.15.28 See, I will tarry in the plain of the wilderness, until there come word from you to certify me.

α.15.29 Newaj Zadok kah Abiathar, wonk kenunnumwog wut[-]arkum God, en Jerusalem, kah na appuog.
E.15.29 Zadok therefore and Abiathar carried the ark of God again to Jerusalem: and they tarried there.

α.15.30 Kah DAvid kuhkuhqueu ahhut olivet kohkuhquemuk, kah mau nean kuhkuhquit, kah mamahchehkissittau, kah wame missinninnúog neg weechauoncheg, nishnoh pasuk unkhum uppuhkuk kah kuhkuhquée mauog nean kuhkuhquehettit.
E.15.30 And David went up by the ascent of mount Olivet, and wept as he went up, and had his head covered, and he went barefoot: and all the people that was with him covered every man his head, and they went up, weeping as they went up.

α.15.31 Kah unnon David, n8won, Ahitophel ke[n]ukshau ummatche wunn8womoh Absolom, kah David n8wau, woi Jehovah k8wehquetumoush, quinnupinish ukkinn8s8wáonk Ahitophel en matammagwinneat;
E.15.31 And one told David, saying, Ahithophel is among the conspirators with Absalom. And David said, O LORD, I pray thee, turn the counsel of Ahithophel into foolishness.

α.15.32 Kah nnih, David paont koduhkóag, ne adt wowussumont Goduh, kusseh, Hushai wutArkit, peyauh wunnogskunkquoh, wuthogk8 nehnekuhkausu, kah ohke ohtau uppuhkukqut.
E.15.32 And it came to pass, that when David was come to the top of the mount, where he worshipped God, behold, Hushai the Archite came to meet him with his coat rent, and earth upon his head:

α.15.33 Neh ánonche David, weechaiéan, woh ken n8wéas8.
E.15.33 Unto whom David said, If thou passest on with me, then thou shalt be a burden unto me:

α.15.34 Qut qushkean en otanat, kah unnadt Absolom nen yeuyeu kittinneum woi ketass8t, neane k8sh wuttinneumuhkauog yeu pajeh, netatuppe ken, neen wonk yeuyeu kittinneum, neit woh ken, wutche nen, matta toh kitin tuppehtea8h ukken8s8wáonk Ahitophel.
E.15.34 But if thou return to the city, and say unto Absalom, I will be thy servant, O king; as I have been thy father's servant hitherto, so will I now also be thy servant: then mayest thou for me defeat the counsel of Ahithophel.

α.15.35 Kah sunnummatta k8wetomuk8h Zadok kah Abiathar sephausuénuog, newaj pish nnih, uttoh woh ane n8taman wutch ketass8t wekit, woh kuttinnon Zadok, kah Abiathar sephausuenúog.
E.15.35 And hast thou not there with thee Zadok and Abiathar the priests?  therefore it shall be, that what thing soever thou shalt hear out of the king's house, thou shalt tell it to Zadok and Abiathar the priests.

α.15.36 Kusseh, nag weetomukqueg nees8oh wunnaumonuh, Ahimaas Zadok wunnaumonuh, kah Jonathan Abiathar wunnaumonuh, kah nag nashpe woh kenegont8am nishnoh teag ne n8taman.
E.15.36 Behold, they have there with them their two sons, Ahimaaz Zadok's son, and Jonathan Abiathar's son; and by them ye shall send unto me every thing that ye can hear.

α.15.37 Neit Hushai David wetompoh, peyau keitotanat, kah Absolom peyau Jerusalem.
E.15.37 So Hushai David's friend came into the city, and Absalom came into Jerusalem.

α.16.1 KAh David ogguhse paumuhkog koduhkôag, kusseh, Ziba wuttinneumoh Mephibosheth, wunnogskonkquoh, nashpe nees8oh assesoh appappúinnú8oh; kah nayeutamwog neese pasuk88ash petukqunnegash, kah nequt pasuk8utcheiyeuash petukqunnegash, kah nequt pasuk8utcheiyeuash raisins, kah nequt pasuk88ash neepunne meechummuongash, kah wishquie wine.
E.16.1 And when David was a little past the top of the hill, behold, Ziba the servant of Mephibosheth met him, with a couple of asses saddled, and upon them two hundred loaves of bread, and an hundred bunches of raisins, and an hundred of summer fruits, and a bottle of wine.

α.16.2 Kah ketass8t unnau Zibahoh, toh kittinnauwuttam yeush nashpe? kah Ziba n8wau, assesog wutche ketass8t neh wekit neh wunn[a]iyeumukqunaóont, kah petukqunnunk, kah neepunne mechummuongash, wutche wuskenúog ummechumunaóont, kah wine, neg sauunukeg ut touohkomuk, onk woh wuttattamwog.
E.16.2 And the king said unto Ziba, What meanest thou by these? And Ziba said, The asses be for the king's household to ride on; and the bread and summer fruit for the young men to eat; and the wine, that such as be faint in the wilderness may drink.

α.16.3 Kah ketass8t n8wau, uttiyeuoh kussontimom wunnaumonuh? kah Ziba unnau ketass8tamwoh, kusseh, appu Jerusalem, newutche n8wau, yeu kesukok, wek Israel nunnompenumunk wutass8tamóonk n8sh.
E.16.3 And the king said, And where is thy master's son? And Ziba said unto the king, Behold, he abideth at Jerusalem: for he said, To day shall the house of Israel restore me the kingdom of my father.

α.16.4 Neit ketass8t unnau Zibahoh, wame ne wadchiig Mephiboshethut nish kutaiheash, kah Ziba n8wau, hohpaeu k8wehquetumoush, namehteauutti tapeneôdtuonk ut anaquabean nussontimom ketass8t.
E.16.4 Then said the king to Ziba, Behold, thine are all that pertained unto Mephibosheth. And Ziba said, I humbly beseech thee that I may find grace in thy sight, my lord, O king.

α.16.5 Kah ketass8t David paont Bahurim, kusseh, na 8ch sohhamun wosketomp wutch wutteateashiyeuonganit wekit Saul, noh áhenit Shimei, wunnaumonuh Gera: sohham kah ash pummu mattanitteau neane peyont.
E.16.5 And when king David came to Bahurim, behold, thence came out a man of the family of the house of Saul, whose name was Shimei, the son of Gera: he came forth, and cursed still as he came.

α.16.6 Kah togkomau Davidoh qussukquanash, kah wáme wuttinneumoh ketass8t David, kah wame missinninnuog, kah wame menuhkesuénuog wuttinohkôunit kah menadcheanit.
E.16.6 And he cast stones at David, and at all the servants of king David: and all the people and all the mighty men were on his right hand and on his left.

α.16.7 Kah yeu wussin Shimei mattanitteadt, sohhash, sohhash, ken musqueheonganénin, ken kah Beliale wosketomp.
E.16.7 And thus said Shimei when he cursed, Come out, come out, thou bloody man, and thou man of Belial:

α.16.8 Jehovah kutompontinumonk wame 8sqheonk week Saul, noh nompe nánauinnuwomadt, kah Jehovah mag8 ketass8tamóonk en wunnutcheganit Absolom kenaumon, kah kusseh kenashpe neemunit kummatcheet8onk, newutche ken k8sqheonganénin.
E.16.8 The LORD hath returned upon thee all the blood of the house of Saul, in whose stead thou hast reigned; and the LORD hath delivered the kingdom into the hand of Absalom thy son: and, behold, thou art taken in thy mischief, because thou art a bloody man.

α.16.9 Neit Abishai wunnaumonuh Zerviah unnau ketass8tamwoh, tohwutch woh yeuoh nupp8[á]num mattanumont nussontimomoh ketass8t? k8wehquetumoush qushkodteadti, kah amaunumutti uppuhkuk.
E.16.9 Then said Abishai the son of Zeruiah unto the king, Why should this dead dog curse my lord the king? let me go over, I pray thee, and take off his head.

α.16.10 Kah ketass8t n8wau, tohkittin tuppanumunumw8 kenaau wunnaumonuh Zerviah? nene matánitteaj, newutche Jehovah wuttinuh, mattanum David, neit howan woh an8wadt tohwutch yeu ussean?
E.16.10 And the king said, What have I to do with you, ye sons of Zeruiah?  so let him curse, because the LORD hath said unto him, Curse David. Who shall then say, Wherefore hast thou done so?

α.16.11 Kah David unnau Abishaioh, kah wame wuttinneumoh, kusseh, nunnaumon, noh sohhogkup wutch nunnogkussit, natinneham nuppomantamóonk, uttoh an m8cheke yeuoh up-Benjamit, mukk8nók, kah matanitteaj, newutche Jehovah wuttinnon.
E.16.11 And David said to Abishai, and to all his servants, Behold, my son, which came forth of my bowels, seeketh my life: how much more now may this Benjamite do it? let him alone, and let him curse; for the LORD hath bidden him.

α.16.12 Paguodche Jehovah monunneam nutuhquanumóonk, kah Jehovah pish nukqushkenemunk wanegik wutche ummatanitteáonk yeu kesukok.
E.16.12 It may be that the LORD will look on mine affliction, and that the LORD will requite me good for his cursing this day.

α.16.13 Kah David kah wuttinneumoh neaáhettit mayut, Shimei pomushau kishkontu, uppiuhsukuhkunkquoh, kah matanitteau ne nôont, kah wuttogkomuh qussukquanash, kah puppissi wuttogkomuh.
E.16.13 And as David and his men went by the way, Shimei went along on the hill's side over against him, and cursed as he went, and threw stones at him, and cast dust.

α.16.14 Kah ketass8t, kah wame missinninnúh weechógqutcheh, sauunumwáe peyaog, kah na wuttit menehkheoneau wuhhogkauh.
E.16.14 And the king, and all the people that were with him, came weary, and refreshed themselves there.

α.16.15 Kah Absolom, kah wame missinninnóg Israelle wosketompaog, peyaog Jerusalem, kah Ahitopheloh weechóg.
E.16.15 And Absalom, and all the people the men of Israel, came to Jerusalem, and Ahithophel with him.

α.16.16 Kah nnih, Hushai wut[-]Archit, David wetompuh, paaonont Absolomoh, Hushai unnau Absolomoh, God wadchanonch ketass8t, God wadchanonch ketass8t.
E.16.16 And it came to pass, when Hushai the Archite, David's friend, was come unto Absalom, that Hushai said unto Absalom, God save the king, God save the king.

α.16.17 Kah Absolom unnau Hushai, sun yeu kittinn8womonon ketomp? tohwutch matta weechaóadt ketomp?
E.16.17 And Absalom said to Hushai, Is this thy kindness to thy friend? why wentest thou not with thy friend?

α.16.18 Kah Hushau unnau Absolomoh matta, qut Jehovah, kah yeug missinninnúog kah wame wosketompaog Israel neh pepe[na]áhettitcheh, nen wuttaiheuh, kah noh n8weetappem.
E.16.18 And Hushai said unto Absalom, Nay; but whom the LORD, and this people, and all the men of Israel, choose, his will I be, and with him will I abide.

α.16.19 Kah wonk, howan woh wadtininneumuhkauog? sunnummatta woh n8tinninneumuhkauoh ut anaquabit wunnaumonuh? neane wuttinneumuhkaúseomp ut k8sh anaquabit ne nuttinniin ut anaquabean.
E.16.19 And again, whom should I serve? should I not serve in the presence of his son? as I have served in thy father's presence, so will I be in thy presence.

α.16.20 Neit Absolom unnau Ahitopheloh, ken8nittegk uttoh woh aséog.
E.16.20 Then said Absalom to Ahithophel, Give counsel among you what we shall do.

α.16.21 Kah Ahitophel unnau Absolomoh petukau k8sh 8skappeumoh, neh nogkononcheh nanawehtinneaóout wetu, neit wame Israel pish n8tam, kutuhquanumuk k8sh, neit wunnutchegan8 wame neg wetomukqueaneg pish menuhki.
E.16.21 And Ahithophel said unto Absalom, Go in unto thy father's concubines, which he hath left to keep the house; and all Israel shall hear that thou art abhorred of thy father: then shall the hands of all that are with thee be strong.

α.16.22 Neit wekekouáog Absolomoh ut woskechekommuk, kah Absolom petutteaóneau 8shoh 8skappeumoh, ut anaquabhettit wame Israel,
E.16.22 So they spread Absalom a tent upon the top of the house; and Absalom went in unto his father's concubines in the sight of all Israel.

α.16.23 Kah ukken8s8waonk Ahitophel, nish an ken8s8wajeh, ut yeush kesukodtash, mô onatuheyeu8 noh pasuk natinneuhhog wuttinn8wáonk God, nnih, wame ukken8s8waonk Ahitophel, anaquabit David kah anaquabit Absolom.
E.16.23 And the counsel of Ahithophel, which he counselled in those days, was as if a man had enquired at the oracle of God: so was all the counsel of Ahithophel both with David and with Absalom.

α.17.1 WOnk Ahitophel unnau Absolomoh, yeuyeu pepenauonti nabo neese muttannonganog wosketompaog, kah nunneepoh, kah nunn8swuttah David yeu nohkog.
E.17.1 Moreover Ahithophel said unto Absalom, Let me now choose out twelve thousand men, and I will arise and pursue after David this night:

α.17.2 Kah nukquentau ashsasauunukup, kah nan8chumwesup, kah n8wabesu[a]h, kah wame missinninnúh n[e]h weetomukqutcheh pish w[u]ssem8og, kah webe nuttogkom ketass8t.
E.17.2 And I will come upon him while he is weary and weak handed, and will make him afraid: and all the people that are with him shall flee; and I will smite the king only:

α.17.3 Kah kukquehchuwuttoush wame missinninnúh wosketomp noh natinneahadt onatuh w[a]me qush[k]éhettit: neit wame missinninnúog pish wunohteaog.
E.17.3 And I will bring back all the people unto thee: the man whom thou seekest is as if all returned: so all the people shall be in peace.

α.17.4 Kah unn8waonk 8netapeneaumun Absolom, kah wame Israelle eldersog.
E.17.4 And the saying pleased Absalom well, and all the elders of Israel.

α.17.5 Neit Absolom n8wau, eyeu wehkom Hushai wonk wut-Archit, kah n8tauwontu[h] uttoh wonk noh an8wadt.
E.17.5 Then said Absalom, Call now Hushai the Archite also, and let us hear likewise what he saith.

α.17.6 Kah Hushai paaónont Absolomoh Absolom ukken8nuh, n8wau, Ahitophel yeu wussin; sun woh nutussemun ne an8wadt? matta n$n8g, ket8hkash.
E.17.6 And when Hushai was come to Absalom, Absalom spake unto him, saying, Ahithophel hath spoken after this manner: shall we do after his saying? if not; speak thou.

α.17.7 Kah Hushau unnau Absolomoh, ken8nuwaonk ne Ahitophel maguk, matta wunnegenninn8 yeuyeu.
E.17.7 And Hushai said unto Absalom, The counsel that Ahithophel hath given is not good at this time.

α.17.8 Newutche (n8wau Hushai) k8wae k8sh, kah wuttinneumoh, nag menuhkèsuénuog, kah weesogkontamwog ut wuttahh8wóut, onatuh masq magk8kinit 8shkishimm8mesoh ut ohteakonit, kah k8sh ayeuteaen, kah matta weesukquom8móou missinninnuh.
E.17.8 For, said Hushai, thou knowest thy father and his men, that they be mighty men, and they be chafed in their minds, as a bear robbed of her whelps in the field: and thy father is a man of war, and will not lodge with the people.

α.17.9 Kusseh noh puttogqueu wohtohhut pesohtheganit, asuh wohto[u]hut, kah pish nnih, nawhutch nag negonne kepuhteamuk, howan n8tog, nag pish n8waog, na paguanittuonk ut kenugke missinninnúog neg asuhkauoncheg Absolomoh.
E.17.9 Behold, he is hid now in some pit, or in some other place: and it will come to pass, when some of them be overthrown at the first, that whosoever heareth it will say, There is a slaughter among the people that follow Absalom.

α.17.10 Kah noh wonk manuhkesit, noh wuttah onatuheyeuuk qunnonouut pish papaquannu mohtuppáyeu: newutche wame Israel wahteoh k8sh menuhkoshketomp, kah neg weetomonch[e]g menuhkoshketompaog. 
E.17.10 And he also that is valiant, whose heart is as the heart of a lion, shall utterly melt: for all Israel knoweth that thy father is a mighty man, and they which be with him are valiant men.

α.17.11 Newutche nukken8nuwam, wame Israel mukkinne miyaehtunkqush, wutch wehque Beersheba, onatuh nagu[n]t kishke ketahhannit wutche monacheg, kah kutayeuuhkononat kuhhog.
E.17.11 Therefore I counsel that all Israel be generally gathered unto thee, from Dan even to Beersheba, as the sand that is by the sea for multitude; and that thou go to battle in thine own person.

α.17.12 Neit pish in queentauon wohtohhut, toh woh adt namehit, pish kenuhkukauoun onatuh neechippog paném8uk ut ohkeit, kah noh kah wame wosketompuh neh weechayeumukqutcheh, matta pish sequttahwhoun noh pasuk.
E.17.12 So shall we come upon him in some place where he shall be found, and we will light upon him as the dew falleth on the ground: and of him and of all the men that are with him there shall not be left so much as one.

α.17.13 Wonk, petutteadt otanat, neit wame Israel pish paudtoog pemeneuhtanash ne otanat, kah pish nuttinontanchittauunan en sepuut, nô pajeh matta pasuk qussukquan na adt namehteau8muk.
E.17.13 Moreover, if he be gotten into a city, then shall all Israel bring ropes to that city, and we will draw it into the river, until there be not one small stone found there.

α.17.14 Kah Absolom kah wame Israelle wosketompaog, n8waog, ukkinn8s8waonk Hus[h]ai wut-Archit, nean wunneguk onk ne ukkinn8s8waonk Ahitophel: newutche Lord ukkuhquttumun pañushittauunat 8ne ken8suwaonk Ahitophel, yeu wadj woh Jehovah uppaudtauonat machuk Absolomoh.
E.17.14 And Absalom and all the men of Israel said, The counsel of Hushai the Archite is better than the counsel of Ahithophel. For the LORD had appointed to defeat the good counsel of Ahithophel, to the intent that the LORD might bring evil upon Absalom.

α.17.15 Neit Hushai unnau Zadokoh kah Abiatharoh sephausuenuog, yeu in kah yeu in Ahitophel ken8nau Absolomoh, kah Israelle eldersog, kah yeu in, kah yeu in nuttin ken8s8uh.
E.17.15 Then said Hushai unto Zadok and to Abiathar the priests, Thus and thus did Ahithophel counsel Absalom and the elders of Israel; and thus and thus have I counselled.

α.17.16 Newutche yeuyeu teanuk ann8team8k unnonat David, n8wagk, ahque kouish yeu nohkog ut touohkomukque mukoshquttaut, qut kenuppe qushkodteash, ishkont keta[s]s8t misseashquónon, kah wame missinninnúog neh weetomukqutcheh.
E.17.16 Now therefore send quickly, and tell David, saying, Lodge not this night in the plains of the wilderness, but speedily pass over; lest the king be swallowed up, and all the people that are with him.

α.17.17 Yeuyeu Jonathan kah Ahimaas appuog kishke Enrogel (newutche matta woh nogqusseog uppetukonaóonk keitotanat) kah nunksq, na au kah wuttinnon: kah nag moncheog kah wuttinnoneau David.
E.17.17 Now Jonathan and Ahimaaz stayed by Enrogel; for they might not be seen to come into the city: and a wench went and told them; and they went and told king David.

α.17.18 Qut onch wusken wunnauuh, kah wuttinnon Absolomoh, qut naneeswe teanuk moncheog, kah peyaog wosketomp weekit ut Bahurim, noh wad8thamonganit ut wutchippinneutunkanit, ne 8womussinneau.
E.17.18 Nevertheless a lad saw them, and told Absalom: but they went both of them away quickly, and came to a man's house in Bahurim, which had a well in his court; whither they went down.

α.17.19 Kah mittamwossis nemunnum kah sephaginnum unkwhonk waábe wassadt8nonog, kah ne wussepagenumun n8khik, kah ne matta wahteau8un.
E.17.19 And the woman took and spread a covering over the well's mouth, and spread ground corn thereon; and the thing was not known.

α.17.20 Kah wuttinneumoh Absolom paonit wekit, mittamwossisut, n8waog uttoh wutappen Ahimaaz kah Jonathan? kah mittamwossis nah wuttinuh, qushkodteog sepuissit, kah natinneahwáhettit kah matta namheahetteg, nag qushkeog en Jerusalem.
E.17.20 And when Absalom's servants came to the woman to the house, they said, Where is Ahimaaz and Jonathan? And the woman said unto them, They be gone over the brook of water. And when they had sought and could not find them, they returned to Jerusalem.

α.17.21 Kah nnih mahche monchehettit, nag kuhkuhqueog wutch wutáhamonganit, kah moncheog, kah wuttinnoneau ketass8tmawe Davidoh, kah unnáog Davidoh, neepaush, kah teanuk quóshkodteash nippee, newutche yeu wuttin ayeuuhkonittue ken ken8s8un Ahitophel.
E.17.21 And it came to pass, after they were departed, that they came up out of the well, and went and told king David, and said unto David, Arise, and pass quickly over the water: for thus hath Ahithophel counselled against you.

α.17.22 Neit David neepau, kah wame missinninnuh neh weetomukqutcheh, kah qushkodteaog Jordan: mohtompanáeu, nag matta pasuk ukquenauussu, noh matta quoshkodteaog Jordan.
E.17.22 Then David arose, and all the people that were with him, and they passed over Jordan: by the morning light there lacked not one of them that was not gone over Jordan.

α.17.23 Kah Ahitophel, nag* ukken8suwaonk matta asuhkom8un, appappuwunneheau wutassumoh, kah neepau, kah au wekit, wutotanat, kah wunnashau neh wekit, kah keechequabinau wuhhogkuh, kah nupp8, kah posekinau 8shoh 8weenohkeet.
E.17.23 And when Ahithophel saw that his counsel was not followed, he saddled his ass, and arose, and gat him home to his house, to his city, and put his household in order, and hanged himself, and died, and was buried in the sepulchre of his father.

α.17.24 Neit David peyau Mahanaim, kah Absolom qushkodteau Jordan, kah wame Israelle wosketompaog weeche.
E.17.24 Then David came to Mahanaim. And Absalom passed over Jordan, he and all the men of Israel with him.

α.17.25 Kah Absolom, ummugquompaheuh Amasa ut ayeuhteaut, nompenumwe Joáboh; yeuoh Amasa, wunnaumonuh wosketomp ussowenau Ithra wut-Israelit, noh petutteaonont Abigailoh wuttaunoh Nahash, weetompasu Zerviahoh Joab ohkasoh.
E.17.25 And Absalom made Amasa captain of the host instead of Joab: which Amasa was a man's son, whose name was Ithra an Israelite, that went in to Abigail the daughter of Nahash, sister to Zeruiah Joab's mother.

α.17.26 Neit Israel kah Absolom tuppuksinwog ut ohkit Giliad.
E.17.26 So Israel and Absalom pitched in the land of Gilead.

α.17.27 Kah n$nih, David paont Mahanaim, Shobi wunnaumonuh Nahash, wutch Rabbah, wutch wunnaumonuh Ammon, kah Machir wunnaumonuh Ammiel wutch Hedebar, kah Barzillai uk-Giliadit wutch Rogelim.
E.17.27 And it came to pass, when David was come to Mahanaim, that Shobi the son of Nahash of Rabbah of the children of Ammon, and Machir the son of Ammiel of Lodebar, and Barzillai the Gileadite of Rogelim,

α.17.28 Padtóog apinneash, káh wunnonganash kah ohkeishquash, kah wheatásh, kah barlysash kah n8khik, kah uppuminneonash, kah tuppuhquamash, kah peasash kah uppunonneonash.
E.17.28 Brought beds, and basons, and earthen vessels, and wheat, and barley, and flour, and parched corn, and beans, and lentiles, and parched pulse,

α.17.29 Kah hony, kah butter, kah shepsoh, kah cowashinne cheesash wutche David kah wutch missinninnuog neh wee[t]omukqutcheh meechinat, newutche nag n8waog missinninnuog kodtupwog kah sauunnumwog, kah kuhket8nog ut touohkomukqut.
E.17.29 And honey, and butter, and sheep, and cheese of kine, for David, and for the people that were with him, to eat: for they said, The people is hungry, and weary, and thirsty, in the wilderness.

α.18.1 
E.18.1 And David numbered the people that were with him, and set captains of thousands, and captains of hundreds over them.

α.18.2 
E.18.2 And David sent forth a third part of the people under the hand of Joab, and a third part under the hand of Abishai the son of Zeruiah, Joab's brother, and a third part under the hand of Ittai the Gittite. And the king said unto the people, I will surely go forth with you myself also.

α.18.3 
E.18.3 But the people answered, Thou shalt not go forth: for if we flee away, they will not care for us; neither if half of us die, will they care for us: but now thou art worth ten thousand of us: therefore now it is better that thou succour us out of the city.

α.18.4 
E.18.4 And the king said unto them, What seemeth you best I will do. And the king stood by the gate side, and all the people came out by hundreds and by thousands.

α.18.5 
E.18.5 And the king commanded Joab and Abishai and Ittai, saying, Deal gently for my sake with the young man, even with Absalom. And all the people heard when the king gave all the captains charge concerning Absalom.

α.18.6 
E.18.6 So the people went out into the field against Israel: and the battle was in the wood of Ephraim;

α.18.7 
E.18.7 Where the people of Israel were slain before the servants of David, and there was there a great slaughter that day of twenty thousand men.

α.18.8 
E.18.8 For the battle was there scattered over the face of all the country: and the wood devoured more people that day than the sword devoured.

α.18.9 
E.18.9 And Absalom met the servants of David. And Absalom rode upon a mule, and the mule went under the thick boughs of a great oak, and his head caught hold of the oak, and he was taken up between the heaven and the earth; and the mule that was under him went away.

α.18.10 
E.18.10 And a certain man saw it, and told Joab, and said, Behold, I saw Absalom hanged in an oak.

α.18.11 
E.18.11 And Joab said unto the man that told him, And, behold, thou sawest him, and why didst thou not smite him there to the ground? and I would have given thee ten shekels of silver, and a girdle.

α.18.12 
E.18.12 And the man said unto Joab, Though I should receive a thousand shekels of silver in mine hand, yet would I not put forth mine hand against the king's son: for in our hearing the king charged thee and Abishai and Ittai, saying, Beware that none touch the young man Absalom.

α.18.13 
E.18.13 Otherwise I should have wrought falsehood against mine own life: for there is no matter hid from the king, and thou thyself wouldest have set thyself against me.

α.18.14 
E.18.14 Then said Joab, I may not tarry thus with thee. And he took three darts in his hand, and thrust them through the heart of Absalom, while he was yet alive in the midst of the oak.

α.18.15 
E.18.15 And ten young men that bare Joab's armour compassed about and smote Absalom, and slew him.

α.18.16 
E.18.16 And Joab blew the trumpet, and the people returned from pursuing after Israel: for Joab held back the people.

α.18.17 
E.18.17 And they took Absalom, and cast him into a great pit in the wood, and laid a very great heap of stones upon him: and all Israel fled every one to his tent.

α.18.18 
E.18.18 Now Absalom in his lifetime had taken and reared up for himself a pillar, which is in the king's dale: for he said, I have no son to keep my name in remembrance: and he called the pillar after his own name: and it is called unto this day, Absalom's place.

α.18.19 
E.18.19 Then said Ahimaaz the son of Zadok, Let me now run, and bear the king tidings, how that the LORD hath avenged him of his enemies.

α.18.20 
E.18.20 And Joab said unto him, Thou shalt not bear tidings this day, but thou shalt bear tidings another day: but this day thou shalt bear no tidings, because the king's son is dead.

α.18.21 
E.18.21 Then said Joab to Cushi, Go tell the king what thou hast seen. And Cushi bowed himself unto Joab, and ran.

α.18.22 
E.18.22 Then said Ahimaaz the son of Zadok yet again to Joab, But howsoever, let me, I pray thee, also run after Cushi. And Joab said, Wherefore wilt thou run, my son, seeing that thou hast no tidings ready?

α.18.23 
E.18.23 But howsoever, said he, let me run. And he said unto him, Run. Then Ahimaaz ran by the way of the plain, and overran Cushi.

α.18.24 
E.18.24 And David sat between the two gates: and the watchman went up to the roof over the gate unto the wall, and lifted up his eyes, and looked, and behold a man running alone.

α.18.25 
E.18.25 And the watchman cried, and told the king. And the king said, If he be alone, there is tidings in his mouth. And he came apace, and drew near.

α.18.26 
E.18.26 And the watchman saw another man running: and the watchman called unto the porter, and said, Behold another man running alone. And the king said, He also bringeth tidings.

α.18.27 
E.18.27 And the watchman said, Me thinketh the running of the foremost is like the running of Ahimaaz the son of Zadok. And the king said, He is a good man, and cometh with good tidings.

α.18.28 
E.18.28 And Ahimaaz called, and said unto the king, All is well. And he fell down to the earth upon his face before the king, and said, Blessed be the LORD thy God, which hath delivered up the men that lifted up their hand against my lord the king.

α.18.29 
E.18.29 And the king said, Is the young man Absalom safe? And Ahimaaz answered, When Joab sent the king's servant, and me thy servant, I saw a great tumult, but I knew not what it was.

α.18.30 
E.18.30 And the king said unto him, Turn aside, and stand here. And he turned aside, and stood still.

α.18.31 
E.18.31 And, behold, Cushi came; and Cushi said, Tidings, my lord the king: for the LORD hath avenged thee this day of all them that rose up against thee.

α.18.32 
E.18.32 And the king said unto Cushi, Is the young man Absalom safe? And Cushi answered, The enemies of my lord the king, and all that rise against thee to do thee hurt, be as that young man is.

α.18.33 
E.18.33 And the king was much moved, and went up to the chamber over the gate, and wept: and as he went, thus he said, O my son Absalom, my son, my son Absalom! would God I had died for thee, O Absalom, my son, my son!

α.19.1 
E.19.1 And it was told Joab, Behold, the king weepeth and mourneth for Absalom.

α.19.2 
E.19.2 And the victory that day was turned into mourning unto all the people: for the people heard say that day how the king was grieved for his son.

α.19.3 
E.19.3 And the people gat them by stealth that day into the city, as people being ashamed steal away when they flee in battle.

α.19.4 
E.19.4 But the king covered his face, and the king cried with a loud voice, O my son Absalom, O Absalom, my son, my son!

α.19.5 
E.19.5 And Joab came into the house to the king, and said, Thou hast shamed this day the faces of all thy servants, which this day have saved thy life, and the lives of thy sons and of thy daughters, and the lives of thy wives, and the lives of thy concubines;

α.19.6 
E.19.6 In that thou lovest thine enemies, and hatest thy friends. For thou hast declared this day, that thou regardest neither princes nor servants: for this day I perceive, that if Absalom had lived, and all we had died this day, then it had pleased thee well.

α.19.7 
E.19.7 Now therefore arise, go forth, and speak comfortably unto thy servants: for I swear by the LORD, if thou go not forth, there will not tarry one with thee this night: and that will be worse unto thee than all the evil that befell thee from thy youth until now.

α.19.8 
E.19.8 Then the king arose, and sat in the gate. And they told unto all the people, saying, Behold, the king doth sit in the gate. And all the people came before the king: for Israel had fled every man to his tent.

α.19.9 
E.19.9 And all the people were at strife throughout all the tribes of Israel, saying, The king saved us out of the hand of our enemies, and he delivered us out of the hand of the Philistines; and now he is fled out of the land for Absalom.

α.19.10 
E.19.10 And Absalom, whom we anointed over us, is dead in battle. Now therefore why speak ye not a word of bringing the king back?

α.19.11 
E.19.11 And king David sent to Zadok and to Abiathar the priests, saying, Speak unto the elders of Judah, saying, Why are ye the last to bring the king back to his house? seeing the speech of all Israel is come to the king, even to his house.

α.19.12 
E.19.12 Ye are my brethren, ye are my bones and my flesh: wherefore then are ye the last to bring back the king?

α.19.13 
E.19.13 And say ye to Amasa, Art thou not of my bone, and of my flesh? God do so to me, and more also, if thou be not captain of the host before me continually in the room of Joab.

α.19.14 
E.19.14 And he bowed the heart of all the men of Judah, even as the heart of one man; so that they sent this word unto the king, Return thou, and all thy servants.

α.19.15 
E.19.15 So the king returned, and came to Jordan. And Judah came to Gilgal, to go to meet the king, to conduct the king over Jordan.

α.19.16 
E.19.16 And Shimei the son of Gera, a Benjamite, which was of Bahurim, hasted and came down with the men of Judah to meet king David.

α.19.17 
E.19.17 And there were a thousand men of Benjamin with him, and Ziba the servant of the house of Saul, and his fifteen sons and his twenty servants with him; and they went over Jordan before the king.

α.19.18 
E.19.18 And there went over a ferry boat to carry over the king's household, and to do what he thought good. And Shimei the son of Gera fell down before the king, as he was come over Jordan;

α.19.19 
E.19.19 And said unto the king, Let not my lord impute iniquity unto me, neither do thou remember that which thy servant did perversely the day that my lord the king went out of Jerusalem, that the king should take it to his heart.

α.19.20 
E.19.20 For thy servant doth know that I have sinned: therefore, behold, I am come the first this day of all the house of Joseph to go down to meet my lord the king.

α.19.21 
E.19.21 But Abishai the son of Zeruiah answered and said, Shall not Shimei be put to death for this, because he cursed the LORD's anointed?

α.19.22 
E.19.22 And David said, What have I to do with you, ye sons of Zeruiah, that ye should this day be adversaries unto me? shall there any man be put to death this day in Israel? for do not I know that I am this day king over Israel?

α.19.23 
E.19.23 Therefore the king said unto Shimei, Thou shalt not die. And the king sware unto him.

α.19.24 
E.19.24 And Mephibosheth the son of Saul came down to meet the king, and had neither dressed his feet, nor trimmed his beard, nor washed his clothes, from the day the king departed until the day he came again in peace.

α.19.25 
E.19.25 And it came to pass, when he was come to Jerusalem to meet the king, that the king said unto him, Wherefore wentest not thou with me, Mephibosheth?

α.19.26 
E.19.26 And he answered, My lord, O king, my servant deceived me: for thy servant said, I will saddle me an ass, that I may ride thereon, and go to the king; because thy servant is lame.

α.19.27 
E.19.27 And he hath slandered thy servant unto my lord the king; but my lord the king is as an angel of God: do therefore what is good in thine eyes.

α.19.28 
E.19.28 For all of my father's house were but dead men before my lord the king: yet didst thou set thy servant among them that did eat at thine own table. What right therefore have I yet to cry any more unto the king?

α.19.29 
E.19.29 And the king said unto him, Why speakest thou any more of thy matters? I have said, Thou and Ziba divide the land.

α.19.30 
E.19.30 And Mephibosheth said unto the king, Yea, let him take all, forasmuch as my lord the king is come again in peace unto his own house.

α.19.31 
E.19.31 And Barzillai the Gileadite came down from Rogelim, and went over Jordan with the king, to conduct him over Jordan.

α.19.32 
E.19.32 Now Barzillai was a very aged man, even fourscore years old: and he had provided the king of sustenance while he lay at Mahanaim; for he was a very great man.

α.19.33 
E.19.33 And the king said unto Barzillai, Come thou over with me, and I will feed thee with me in Jerusalem.

α.19.34 
E.19.34 And Barzillai said unto the king, How long have I to live, that I should go up with the king unto Jerusalem?

α.19.35 
E.19.35 I am this day fourscore years old: and can I discern between good and evil? can thy servant taste what I eat or what I drink? can I hear any more the voice of singing men and singing women? wherefore then should thy servant be yet a burden unto my lord the king?

α.19.36 
E.19.36 Thy servant will go a little way over Jordan with the king: and why should the king recompense it me with such a reward?

α.19.37 
E.19.37 Let thy servant, I pray thee, turn back again, that I may die in mine own city, and be buried by the grave of my father and of my mother. But behold thy servant Chimham; let him go over with my lord the king; and do to him what shall seem good unto thee.

α.19.38 
E.19.38 And the king answered, Chimham shall go over with me, and I will do to him that which shall seem good unto thee: and whatsoever thou shalt require of me, that will I do for thee.

α.19.39 
E.19.39 And all the people went over Jordan. And when the king was come over, the king kissed Barzillai, and blessed him; and he returned unto his own place.

α.19.40 
E.19.40 Then the king went on to Gilgal, and Chimham went on with him: and all the people of Judah conducted the king, and also half the people of Israel.

α.19.41 
E.19.41 And, behold, all the men of Israel came to the king, and said unto the king, Why have our brethren the men of Judah stolen thee away, and have brought the king, and his household, and all David's men with him, over Jordan?

α.19.42 
E.19.42 And all the men of Judah answered the men of Israel, Because the king is near of kin to us: wherefore then be ye angry for this matter? have we eaten at all of the king's cost? or hath he given us any gift?

α.19.43 
E.19.43 And the men of Israel answered the men of Judah, and said, We have ten parts in the king, and we have also more right in David than ye: why then did ye despise us, that our advice should not be first had in bringing back our king? And the words of the men of Judah were fiercer than the words of the men of Israel.

α.20.1 
E.20.1 And there happened to be there a man of Belial, whose name was Sheba, the son of Bichri, a Benjamite: and he blew a trumpet, and said, We have no part in David, neither have we inheritance in the son of Jesse: every man to his tents, O Israel.

α.20.2 
E.20.2 So every man of Israel went up from after David, and followed Sheba the son of Bichri: but the men of Judah clave unto their king, from Jordan even to Jerusalem.

α.20.3 
E.20.3 And David came to his house at Jerusalem; and the king took the ten women his concubines, whom he had left to keep the house, and put them in ward, and fed them, but went not in unto them. So they were shut up unto the day of their death, living in widowhood.

α.20.4 
E.20.4 Then said the king to Amasa, Assemble me the men of Judah within three days, and be thou here present.

α.20.5 
E.20.5 So Amasa went to assemble the men of Judah: but he tarried longer than the set time which he had appointed him.

α.20.6 
E.20.6 And David said to Abishai, Now shall Sheba the son of Bichri do us more harm than did Absalom: take thou thy lord's servants, and pursue after him, lest he get him fenced cities, and escape us.

α.20.7 
E.20.7 And there went out after him Joab's men, and the Cherethites, and the Pelethites, and all the mighty men: and they went out of Jerusalem, to pursue after Sheba the son of Bichri.

α.20.8 
E.20.8 When they were at the great stone which is in Gibeon, Amasa went before them. And Joab's garment that he had put on was girded unto him, and upon it a girdle with a sword fastened upon his loins in the sheath thereof; and as he went forth it fell out.

α.20.9 
E.20.9 And Joab said to Amasa, Art thou in health, my brother? And Joab took Amasa by the beard with the right hand to kiss him.

α.20.10 
E.20.10 But Amasa took no heed to the sword that was in Joab's hand: so he smote him therewith in the fifth rib, and shed out his bowels to the ground, and struck him not again; and he died. So Joab and Abishai his brother pursued after Sheba the son of Bichri.

α.20.11 
E.20.11 And one of Joab's men stood by him, and said, He that favoureth Joab, and he that is for David, let him go after Joab.

α.20.12 
E.20.12 And Amasa wallowed in blood in the midst of the highway. And when the man saw that all the people stood still, he removed Amasa out of the highway into the field, and cast a cloth upon him, when he saw that every one that came by him stood still.

α.20.13 
E.20.13 When he was removed out of the highway, all the people went on after Joab, to pursue after Sheba the son of Bichri.

α.20.14 
E.20.14 And he went through all the tribes of Israel unto Abel, and to Bethmaachah, and all the Berites: and they were gathered together, and went also after him.

α.20.15 
E.20.15 And they came and besieged him in Abel of Bethmaachah, and they cast up a bank against the city, and it stood in the trench: and all the people that were with Joab battered the wall, to throw it down.

α.20.16 
E.20.16 Then cried a wise woman out of the city, Hear, hear; say, I pray you, unto Joab, Come near hither, that I may speak with thee.

α.20.17 
E.20.17 And when he was come near unto her, the woman said, Art thou Joab?  And he answered, I am he. Then she said unto him, Hear the words of thine handmaid. And he answered, I do hear.

α.20.18 
E.20.18 Then she spake, saying, They were wont to speak in old time, saying, They shall surely ask counsel at Abel: and so they ended the matter.

α.20.19 
E.20.19 I am one of them that are peaceable and faithful in Israel: thou seekest to destroy a city and a mother in Israel: why wilt thou swallow up the inheritance of the LORD?

α.20.20 
E.20.20 And Joab answered and said, Far be it, far be it from me, that I should swallow up or destroy.

α.20.21 
E.20.21 The matter is not so: but a man of mount Ephraim, Sheba the son of Bichri by name, hath lifted up his hand against the king, even against David: deliver him only, and I will depart from the city. And the woman said unto Joab, Behold, his head shall be thrown to thee over the wall.

α.20.22 
E.20.22 Then the woman went unto all the people in her wisdom. And they cut off the head of Sheba the son of Bichri, and cast it out to Joab. And he blew a trumpet, and they retired from the city, every man to his tent. And Joab returned to Jerusalem unto the king.

α.20.23 
E.20.23 Now Joab was over all the host of Israel: and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada was over the Cherethites and over the Pelethites:

α.20.24 
E.20.24 And Adoram was over the tribute: and Jehoshaphat the son of Ahilud was recorder:

α.20.25 
E.20.25 And Sheva was scribe: and Zadok and Abiathar were the priests:

α.20.26 
E.20.26 And Ira also the Jairite was a chief ruler about David.

α.21.1 
E.21.1 Then there was a famine in the days of David three years, year after year; and David enquired of the LORD. And the LORD answered, It is for Saul, and for his bloody house, because he slew the Gibeonites.

α.21.2 
E.21.2 And the king called the Gibeonites, and said unto them; (now the Gibeonites were not of the children of Israel, but of the remnant of the Amorites; and the children of Israel had sworn unto them: and Saul sought to slay them in his zeal to the children of Israel and Judah.)

α.21.3 
E.21.3 Wherefore David said unto the Gibeonites, What shall I do for you?  and wherewith shall I make the atonement, that ye may bless the inheritance of the LORD?

α.21.4 
E.21.4 And the Gibeonites said unto him, We will have no silver nor gold of Saul, nor of his house; neither for us shalt thou kill any man in Israel. And he said, What ye shall say, that will I do for you.

α.21.5 
E.21.5 And they answered the king, The man that consumed us, and that devised against us that we should be destroyed from remaining in any of the coasts of Israel,

α.21.6 
E.21.6 Let seven men of his sons be delivered unto us, and we will hang them up unto the LORD in Gibeah of Saul, whom the LORD did choose. And the king said, I will give them.

α.21.7 
E.21.7 But the king spared Mephibosheth, the son of Jonathan the son of Saul, because of the LORD's oath that was between them, between David and Jonathan the son of Saul.

α.21.8 
E.21.8 But the king took the two sons of Rizpah the daughter of Aiah, whom she bare unto Saul, Armoni and Mephibosheth; and the five sons of Michal the daughter of Saul, whom she brought up for Adriel the son of Barzillai the Meholathite:

α.21.9 
E.21.9 And he delivered them into the hands of the Gibeonites, and they hanged them in the hill before the LORD: and they fell all seven together, and were put to death in the days of harvest, in the first days, in the beginning of barley harvest.

α.21.10 
E.21.10 And Rizpah the daughter of Aiah took sackcloth, and spread it for her upon the rock, from the beginning of harvest until water dropped upon them out of heaven, and suffered neither the birds of the air to rest on them by day, nor the beasts of the field by night.

α.21.11 
E.21.11 And it was told David what Rizpah the daughter of Aiah, the concubine of Saul, had done.

α.21.12 
E.21.12 And David went and took the bones of Saul and the bones of Jonathan his son from the men of Jabeshgilead, which had stolen them from the street of Bethshan, where the Philistines had hanged them, when the Philistines had slain Saul in Gilboa:

α.21.13 
E.21.13 And he brought up from thence the bones of Saul and the bones of Jonathan his son; and they gathered the bones of them that were hanged.

α.21.14 
E.21.14 And the bones of Saul and Jonathan his son buried they in the country of Benjamin in Zelah, in the sepulchre of Kish his father: and they performed all that the king commanded. And after that God was intreated for the land.

α.21.15 
E.21.15 Moreover the Philistines had yet war again with Israel; and David went down, and his servants with him, and fought against the Philistines: and David waxed faint.

α.21.16 
E.21.16 And Ishbibenob, which was of the sons of the giant, the weight of whose spear weighed three hundred shekels of brass in weight, he being girded with a new sword, thought to have slain David.

α.21.17 
E.21.17 But Abishai the son of Zeruiah succoured him, and smote the Philistine, and killed him. Then the men of David sware unto him, saying, Thou shalt go no more out with us to battle, that thou quench not the light of Israel.

α.21.18 
E.21.18 And it came to pass after this, that there was again a battle with the Philistines at Gob: then Sibbechai the Hushathite slew Saph, which was of the sons of the giant.

α.21.19 
E.21.19 And there was again a battle in Gob with the Philistines, where Elhanan the son of Jaareoregim, a Bethlehemite, slew the brother of Goliath the Gittite, the staff of whose spear was like a weaver's beam.

α.21.20 
E.21.20 And there was yet a battle in Gath, where was a man of great stature, that had on every hand six fingers, and on every foot six toes, four and twenty in number; and he also was born to the giant.

α.21.21 
E.21.21 And when he defied Israel, Jonathan the son of Shimeah the brother of David slew him.

α.21.22 
E.21.22 These four were born to the giant in Gath, and fell by the hand of David, and by the hand of his servants.

α.22.1 
E.22.1 And David spake unto the LORD the words of this song in the day that the LORD had delivered him out of the hand of all his enemies, and out of the hand of Saul:

α.22.2 
E.22.2 And he said, The LORD is my rock, and my fortress, and my deliverer;

α.22.3 
E.22.3 The God of my rock; in him will I trust: he is my shield, and the horn of my salvation, my high tower, and my refuge, my saviour; thou savest me from violence.

α.22.4 
E.22.4 I will call on the LORD, who is worthy to be praised: so shall I be saved from mine enemies.

α.22.5 
E.22.5 When the waves of death compassed me, the floods of ungodly men made me afraid;

α.22.6 
E.22.6 The sorrows of hell compassed me about; the snares of death prevented me;

α.22.7 
E.22.7 In my distress I called upon the LORD, and cried to my God: and he did hear my voice out of his temple, and my cry did enter into his ears.

α.22.8 
E.22.8 Then the earth shook and trembled; the foundations of heaven moved and shook, because he was wroth.

α.22.9 
E.22.9 There went up a smoke out of his nostrils, and fire out of his mouth devoured: coals were kindled by it.

α.22.10 
E.22.10 He bowed the heavens also, and came down; and darkness was under his feet.

α.22.11 
E.22.11 And he rode upon a cherub, and did fly: and he was seen upon the wings of the wind.

α.22.12 
E.22.12 And he made darkness pavilions round about him, dark waters, and thick clouds of the skies.

α.22.13 
E.22.13 Through the brightness before him were coals of fire kindled.

α.22.14 
E.22.14 The LORD thundered from heaven, and the most High uttered his voice.

α.22.15 
E.22.15 And he sent out arrows, and scattered them; lightning, and discomfited them.

α.22.16 
E.22.16 And the channels of the sea appeared, the foundations of the world were discovered, at the rebuking of the LORD, at the blast of the breath of his nostrils.

α.22.17 
E.22.17 He sent from above, he took me; he drew me out of many waters;

α.22.18 
E.22.18 He delivered me from my strong enemy, and from them that hated me: for they were too strong for me.

α.22.19 
E.22.19 They prevented me in the day of my calamity: but the LORD was my stay.

α.22.20 
E.22.20 He brought me forth also into a large place: he delivered me, because he delighted in me.

α.22.21 
E.22.21 The LORD rewarded me according to my righteousness: according to the cleanness of my hands hath he recompensed me.

α.22.22 
E.22.22 For I have kept the ways of the LORD, and have not wickedly departed from my God.

α.22.23 
E.22.23 For all his judgments were before me: and as for his statutes, I did not depart from them.

α.22.24 
E.22.24 I was also upright before him, and have kept myself from mine iniquity.

α.22.25 
E.22.25 Therefore the LORD hath recompensed me according to my righteousness; according to my cleanness in his eye sight.

α.22.26 
E.22.26 With the merciful thou wilt shew thyself merciful, and with the upright man thou wilt shew thyself upright.

α.22.27 
E.22.27 With the pure thou wilt shew thyself pure; and with the froward thou wilt shew thyself unsavoury.

α.22.28 
E.22.28 And the afflicted people thou wilt save: but thine eyes are upon the haughty, that thou mayest bring them down.

α.22.29 
E.22.29 For thou art my lamp, O LORD: and the LORD will lighten my darkness.

α.22.30 
E.22.30 For by thee I have run through a troop: by my God have I leaped over a wall.

α.22.31 
E.22.31 As for God, his way is perfect; the word of the LORD is tried: he is a buckler to all them that trust in him.

α.22.32 
E.22.32 For who is God, save the LORD? and who is a rock, save our God?

α.22.33 
E.22.33 God is my strength and power: and he maketh my way perfect.

α.22.34 
E.22.34 He maketh my feet like hinds' feet: and setteth me upon my high places.

α.22.35 
E.22.35 He teacheth my hands to war; so that a bow of steel is broken by mine arms.

α.22.36 
E.22.36 Thou hast also given me the shield of thy salvation: and thy gentleness hath made me great.

α.22.37 
E.22.37 Thou hast enlarged my steps under me; so that my feet did not slip.

α.22.38 
E.22.38 I have pursued mine enemies, and destroyed them; and turned not again until I had consumed them.

α.22.39 
E.22.39 And I have consumed them, and wounded them, that they could not arise: yea, they are fallen under my feet.

α.22.40 
E.22.40 For thou hast girded me with strength to battle: them that rose up against me hast thou subdued under me.

α.22.41 
E.22.41 Thou hast also given me the necks of mine enemies, that I might destroy them that hate me.

α.22.42 
E.22.42 They looked, but there was none to save; even unto the LORD, but he answered them not.

α.22.43 
E.22.43 Then did I beat them as small as the dust of the earth, I did stamp them as the mire of the street, and did spread them abroad.

α.22.44 
E.22.44 Thou also hast delivered me from the strivings of my people, thou hast kept me to be head of the heathen: a people which I knew not shall serve me.

α.22.45 
E.22.45 Strangers shall submit themselves unto me: as soon as they hear, they shall be obedient unto me.

α.22.46 
E.22.46 Strangers shall fade away, and they shall be afraid out of their close places.

α.22.47 
E.22.47 The LORD liveth; and blessed be my rock; and exalted be the God of the rock of my salvation.

α.22.48 
E.22.48 It is God that avengeth me, and that bringeth down the people under me.

α.22.49 
E.22.49 And that bringeth me forth from mine enemies: thou also hast lifted me up on high above them that rose up against me: thou hast delivered me from the violent man.

α.22.50 
E.22.50 Therefore I will give thanks unto thee, O LORD, among the heathen, and I will sing praises unto thy name.

α.22.51 
E.22.51 He is the tower of salvation for his king: and sheweth mercy to his anointed, unto David, and to his seed for evermore.

α.23.1 
E.23.1 Now these be the last words of David. David the son of Jesse said, and the man who was raised up on high, the anointed of the God of Jacob, and the sweet psalmist of Israel, said,

α.23.2 
E.23.2 The Spirit of the LORD spake by me, and his word was in my tongue.

α.23.3 
E.23.3 The God of Israel said, the Rock of Israel spake to me, He that ruleth over men must be just, ruling in the fear of God.

α.23.4 
E.23.4 And he shall be as the light of the morning, when the sun riseth, even a morning without clouds; as the tender grass springing out of the earth by clear shining after rain.

α.23.5 
E.23.5 Although my house be not so with God; yet he hath made with me an everlasting covenant, ordered in all things, and sure: for this is all my salvation, and all my desire, although he make it not to grow.

α.23.6 
E.23.6 But the sons of Belial shall be all of them as thorns thrust away, because they cannot be taken with hands:

α.23.7 
E.23.7 But the man that shall touch them must be fenced with iron and the staff of a spear; and they shall be utterly burned with fire in the same place.

α.23.8 
E.23.8 These be the names of the mighty men whom David had: The Tachmonite that sat in the seat, chief among the captains; the same was Adino the Eznite: he lift up his spear against eight hundred, whom he slew at one time.

α.23.9 
E.23.9 And after him was Eleazar the son of Dodo the Ahohite, one of the three mighty men with David, when they defied the Philistines that were there gathered together to battle, and the men of Israel were gone away:

α.23.10 
E.23.10 He arose, and smote the Philistines until his hand was weary, and his hand clave unto the sword: and the LORD wrought a great victory that day; and the people returned after him only to spoil.

α.23.11 
E.23.11 And after him was Shammah the son of Agee the Hararite. And the Philistines were gathered together into a troop, where was a piece of ground full of lentiles: and the people fled from the Philistines.

α.23.12 
E.23.12 But he stood in the midst of the ground, and defended it, and slew the Philistines: and the LORD wrought a great victory.

α.23.13 
E.23.13 And three of the thirty chief went down, and came to David in the harvest time unto the cave of Adullam: and the troop of the Philistines pitched in the valley of Rephaim.

α.23.14 
E.23.14 And David was then in an hold, and the garrison of the Philistines was then in Bethlehem.

α.23.15 
E.23.15 And David longed, and said, Oh that one would give me drink of the water of the well of Bethlehem, which is by the gate!

α.23.16 
E.23.16 And the three mighty men brake through the host of the Philistines, and drew water out of the well of Bethlehem, that was by the gate, and took it, and brought it to David: nevertheless he would not drink thereof, but poured it out unto the LORD.

α.23.17 
E.23.17 And he said, Be it far from me, O LORD, that I should do this: is not this the blood of the men that went in jeopardy of their lives? therefore he would not drink it. These things did these three mighty men.

α.23.18 
E.23.18 And Abishai, the brother of Joab, the son of Zeruiah, was chief among three. And he lifted up his spear against three hundred, and slew them, and had the name among three.

α.23.19 
E.23.19 Was he not most honourable of three? therefore he was their captain: howbeit he attained not unto the first three.

α.23.20 
E.23.20 And Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, the son of a valiant man, of Kabzeel, who had done many acts, he slew two lionlike men of Moab: he went down also and slew a lion in the midst of a pit in time of snow:

α.23.21 
E.23.21 And he slew an Egyptian, a goodly man: and the Egyptian had a spear in his hand; but he went down to him with a staff, and plucked the spear out of the Egyptian's hand, and slew him with his own spear.

α.23.22 
E.23.22 These things did Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and had the name among three mighty men.

α.23.23 
E.23.23 He was more honourable than the thirty, but he attained not to the first three. And David set him over his guard.

α.23.24 
E.23.24 Asahel the brother of Joab was one of the thirty; Elhanan the son of Dodo of Bethlehem,

α.23.25 
E.23.25 Shammah the Harodite, Elika the Harodite,

α.23.26 
E.23.26 Helez the Paltite, Ira the son of Ikkesh the Tekoite,

α.23.27 
E.23.27 Abiezer the Anethothite, Mebunnai the Hushathite,

α.23.28 
E.23.28 Zalmon the Ahohite, Maharai the Netophathite,

α.23.29 
E.23.29 Heleb the son of Baanah, a Netophathite, Ittai the son of Ribai out of Gibeah of the children of Benjamin,

α.23.30 
E.23.30 Benaiah the Pirathonite, Hiddai of the brooks of Gaash,

α.23.31 
E.23.31 Abialbon the Arbathite, Azmaveth the Barhumite,

α.23.32 
E.23.32 Eliahba the Shaalbonite, of the sons of Jashen, Jonathan,

α.23.33 
E.23.33 Shammah the Hararite, Ahiam the son of Sharar the Hararite,

α.23.34 
E.23.34 Eliphelet the son of Ahasbai, the son of the Maachathite, Eliam the son of Ahithophel the Gilonite,

α.23.35 
E.23.35 Hezrai the Carmelite, Paarai the Arbite,

α.23.36 
E.23.36 Igal the son of Nathan of Zobah, Bani the Gadite,

α.23.37 
E.23.37 Zelek the Ammonite, Nahari the Beerothite, armourbearer to Joab the son of Zeruiah,

α.23.38 
E.23.38 Ira an Ithrite, Gareb an Ithrite,

α.23.39 
E.23.39 Uriah the Hittite: thirty and seven in all.

α.24.1 
E.24.1 And again the anger of the LORD was kindled against Israel, and he moved David against them to say, Go, number Israel and Judah.

α.24.2 
E.24.2 For the king said to Joab the captain of the host, which was with him, Go now through all the tribes of Israel, from Dan even to Beersheba, and number ye the people, that I may know the number of the people.

α.24.3 
E.24.3 And Joab said unto the king, Now the LORD thy God add unto the people, how many soever they be, an hundredfold, and that the eyes of my lord the king may see it: but why doth my lord the king delight in this thing?

α.24.4 
E.24.4 Notwithstanding the king's word prevailed against Joab, and against the captains of the host. And Joab and the captains of the host went out from the presence of the king, to number the people of Israel.

α.24.5 
E.24.5 And they passed over Jordan, and pitched in Aroer, on the right side of the city that lieth in the midst of the river of Gad, and toward Jazer:

α.24.6 
E.24.6 Then they came to Gilead, and to the land of Tahtimhodshi; and they came to Danjaan, and about to Zidon,

α.24.7 
E.24.7 And came to the strong hold of Tyre, and to all the cities of the Hivites, and of the Canaanites: and they went out to the south of Judah, even to Beersheba.

α.24.8 
E.24.8 So when they had gone through all the land, they came to Jerusalem at the end of nine months and twenty days.

α.24.9 
E.24.9 And Joab gave up the sum of the number of the people unto the king: and there were in Israel eight hundred thousand valiant men that drew the sword; and the men of Judah were five hundred thousand men.

α.24.10 
E.24.10 And David's heart smote him after that he had numbered the people. And David said unto the LORD, I have sinned greatly in that I have done: and now, I beseech thee, O LORD, take away the iniquity of thy servant; for I have done very foolishly.

α.24.11 
E.24.11 For when David was up in the morning, the word of the LORD came unto the prophet Gad, David's seer, saying,

α.24.12 
E.24.12 Go and say unto David, Thus saith the LORD, I offer thee three things; choose thee one of them, that I may do it unto thee.

α.24.13 
E.24.13 So Gad came to David, and told him, and said unto him, Shall seven years of famine come unto thee in thy land? or wilt thou flee three months before thine enemies, while they pursue thee? or that there be three days' pestilence in thy land? now advise, and see what answer I shall return to him that sent me.

α.24.14 
E.24.14 And David said unto Gad, I am in a great strait: let us fall now into the hand of the LORD; for his mercies are great: and let me not fall into the hand of man.

α.24.15 
E.24.15 So the LORD sent a pestilence upon Israel from the morning even to the time appointed: and there died of the people from Dan even to Beersheba seventy thousand men.

α.24.16 
E.24.16 And when the angel stretched out his hand upon Jerusalem to destroy it, the LORD repented him of the evil, and said to the angel that destroyed the people, It is enough: stay now thine hand. And the angel of the LORD was by the threshingplace of Araunah the Jebusite.

α.24.17 
E.24.17 And David spake unto the LORD when he saw the angel that smote the people, and said, Lo, I have sinned, and I have done wickedly: but these sheep, what have they done? let thine hand, I pray thee, be against me, and against my father's house.

α.24.18 
E.24.18 And Gad came that day to David, and said unto him, Go up, rear an altar unto the LORD in the threshingfloor of Araunah the Jebusite.

α.24.19 
E.24.19 And David, according to the saying of Gad, went up as the LORD commanded.

α.24.20 
E.24.20 And Araunah looked, and saw the king and his servants coming on toward him: and Araunah went out, and bowed himself before the king on his face upon the ground.

α.24.21 
E.24.21 And Araunah said, Wherefore is my lord the king come to his servant?  And David said, To buy the threshingfloor of thee, to build an altar unto the LORD, that the plague may be stayed from the people.

α.24.22 
E.24.22 And Araunah said unto David, Let my lord the king take and offer up what seemeth good unto him: behold, here be oxen for burnt sacrifice, and threshing instruments and other instruments of the oxen for wood.

α.24.23 
E.24.23 All these things did Araunah, as a king, give unto the king. And Araunah said unto the king, The LORD thy God accept thee.

α.24.24 
E.24.24 And the king said unto Araunah, Nay; but I will surely buy it of thee at a price: neither will I offer burnt offerings unto the LORD my God of that which doth cost me nothing. So David bought the threshingfloor and the oxen for fifty shekels of silver.

α.24.25 
E.24.25 And David built there an altar unto the LORD, and offered burnt offerings and peace offerings. So the LORD was intreated for the land, and the plague was stayed from Israel.