
α.1.1 UT wunnishwe nanawunnuáwe kodtum8mut Jehojakim Judae ketass8t, Nebuchadnezzar Babylone ketass8t peyau Jerusalem, kah 8wéenuhkomun.
E.1.1 In the third year of the reign of Jehoiakim king of Judah came Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon unto Jerusalem, and besieged it.

α.1.2 Kah Lord ummagunah Jehojakimoh Judae ketass8toh en wunnutcheganit, kah nawhutche wishquash ut wekit God, nish as8uttu[n]kupash en ohkeit Shinar, en wekit ummanitt8moh, kah paudtau wishquash en nompakouunikkomukqut ummanitt8moh.
E.1.2 And the Lord gave Jehoiakim king of Judah into his hand, with part of the vessels of the house of God: which he carried into the land of Shinar to the house of his god; and he brought the vessels into the treasure house of his god.

α.1.3 Kah ketass8t ken8nau Ashpenazoh wussontimóm8uh wut$eunuchseumoh: onk woh nawhutch pas8au wunnaumonuh Israel, kah wutch ketass8t 8skannemunneoh, kah wutch sontimóog.
E.1.3 And the king spake unto Ashpenaz the master of his eunuchs, that he should bring certain of the children of Israel, and of the king's seed, and of the princes;

α.1.4 Wuskenuog neg matta chagkes[e]gig qut wanekitcheg, nahtuhtunkig wame waanta[m]óonk, wahteaue nupwóog, wohtogig nish wahteomukish, kah neg tapenukeg neepauinneat ummishekommukqut ketass8t: kah neg woh kohk8tomauóncheg Caldeanse néhtúhtoonk kah unnont8waonk.
E.1.4 Children in whom was no blemish, but well favoured, and skilful in all wisdom, and cunning in knowledge, and understanding science, and such as had ability in them to stand in the king's palace, and whom they might teach the learning and the tongue of the Chaldeans.

α.1.5 Kah ketass8t ukkuhquttumauwoh, kekesukodáe ohtoonk ketass8t ummeechumum, kah wine ne wadtattog: ne wuttinne assamon nishwe kodtumwaeu, kah ne mahtshunk woh neepoog anaquabit ketass8t.
E.1.5 And the king appointed them a daily provision of the king's meat, and of the wine which he drank: so nourishing them three years, that at the end thereof they might stand before the king.

α.1.6 Kah kenugke yeug, wutch wunnaumonuh Judah, noh Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, kah Azariah:
E.1.6 Now among these were of the children of Judah, Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah:

α.1.7 Uyyiyeuh eunuchse sontim wesuonganuhkauup: kah ussowenau Daniel Belteshazzar, kah Hananiah Shadrach, kah Mishael Meshach, kah Azariah Abednego.
E.1.7 Unto whom the prince of the eunuchs gave names: for he gave unto Daniel the name of Belteshazzar; and to Hananiah, of Shadrach; and to Mishael, of Meshach; and to Azariah, of Abednego.

α.1.8 Qut Daniel pogkodtantam ut wuttahhut, matta nishkheónat wuhhogkuh, ohtauunat ketass8t ummeetsuonk; asuh nashpe wine ne wadtattog: newaj wehquetumauont eunuchse sontimoh onk woh mo nishkheónat wuhhogkuh.
E.1.8 But Daniel purposed in his heart that he would not defile himself with the portion of the king's meat, nor with the wine which he drank: therefore he requested of the prince of the eunuchs that he might not defile himself.

α.1.9 Kah God paudtauau Danieloh womonittuonk kah kitteamonteanittuonk ut anaquabit eunuchse sontim.
E.1.9 Now God had brought Daniel into favour and tender love with the prince of the eunuchs.

α.1.10 Kah eunuchse sontim unnau Danieloh, nukqush nussontimom ketass8t, noh kohquttumunkqueog kummetsuongan8, kah k8tattam8ongan8: newutche tohwhaj woh nag* kuskesukk88ash m8cheke ônauussúm8ut, onk onkatogig k8weeskenu8og? neit pish nunnukquodtut kupponamumw8 nuppuhkuk ut ketass8tamut.
E.1.10 And the prince of the eunuchs said unto Daniel, I fear my lord the king, who hath appointed your meat and your drink: for why should he see your faces worse liking than the children which are of your sort? then shall ye make me endanger my head to the king.

α.1.11 Neit Daniel unnau Melz[a]r, noh Eunuchse sontim nanawunnumwahit Daniel[ó]h, Hananiahoh, Mishaeloh, Azariahoh,
E.1.11 Then said Daniel to Melzar, whom the prince of the eunuchs had set over Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah,

α.1.12 Qutcheh kittinneumog k8wehquetumoush piogkukquinne, assamukqutteuh pulse meechinat, kah nippe wuttattamunat.
E.1.12 Prove thy servants, I beseech thee, ten days; and let them give us pulse to eat, and water to drink.

α.1.13 Neit moninneaumunach nuttinnussuonganun, ut anaquabean; kah wuttinnussuongan8 wuskenuog neg mechukeg ummeechumum ketass8t: kah nean nauman uneh kittinninn[ú]mog.
E.1.13 Then let our countenances be looked upon before thee, and the countenance of the children that eat of the portion of the king's meat: and as thou seest, deal with thy servants.

α.1.14 Neit yeu wuttinne 8namptauon, kah ukqutcheuh piogquequnnu.
E.1.14 So he consented to them in this matter, and proved them ten days.

α.1.15 Kah mahtshunk piogquequinogkod, wuttinnussuongan8 anué wunneetue nogquodt kah wunnogque weyausu, onk neg wame wuskenuog meechikeg ummeechumu[m] ketass8t.
E.1.15 And at the end of ten days their countenances appeared fairer and fatter in flesh than all the children which did eat the portion of the king's meat.

α.1.16 Neit Melzar amaunum ummeetsue ohtoongan8, kah wine ne woh wadtattamohettit, kah wutassamoh pulse.
E.1.16 Thus Melzar took away the portion of their meat, and the wine that they should drink; and gave them pulse.

α.1.17 Kah yeuh yauoh wuskenúh God wuttinninnumauoh wahteauonk, kah nehtuhtoog wame nehtuhtoonk kah waantamóonk, kah Daniel wohtam wame monomansuongash kah nanukquom8ongash
E.1.17 As for these four children, God gave them knowledge and skill in all learning and wisdom: and Daniel had understanding in all visions and dreams.

α.1.18 Kah mahtshunk kesukodtash ketass8t ánont pet[h]úus, neit eunuchse sontim uppethúunuh anaquabit Nebuchadnezzar.
E.1.18 Now at the end of the days that the king had said he should bring them in, then the prince of the eunuchs brought them in before Nebuchadnezzar.

α.1.19 Kah ketass8t ukkeket8hkauuh: kah kenugke nag wame, matta howan unne nameheóun, Danielut, Hananiahut, Mishaelut, kah Azariahut: newaj nag neepauwehettit anaquabit ketass8t.
E.1.19 And the king communed with them; and among them all was found none like Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah: therefore stood they before the king.

α.1.20 Kah ut wame nishnoh unneu waantam[ó]onk kah wohwohtamóonk, ne ketass8t nat8tomauont, wuttapeneaúe piogquodt nompe nameheuh onk neg wame pauwauog, kah Astrologersog ut wame wutass8tam8onganit.
E.1.20 And in all matters of wisdom and understanding, that the king enquired of them, he found them ten times better than all the magicians and astrologers that were in all his realm.

α.1.21 Kah Daniel na wunnagwutteápin nô pajeh wunnegonne kodtum8mut Cyrus.
E.1.21 And Daniel continued even unto the first year of king Cyrus.

α.2.1 KAh nahohtôeu wunanawunnuáe kodtumomut Nebuchadnezzar, Nebuchadnezzar unnukquom unnukquomuongash, nish nashpe wunnashauonk wuttaméhpunom8uk, kah ukkouéonk amaémo/
E.2.1 And in the second year of the reign of Nebuchadnezzar Nebuchadnezzar dreamed dreams, wherewith his spirit was troubled, and his sleep brake from him.

α.2.2 Neit ketass8t ann8team8 wehkomonat pauwauog kah Astrologersog, kah mamontamaog, kah Caldeansog, 8wahteauwaheonaout ketass8toh wuttinnukquom8ongash: neit peyaog kah neepoog ut anaquabit ketass8t.
E.2.2 Then the king commanded to call the magicians, and the astrologers, and the sorcerers, and the Chaldeans, for to shew the king his dreams. So they came and stood before the king.

α.2.3 Kah ketass8t noh wuttinuh nuttinukquom unnukquom8onk, kah nunnashauonk wuttamehpunau wahteauunat unnukquom8onk.
E.2.3 And the king said unto them, I have dreamed a dream, and my spirit was troubled to know the dream.

α.2.4 Neit Caldeansog ken8naog ketass8toh, Syriacke unnont8waonganit, woi ketass8t micheme pomantaj, us kittinnumog kuttinnukquom8onk, kah kenahtinunan ne anauwuttam8m8uk.
E.2.4 Then spake the Chaldeans to the king in Syriack, O king, live for ever: tell thy servants the dream, and we will shew the interpretation.

α.2.5 Ketass8t namp8ham, kah unnau, Caldeansoh, ne teag n8wanantamun: matta wahteauwaheog nuttinnukquom8onk kah ne an8wuttam8m8uk, pish kuss8qu[s]wutteamw8, kah kek8oash pish anohkekonash.
E.2.5 The king answered and said to the Chaldeans, The thing is gone from me: if ye will not make known unto me the dream, with the interpretation thereof, ye shall be cut in pieces, and your houses shall be made a dunghill.

α.2.6 Qut wahteauwaheog unnukquom8onk kah na anauwuttam8m8uk pish kuttattumunumaiimw8 mag8ongash, kah onkquatunkash, kah miṣhe quttianittuonk: newutche wahteauwahegk unnukquomuonk, kah ne anauwuttam8m8uk.
E.2.6 But if ye shew the dream, and the interpretation thereof, ye shall receive of me gifts and rewards and great honour: therefore shew me the dream, and the interpretation thereof.

α.2.7 Wonk namp8hamwog kah n8waog, ketass8t unnonch wuttinnumoh wuttinnukquom8onk kah kenahtinunumun ne anauwuttam8m8uk.
E.2.7 They answered again and said, Let the king tell his servants the dream, and we will shew the interpretation of it.

α.2.8 K[e]tass8t namp8ham kah n8wau, nuppahke wahteoh, kukkod wutahquompiyeumumw8, newutche kenaumumw8 ne teag nunnukonuk.
E.2.8 The king answered and said, I know of certainty that ye would gain the time, because ye see the thing is gone from me.

α.2.9 Qut matta wahteauwaheog unnukquom8onk, pasuk webe wussittumoonk wutche kenaau: newutche kukquoshauehtamumw8 pann8wae kah anitte kutt8wongash unn8wonat ut anaquabeh, nô pajeh ahquompi ôs8wem8uk: newutche unnegq unnukquom8onk, kah pish n8wahteoh woh k8wohteauwahimw8 ne anawuttam8m8uk.
E.2.9 But if ye will not make known unto me the dream, there is but one decree for you: for ye have prepared lying and corrupt words to speak before me, till the time be changed: therefore tell me the dream, and I shall know that ye can shew me the interpretation thereof.

α.2.10 Caldeansog namp8hamwog ut anaquabit ketass8t, kah n8waog, matta wosketompaun8 ut ohkeit, noh woh wahteauwaheont ne wutteag8m ketass8t: newutche wanne ketass8t, Sontim, asuh nananuwaen noh nat8tamauo[u]t neahunag howae pauwâoh kah Astrologersoh, kah Caldeansoh.
E.2.10 The Chaldeans answered before the king, and said, There is not a man upon the earth that can shew the king's matter: therefore there is no king, lord, nor ruler, that asked such things at any magician, or astrologer, or Chaldean.

α.2.11 Kah ne penowe teagwas ne ketass8t nat8tuk, kah na matta onkatuk noh oh nahtitteadt ut anaquábit ketass8t, qut webe Manitt8og, neg matta weetotam8gig weyaus.
E.2.11 And it is a rare thing that the king requireth, and there is none other that can shew it before the king, except the gods, whose dwelling is not with flesh.

α.2.12 Yeu waj ketass8t m8squantam kah mishe chenauausu, kah ann8team8 pagwanonat wame Babylone waantamwog.
E.2.12 For this cause the king was angry and very furious, and commanded to destroy all the wise men of Babylon.

α.2.13 Kah wussittumoonk sohham8m8 onk woh waantamwog nushóog, kah natinnewhaog Danieloh kah weechayeumoncheh nushonaout.
E.2.13 And the decree went forth that the wise men should be slain; and they sought Daniel and his fellows to be slain.

α.2.14 Neit Daniel kodeáhqutteam8e, kah waantamwe namp8hamauau Ariochoh ketass8t wutaskwheteae mugquomp8moh, noh sohhog nushonat Babylone waantamwoh.
E.2.14 Then Daniel answered with counsel and wisdom to Arioch the captain of the king's guard, which was gone forth to slay the wise men of Babylon:

α.2.15 Namp8ham, kah unnau Ariochoh ketass8t ummugquomp8moh, tohwaj wussittum8onk kenuppeyeu8k wutch ketass8tut? neit Arioch wahteauwaheau ne teag Danieloh.
E.2.15 He answered and said to Arioch the king's captain, Why is the decree so hasty from the king? Then Arioch made the thing known to Daniel.

α.2.16 Neit Daniel petutteau, kah wehquetumauau ketass8toh woh wuttinnumauonat ahquompi, neit woh wunnahtinoh ketass8toh ne ánawuttam8m8uk.
E.2.16 Then Daniel went in, and desired of the king that he would give him time, and that he would shew the king the interpretation.

α.2.17 Neit Daniel au wekit, kah wahteauwaheau ne teag Hananiahoh, Mishaeloh, kah Azariahoh weechayeumoncheh:
E.2.17 Then Daniel went to his house, and made the thing known to Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah, his companions:

α.2.18 Onk woh wutche peantamwog um$monanitteaongash kesukque Manit, papaume yeu kemeyeu8k, onk woh mo Daniel kah weechayeumoncheh weeche pagwanéoh onkatogeh Babylone waantamwoh.
E.2.18 That they would desire mercies of the God of heaven concerning this secret; that Daniel and his fellows should not perish with the rest of the wise men of Babylon.

α.2.19 Neit kemeyeu8k wahteauwáheon Daniel ut nukkonae monomansuonganit: neit Daniel tabuttantamauau kesukque Manitt8h.
E.2.19 Then was the secret revealed unto Daniel in a night vision. Then Daniel blessed the God of heaven.

α.2.20 Daniel namp8ham kah n8wau, wunanittamunach 8wesuonk God micheme kah micheme: newutche waantamóonk kah menuhkesuonk wuttaihe.
E.2.20 Daniel answered and said, Blessed be the name of God for ever and ever: for wisdom and might are his:

α.2.21 Kah noh ôs8wunum ahquompiyeuash kah utt8cheyeuash: noh ontashau ketass8toh, kah wunnashau ketass8toh: noh aninnumauau waantamóonk waantamwoh, kah wohwoht[a]móonk neg wahteunkeg wohwohtamóonk.
E.2.21 And he changeth the times and the seasons: he removeth kings, and setteth up kings: he giveth wisdom unto the wise, and knowledge to them that know understanding:

α.2.22 Noh wahteauwahuau m8noagish kah keme8gish, noh wahteau teag ohtag pohkenahtu, kah wequai weechayeumuk.
E.2.22 He revealeth the deep and secret things: he knoweth what is in the darkness, and the light dwelleth with him.

α.2.23 Kuttabattantamoush, kah k8wowenomush woi ken um$Manitt8moh n8shunonog, ken anummiéan waantamoonk kah menuhkesuonk kah yeuyeu k8wahteauwaheh, ne kuppeantamauunumun: newutche yeuyeu k8wahteauwahimun ketass8t wuttinniyeuonk.
E.2.23 I thank thee, and praise thee, O thou God of my fathers, who hast given me wisdom and might, and hast made known unto me now what we desired of thee: for thou hast now made known unto us the king's matter.

α.2.24 Newaj Daniel petuk[a]uau Ariochoh, neh ketass8t kehtimumpoh pagwanonat Babylone waantamwoh: moncheu kah yeu wuttinnon: ahque pagwas Babylone waantamwog: pas8weh anaquabit ketass8t, kah n8wahteauwah ketass8t ne anawuttam8m8uk.
E.2.24 Therefore Daniel went in unto Arioch, whom the king had ordained to destroy the wise men of Babylon: he went and said thus unto him; Destroy not the wise men of Babylon: bring me in before the king, and I will shew unto the king the interpretation.

α.2.25 Neit Arioch kenuppe pas8au Danieloh anaquabit ketass8t, kah yeu wuttinnon, nunnameh wosketomp, wutch Judae missinóog noh wahteauwaheont ketass8toh na anawuttam8m8uk.
E.2.25 Then Arioch brought in Daniel before the king in haste, and said thus unto him, I have found a man of the captives of Judah, that will make known unto the king the interpretation.

α.2.26 Ketass8t namp8ham kah unnau Danieloh, noh ahhenit Belteshazzar, sun kuttapnum k8wahteauwahineat unnukquomuonk no nauog, kah ne anawuttam8m8uk?
E.2.26 The king answered and said to Daniel, whose name was Belteshazzar, Art thou able to make known unto me the dream which I have seen, and the interpretation thereof?

α.2.27 Daniel namp8ham ut anaquabit ketass8t, kah n8wau, keméyeuuk ne ketass8t nat8tomauont, waantamwog, Astrologiansog, pauwauog, kah mamontamaog, matta woh wunn[á]htinnónneau.
E.2.27 Daniel answered in the presence of the king, and said, The secret which the king hath demanded cannot the wise men, the astrologers, the magicians, the soothsayers, shew unto the king;

α.2.28 Qut Manitt88 kesukqut noh wahteauwahuau kemeyeu8gish, kah wahteauwaheau ketass8t Nebuchadnezzar, toh pish ânak ut ogk[o]wáe kesukodtut. Kuttinnukquom8onk kah kuppuhkukk8e monomansuongash ut kutappineat, yeush.
E.2.28 But there is a God in heaven that revealeth secrets, and maketh known to the king Nebuchadnezzar what shall be in the latter days. Thy dream, and the visions of thy head upon thy bed, are these;

α.2.29 Ken woi ketass8t, kuttenantam8ongash kuppeyáonuk ut kutappineat, toh pish ânak ompetak; kah noh wahteauwahuad kemeyeu8gish k8wahteauwáhik toh pish ânak.
E.2.29 As for thee, O king, thy thoughts came into thy mind upon thy bed, what should come to pass hereafter: and he that revealeth secrets maketh known to thee what shall come to pass.

α.2.30 Qut nen, yeu kemeyeuuk n8wahteauwáhittean, matta wutche nutanue waantam8mâonk onk wame pomantogig, qut nag wutchu pish wahteauwaheoncheg ketass8toh ne anawuttam8muk, onk woh k8wahteoh kuttahh8wae unnantam8ongash.
E.2.30 But as for me, this secret is not revealed to me for any wisdom that I have more than any living, but for their sakes that shall make known the interpretation to the king, and that thou mightest know the thoughts of thy heart.

α.2.31 Kenaumunas woi ketass8t, kah kusseh, mishe nunneukontunk, noh 8wósippasuonk wunnegen, neepau anaquabean, kah ne ânak uhqueneunkquodt.
E.2.31 Thou, O king, sawest, and behold a great image. This great image, whose brightness was excellent, stood before thee; and the form thereof was terrible.

α.2.32 Uppuhkuk yeuoh nunnukontunk pahke goldeu8; wohpannog kah wuhpittenash silveréu8ash, wunnogkus, kah wehquaash brasseu8ash.
E.2.32 This image's head was of fine gold, his breast and his arms of silver, his belly and his thighs of brass,

α.2.33 Wuhkontash missehchuog88ash, wussetash nawhutche missehchuog88ash, kah nawhutche man8nsk88ash.
E.2.33 His legs of iron, his feet part of iron and part of clay.

α.2.34 Kenauóp pajeh hassun amóhthamuk matta nashpe menutchegash, noh togkomont nunnukontunkoh ut wusseetut nish masitchuogk8ugish, kah man8nsk8ugish, kah sohquetahhamunash.
E.2.34 Thou sawest till that a stone was cut out without hands, which smote the image upon his feet that were of iron and clay, and brake them to pieces.

α.2.35 Neit misséhchuog, kah man8nsk, brasse, silver, kah ne gold sukquehthamun, kah tatuppeyeu8 wossadteamunit ut sequanne ahhuttannuppoghomuk, kah waban wutt8anúhtamunash, nô pajeh matta ayeuonganit ut ummehteauouunat: kah qussuk noh togkomont nunnukontunkoh, mishadch88, kah numwohteau mamusse ohkeit.
E.2.35 Then was the iron, the clay, the brass, the silver, and the gold, broken to pieces together, and became like the chaff of the summer threshingfloors; and the wind carried them away, that no place was found for them: and the stone that smote the image became a great mountain, and filled the whole earth.

α.2.36 Yeu unnukquom8onk, kah nussinnean ne anawuttam8m8uk anaquabit ketass8t.
E.2.36 This is the dream; and we will tell the interpretation thereof before the king.

α.2.37 Ken woi ketass8t, ukketass8tamom8uh ketass8tamwog, newutche kesukque Manit kuttinnumunk ketass8tamóonk, missugken8onk, kah menuhkesuonk kah sohsumóonk.
E.2.37 Thou, O king, art a king of kings: for the God of heaven hath given thee a kingdom, power, and strength, and glory.

α.2.38 Kah uttoh ápinit wunnaumonáuh wosketompaog ohteuhkóne puppinashimwog, kah kesukque puppinshásog neh upponuh kenutcheganit, kah neh kenanawunnumwáhikqunoh; ken ne golde muhpuhkuk.
E.2.38 And wheresoever the children of men dwell, the beasts of the field and the fowls of the heaven hath he given into thine hand, and hath made thee ruler over them all. Thou art this head of gold.

α.2.39 Kah nahohtôe ken, pish waapem8 onkatuk ass8tam8onk peásin onk ken, kah onkatuk nashwunnú8k brasse tass8tamóonk, noh pish nanawunuk mamusse ohke.
E.2.39 And after thee shall arise another kingdom inferior to thee, and another third kingdom of brass, which shall bear rule over all the earth.

α.2.40 Kah yáwunnú8k tass8tamóonk pish ogque menuhki missehchuogkut, newutche neane missehchuog sukquehtham8m8uk, kah sohkom wame teanteagwashinish: kah neane missehchuog sukquéhtham8m8uk wame yeush: pish sukquéhthausum8, kah puppukittahham8m8.
E.2.40 And the fourth kingdom shall be strong as iron: forasmuch as iron breaketh in pieces and subdueth all things: and as iron that breaketh all these, shall it break in pieces and bruise.

α.2.41 Kah nauman musseetash kah muhpuhkukquaseetash, nawhutche ahkuhqutteaénue man8nsk, kah nawhutche missehchuog, ass8tam8onk pish chadchapem8, na$ut pish ummenuhkesuonk missehchuog: newutche kenaumup missehchuog kenukkinausu sabáe man8nsk.
E.2.41 And whereas thou sawest the feet and toes, part of potters' clay, and part of iron, the kingdom shall be divided; but there shall be in it of the strength of the iron, forasmuch as thou sawest the iron mixed with miry clay.

α.2.42 Kah neane muppuhkukquaseetash nawhutche missehchuog, nawhutche man8nsk: ne pish ne ass8tamóonk nawhutche menuhki, kah nawhutche pukkuhki.
E.2.42 And as the toes of the feet were part of iron, and part of clay, so the kingdom shall be partly strong, and partly broken.

α.2.43 Kah nauman missehchuog kenugshau sâbae man8nskut, nag pish kenukkinaog wuhhogkauh 8skannemun[ó]uh wosketompaog, qut nag matta pish môsogquehtóadtéog, neane missehchuog matta kenukshon8g missehchuogkut.
E.2.43 And whereas thou sawest iron mixed with miry clay, they shall mingle themselves with the seed of men: but they shall not cleave one to another, even as iron is not mixed with clay.

α.2.44 Kah ut ukkesukodtum8oash yeug ketass8tamwog, kesukque Manit pish wunohto ass8tamóonk, ne matta pish pagwadto8muk: kah ass8tamoonk matta pish séqunnumauóuneau onkatogig missinninnúog, qut noh pish sukqueithausu kah mohtupánum wame yeush ass8tam8ongash, kah ne pish micheme ohteau.
E.2.44 And in the days of these kings shall the God of heaven set up a kingdom, which shall never be destroyed: and the kingdom shall not be left to other people, but it shall break in pieces and consume all these kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever.

α.2.45 Nauman hassun tummehthamun wutch wadchuut matta nashpe menutchegash, sohquetaheeteom8 missehchuog, brasse, man8nsk silver kah ne gold: mishe Manit wahteauwaheau ketass8toh toh pish ânak ompetak, kah unnukquom8onk wunnamuhkutey[ê]u8, kah ne anawuttam8m8uk papaneyeu8.
E.2.45 Forasmuch as thou sawest that the stone was cut out of the mountain without hands, and that it brake in pieces the iron, the brass, the clay, the silver, and the gold; the great God hath made known to the king what shall come to pass hereafter: and the dream is certain, and the interpretation thereof sure.

α.2.46 Neit NEbuchadnezzar ketass8t penushadtam wuskesuk, kah wowussumau Danieloh, kah ann8team8 sephamauonat mag8onk kah weetemungquokish.
E.2.46 Then the king Nebuchadnezzar fell upon his face, and worshipped Daniel, and commanded that they should offer an oblation and sweet odours unto him.

α.2.47 Ketass8t namp8hamauau Danieloh, kah n8wau, wunnamuhkut ken Manitt8mw8, um-Manitt8m8uh manitt8og, kah wussontim8m8uh ketass8tamwog, kah noh wahteauwahuadt kemeyeu8gish newutche woh k8wahteauwahuwam yeu kemeyeuuk.
E.2.47 The king answered unto Daniel, and said, Of a truth it is, that your God is a God of gods, and a Lord of kings, and a revealer of secrets, seeing thou couldest reveal this secret.

α.2.48 Neit ketass8t missugkenheau Danieloh, kah wuttinnumauoh monatash mishe mag8ongash, kah nanawunnumwáheau mamusse Babylone wutohtimóin: kah kehche nanawunnuácheg, ánue wame Babylone waantamwoh.
E.2.48 Then the king made Daniel a great man, and gave him many great gifts, and made him ruler over the whole province of Babylon, and chief of the governors over all the wise men of Babylon.

α.2.49 Neit Daniel wehquetumauau ketass8toh, kah Shadrakoh, Meshechoh kah Abenegooh nanawunnumwáheuh Babylone wutohtimoinne tuppiyeuongash: qut Daniel [a]ppu 8squontamut ketass8t.
E.2.49 Then Daniel requested of the king, and he set Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, over the affairs of the province of Babylon: but Daniel sat in the gate of the king.

α.3.1 NEbuchadnezzar ketass8t unnunnúkontunk[a]néhteau gold, ne sohkunkqussit nequtta tahshinchagishquanogkod, kah ne kashkeit nequtta tashishquanogkod: upponuh Durae mukoshquttaut ut Babylone wutohtimóinneat.
E.3.1 Nebuchadnezzar the king made an image of gold, whose height was threescore cubits, and the breadth thereof six cubits: he set it up in the plain of Dura, in the province of Babylon.

α.3.2 Neit Nebuchadnezzar ketass8t ann8team8 miyanonat sontimóog, nananuacheg, kah mugquompuh, wussittumwaénuog, nompakouwauenuog, kogahqutteaenuog, kehche wutohtimóenuog, kah wame wutohtimóinne nanawunnuacheg, peyonat wowussumónat nunnukontunk neh ketass8t Nebuchadnezzar wânashoncheh.
E.3.2 Then Nebuchadnezzar the king sent to gather together the princes, the governors, and the captains, the judges, the treasurers, the counsellors, the sheriffs, and all the rulers of the provinces, to come to the dedication of the image which Nebuchadnezzar the king had set up.

α.3.3 Neit sontimoog nanawunnuacheg, kah mugquompaog, wussittumwaenuog, nompak8unnuwaenuog, kogahqutteamwenuog, kehche wutohtimoenuog, kah wutohtimoinne nanawunnuwaenuog miyaeog wowussumonat nunnukontunk ne Nebuchadnezzar ketass8t wânashoncheh, kah nag neepoog anaquabit nunnukontunk neh Nebuchadnezzar wanashoncheh
E.3.3 Then the princes, the governors, and captains, the judges, the treasurers, the counsellors, the sheriffs, and all the rulers of the provinces, were gathered together unto the dedication of the image that Nebuchadnezzar the king had set up; and they stood before the image that Nebuchadnezzar had set up.

α.3.4 Neit wôwhot8waenin mishont8wau, kutann8nitteamw8 woi missinninnuog wutohtimóinneunk, kah unnont8waongash.
E.3.4 Then an herald cried aloud, To you it is commanded, O people, nations, and languages,

α.3.5 N8tamóg wunnont8waeu cornet, flut, harp, sackbut, ps[á]ltery dulcimer, kah wame eiyane wanont8agk, penushunk kah wowussumok golde nunnukontunk neh Nebuchadnezzar ketass8t wanashoncheh.
E.3.5 That at what time ye hear the sound of the cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery, dulcimer, and all kinds of musick, ye fall down and worship the golden image that Nebuchadnezzar the king hath set up:

α.3.6 Kah noh matta panshunk kah wowussumunk ne nan hour pish unnohkon nashaue nashqunae sabassóhsuonganit.
E.3.6 And whoso falleth not down and worshippeth shall the same hour be cast into the midst of a burning fiery furnace.

α.3.7 Newaj ne ahquompag wame missinninnuog n8tamwehettit wunnont8waeu cornet, flut, harp, sackbut, psaltery, kah wame eiyane wanont8agk, wame missinninnuog, wutohtimoneash, unnont8waongash penushaog kah wowussumaog golde nunnukontunkoh neh Nebuchadnezzar ketass8t wanashompuh.
E.3.7 Therefore at that time, when all the people heard the sound of the cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery, and all kinds of musick, all the people, the nations, and the languages, fell down and worshipped the golden image that Nebuchadnezzar the king had set up.

α.3.8 Newaj na ut ahquompag nawhutche Caldeansog pas8tshaog, kah pakodchimaog Jewsoh.
E.3.8 Wherefore at that time certain Chaldeans came near, and accused the Jews.

α.3.9 Nag kutt8og kah unnaog ketass8toh Nebuchadnezzar, woi ketass8t micheme pomantaj.
E.3.9 They spake and said to the king Nebuchadnezzar, O king, live for ever.

α.3.10 Ken woi ketass8t kukkuhquttumup, nish$noh wosketomp n8tog wunnont8waeu Cornet, Flute, Harp, Sackbut, Psaltery, kah Dulcimer, kah wame eiyane wánont8wag, pish penushau kah wowussumau Golde nunnukontunkoh.
E.3.10 Thou, O king, hast made a decree, that every man that shall hear the sound of the cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery, and dulcimer, and all kinds of musick, shall fall down and worship the golden image:

α.3.11 Kah howan matta penushunk kah wowussummuog, noh woh unnuhkon nashaue nashqunae sabassohsuonganit.
E.3.11 And whoso falleth not down and worshippeth, that he should be cast into the midst of a burning fiery furnace.

α.3.12 Nawhutche Jewsog neg nanawunnumwaheadcheg Babylon[e] wutohtimoinne wuttinniyeuonganooash Shadrach Meshach kah Abednego: yeug wosketompaog woi ketass8t matta toh kuttin tupanumuk8og, nág matta wowussumauoog kum$Manitt8moh, kah matta wowussumauoog golde nunnukontunkoh noh wanashadt.
E.3.12 There are certain Jews whom thou hast set over the affairs of the province of Babylon, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego; these men, O king, have not regarded thee: they serve not thy gods, nor worship the golden image which thou hast set up.

α.3.13 Neit Nebuchadnezzar musquontog, kah chenauausit, ann8team8 pas8onat Shadrach, Meshach, kah Abednego: neit yeuh uppas8ouh wosketompuh anaquabit ketass8t.
E.3.13 Then Nebuchadnezzar in his rage and fury commanded to bring Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego. Then they brought these men before the king.

α.3.14 Nebuchadnezzar kutt8, kah nah wuttinuh, sun yeu wunnamuhkut, woi Shadrach, Meshach, kah Abednego? sun mo k8wowussumomw8 num$manit8mog, kah sun mo k8wowussumómw8 golde nunnukontunk neh wánashog?
E.3.14 Nebuchadnezzar spake and said unto them, Is it true, O Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, do not ye serve my gods, nor worship the golden image which I have set up?

α.3.15 Yeuyeu quashweóg, n8tamóg wunnont8waeu cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery, kah dulcimer, kah wame eiyane wánont8wagk: penushoóg kah wowussumóog nunnukontunk noh kezheog, wunnegen; qut matta wowussum8óg, ne nan hour, pish kuttinnohkonitteamw8 nashauwe nashqunnae sabasseganit: kah howae noh Manit neh woh pohquohwhunukqueóg wutch nunnutcheganit?
E.3.15 Now if ye be ready that at what time ye hear the sound of the cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery, and dulcimer, and all kinds of musick, ye fall down and worship the image which I have made; well: but if ye worship not, ye shall be cast the same hour into the midst of a burning fiery furnace; and who is that God that shall deliver you out of my hands?

α.3.16 Shadrach, Meshach kah Abednego namp8hamwog, kah unnaog ketass8toh, woi Nebuchadnezzar, matta nukquenauwé[h]ik8mun kenamp8hamauunanónut yeu papaume.
E.3.16 Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, answered and said to the king, O Nebuchadnezzar, we are not careful to answer thee in this matter.

α.3.17 Tohneit, nenag, num-Manitt8mun noh waussumogkut noh tapenum nuppohquohwhunukqunnanonut wutch nashqunáe sabasseganit, kah noh pish nuppohquohwhunukqun wutch kenutcheganit, woi ketass8t.
E.3.17 If it be so, our God whom we serve is able to deliver us from the burning fiery furnace, and he will deliver us out of thine hand, O king.

α.3.18 Qut matta nan8g, wahteaush, woi ketass8t, matta n8wowussumómun kum-manitt8mog, auh wowussumonat golde ennúnnukontunk noh wanashadt.
E.3.18 But if not, be it known unto thee, O king, that we will not serve thy gods, nor worship the golden image which thou hast set up.

α.3.19 Neit Nebuchadnezzar numwae musquantam kah wuttinnussuonk ôs8wém8 ayeukonittue Shadrachoh, Meshachoh kah Abednego: newaj ann8teamwit nesausuk tahshit nompe kussampskussumunat sabassauseg.
E.3.19 Then was Nebuchadnezzar full of fury, and the form of his visage was changed against Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego: therefore he spake, and commanded that they should heat the furnace one seven times more than it was wont to be heated.

α.3.20 Kah ann8nau anue ummenuhkesuénumoh ut ukkenauwamúmut, tohkuppinnónat Shadrach, Meshach kah Abednego, kah unnohkonónat en nashqunáe n8tae sabasseganit.
E.3.20 And he commanded the most mighty men that were in his army to bind Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, and to cast them into the burning fiery furnace.

α.3.21 Neit yeug wosketompaog tohkuppinóog nashpe monakinash, mokkussinash, hash8nuk8unash kah hogk8ongash, kah unnohkonunk ut nashaue nashqunáe n8tae sabasseganit.
E.3.21 Then these men were bound in their coats, their hosen, and their hats, and their other garments, and were cast into the midst of the burning fiery furnace.

α.3.22 Newaj ketass8t wutann8team8onk chekeyeuuk, kah s[a]basseg mishe kussopitteau, n8n8nae n8tau wunnushóuh neg wosketompaog kônunoncheg Shadrachoh, Meshachoh kah Abednegooh.
E.3.22 Therefore because the king's commandment was urgent, and the furnace exceeding hot, the flames of the fire slew those men that took up Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego.

α.3.23 Kah yeug nishuog wosketompaog Shadrach, Meshach kah Abednego, weeweepappissue penushaog ut nashaue nashqunáe n8tae sabasseganit.
E.3.23 And these three men, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, fell down bound into the midst of the burning fiery furnace.

α.3.24 Neit Nebuchadnezzar chepshau, kah kenuppe neepau, kah kutt8, kah unnau ukkogahqutteaménúmoh, sunnummatta nuttinnehteómun nishúog weeweetpappissuog wosketompaog ut nashaue n8taut? nag namp8hamwog kah unnáog ketass8toh, nux woi ketass8t.
E.3.24 Then Nebuchadnezzar the king was astonied, and rose up in haste, and spake, and said unto his counsellors, Did not we cast three men bound into the midst of the fire? They answered and said unto the king, True, O king.

α.3.25 Namp8ham kah n8wau, kusseh, nunnau yauog wosketompaog ompeneausuog, pomushaog nashaue n8taut, kah nag matta woskeheoog, kah neánussit yau88wit wunnaumónat God.
E.3.25 He answered and said, Lo, I see four men loose, walking in the midst of the fire, and they have no hurt; and the form of the fourth is like the Son of God.

α.3.26 Neit Nebuchadnezzar pas8tshau nashqunnáe n8tae sabassegane squontamut, kah kutt8, kah n8wau, Shadrach, Meshach kah Abednego kenaau wuttinnumoh quanunkqussit God, sohham8k, kah peyunk, neit Shadrach, Meshach kah Abednego sohhamwog wutch nashaue n8taut.
E.3.26 Then Nebuchadnezzar came near to the mouth of the burning fiery furnace, and spake, and said, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, ye servants of the most high God, come forth, and come hither. Then Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, came forth of the midst of the fire.

α.3.27 Kah sontimóog, nananuwacheg, kah mugquompaog, kah ketass8t ukkogahqutteaéneumoh, miyahettit nag nauáog yeuh wosketompuh, neg ut wuhhogk[áó]ut n8tau m[a]nuhkeseg, kah matt[á] meesunk ut uppuhkuk8óut wajteánuk, asuh wuthogk8ongan8ash matta woh[t]an8g, kah ne ásumunkquok n8tau matta ohtan8.
E.3.27 And the princes, governors, and captains, and the king's counsellors, being gathered together, saw these men, upon whose bodies the fire had no power, nor was an hair of their head singed, neither were their coats changed, nor the smell of fire had passed on them.

α.3.28 Neit Nebuchadnezzar kutt8, kah n8wau, wunnanumunach um-Manitt8moh Shadrach, Meshach, kah Abednego, noh ann8nont wut$angelumoh, kah pohquohwhunau wuttinnúmoh, neh pabuhtanumukqutcheh, kah ôs8wunnumwog wuttinn8waonk ketass8t, kah m[o]gukeg wuhhogkauh, onk woh mo wuttinnúmuhkauoog asuh wowussumóog howae manitto, qut webe um-Manitt8m8uh.
E.3.28 Then Nebuchadnezzar spake, and said, Blessed be the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, who hath sent his angel, and delivered his servants that trusted in him, and have changed the king's word, and yielded their bodies, that they might not serve nor worship any god, except their own God.

α.3.29 Newaj kuhquttum, nishnoh missinnin, wutohtimóin, kah unnont8waonk, noh matche unnont um-Manitt8moh Shadrach, Meshach, kah Abednego, nag pish sohquswóog, kah wek8oash pish anóhkékonash, newutche matta onkatog Manit noh nen woh ánappohquáwhutteunt.
E.3.29 Therefore I make a decree, That every people, nation, and language, which speak any thing amiss against the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, shall be cut in pieces, and their houses shall be made a dunghill: because there is no other God that can deliver after this sort.

α.3.30 Neit ketass8t wunayeúhteau Shadrachoh, Meshechoh, kah Abednegoh, ut Babylone wutohtimóineat.
E.3.30 Then the king promoted Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, in the province of Babylon.

α.4.1 NEbuchadnezzar ketass8t, en wame missinninnuog, wutohtimóne[a]shk kah unnont8waongash neg [à]yitcheg mamusse ohkeit, wunohteaonk muttáanitch en kuhhogkaóut.
E.4.1 Nebuchadnezzar the king, unto all people, nations, and languages, that dwell in all the earth; Peace be multiplied unto you.

α.4.2 Wunnegen ut anaquabeh wahteauwáhuónat kuhkinneasuongash kah monchanatam8ongash nish qu[a]nunkqussit God nahtussitcheh.
E.4.2 I thought it good to shew the signs and wonders that the high God hath wrought toward me.

α.4.3 Uttoh en missiyeuash ukkuhkinneasuongash? kah uttoh en menuhkiyeuash ummonchanatam8ongash? wutass8tamoonk ne mich[e]moht[â]e ass8tamoonk, kah wunnanawunnuwáonk wutch pometuonganit onk yean pometuonganit. 
E.4.3 How great are his signs! and how mighty are his wonders! his kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and his dominion is from generation to generation.

α.4.4 Nen Nebuchadnezzar nutanwôsinup ut nekit, kah n8niyeup ut nummishe komukqut.
E.4.4 I Nebuchadnezzar was at rest in mine house, and flourishing in my palace:

α.4.5 Nunnauomp unnukquomuonk, ne wabesuahhikquéomp, & nuttenautam8ongash ut nutapinneat, kah nuppuhkukque monomansuongash n8tamehikup.
E.4.5 I saw a dream which made me afraid, and the thoughts upon my bed and the visions of my head troubled me.

α.4.6 Newaj kuhk8wai pas8wonat wame Babylone waantamwog ut anaquabeh, onk woh nag n8wahteauwáhikquog neanawuttam8m8uk unnukquom8onk.
E.4.6 Therefore made I a decree to bring in all the wise men of Babylon before me, that they might make known unto me the interpretation of the dream.

α.4.7 Neit petutteaog Pauwauog, Astrologersog, Caldeansog, kah mamontamaog, k[a]h nuttinnóog nuttinnukquom8onk ut anaquabhettit, qut matta n8wahteauwahik8og neanawuttam88uk.
E.4.7 Then came in the magicians, the astrologers, the Chaldeans, and the soothsayers: and I told the dream before them; but they did not make known unto me the interpretation thereof.

α.4.8 Qut maumachish Daniel petutteau ut anaquabeh (noh as8wesit Belteshazzar, ne as8wesit num$manitt8m, kah ut wuhhogkat, wunnashauanitt8moh wunneetupanatamwe manitt8og) kah ut anquabit nuttinnóp nuttinnukquom8onk, nussip,
E.4.8 But at the last Daniel came in before me, whose name was Belteshazzar, according to the name of my God, and in whom is the spirit of the holy gods: and before him I told the dream, saying,

α.4.9 Woi Belteshazzar, wussontim8m8uh waantamwog, newutche n8wahteoh wunnashauanitt8moh wunneetupanatamwe Manit kutappehtunk, kah matta kemeyeuuk k8ta[m]éhik, ussek nuttinnukquomue monomansuongash nish naumonish, kah ne ánaquttam8m8uk.
E.4.9 O Belteshazzar, master of the magicians, because I know that the spirit of the holy gods is in thee, and no secret troubleth thee, tell me the visions of my dream that I have seen, and the interpretation thereof.

α.4.10 Yeush nuppuhkuk8e monomansuongash ut nutapineat: nunnauomp, kah kusseh, mehtug ut nôeu ohkeit, kah muttae qunuhquodt.
E.4.10 Thus were the visions of mine head in my bed; I saw, and behold a tree in the midst of the earth, and the height thereof was great.

α.4.11 Mehtug negkin, kah menuhki, kah ne sohkunkquok missishin kesukqut, kah naumun wutch wame wehqshik ohke.
E.4.11 The tree grew, and was strong, and the height thereof reached unto heaven, and the sight thereof to the end of all the earth:

α.4.12 Wunneppogwash wunnegenash, kah muttaánit ummeechummuonk, kah na$ut wame 8meechummuonganinneau: ohteuhkone puppinashimwog 8tunkauwohtómuneau, kah kesukque puppinshasog wuttuhqunit ayeuog, kah wame weyaus ummeechine[au].
E.4.12 The leaves thereof were fair, and the fruit thereof much, and in it was meat for all: the beasts of the field had shadow under it, and the fowls of the heaven dwelt in the boughs thereof, and all flesh was fed of it.

α.4.13 Nunnaumunap ut nuppuhkukque monomansuongash ut nutappinneat, kah kusseh, askuhwheteaénin, kah w[a]neetupánatamwéy[e]uit n8keu wutch kesukqut.
E.4.13 I saw in the visions of my head upon my bed, and, behold, a watcher and an holy one came down from heaven;

α.4.14 Mishont8wau, kah yeu wussin, tummehtham8k mehtug, kah tummantukqunham8k, pauwôhteagk wunnepagwash, kah seahham8k ummeechummuonk, puppinashimwog amaéihettich wutch agwu, kah puppinshasog wutch wuttuhqunéhtu.
E.4.14 He cried aloud, and said thus, Hew down the tree, and cut off his branches, shake off his leaves, and scatter his fruit: let the beasts get away from under it, and the fowls from his branches:

α.4.15 Qut onch, sequnnum8k wéhquanunk 8wadchábukumash ut ohkeit, kukképissitch missehchuog kah brasse, ut wushkéashquosh ut ohteúhkónit, kah ogqushkaj wutch kesukque nehchippog, kah wutchippiyéumitch[,] kenugke puppinashimwog, ut ohkée moskehtuut.
E.4.15 Nevertheless leave the stump of his roots in the earth, even with a band of iron and brass, in the tender grass of the field; and let it be wet with the dew of heaven, and let his portion be with the beasts in the grass of the earth:

α.4.16 Wuttah [ó]s8wem8itch wutch wosketompahtu, kah puppinashimwe metah aninnumauunach, kah nesausuk tahshit nompe ahquompiyeuash paumuhkongqutch.
E.4.16 Let his heart be changed from man's, and let a beast's heart be given unto him; and let seven times pass over him.

α.4.17 Yeu n$nih nashpe ukkuhquttum8ongan8 askuhwheteaenuog, kah ne nat8mu[h]kon nashpe wuttinn8waongan8 waneetupanatamweyeuwutcheg, onk woh pomontogig wahteauog, noh quanunkquapit nanawunnum wutass8tam8onganit wosketompaog kah wuttinninnumauon howane anantogeh, kah wunanawunumwaheon tiuhquonkqusse missinninnuh.
E.4.17 This matter is by the decree of the watchers, and the demand by the word of the holy ones: to the intent that the living may know that the most High ruleth in the kingdom of men, and giveth it to whomsoever he will, and setteth up over it the basest of men.

α.4.18 Yeu unnukquomuonk nen ketass8t Nebuchadnezar nuñaumun: yeuyeu ken woi Belteshazzar, w[á]hteauwahuash ne anawuttam8m8uk, newutche wame waantamwog ut nutass8tam8onganit matta tapenum8og n8wahteauwahikqunauout ne anawuttam8m8uk: qut kuttapenum, newutche wunnashauanitt8moh wunneetupanatamwe Manitt8og kutapehtunk.
E.4.18 This dream I king Nebuchadnezzar have seen. Now thou, O Belteshazzar, declare the interpretation thereof, forasmuch as all the wise men of my kingdom are not able to make known unto me the interpretation: but thou art able; for the spirit of the holy gods is in thee.

α.4.19 Neit Daniel (noh as8wes[i]t Beltshazzar) chepshau pasuk hower, kah wuttenantam8onk wuttamhik: ketass8t kutt8, kah n8wau, Belteshazar, unnukquom8onk, kah ne anawuttam8m8uk ahque wuttamhikquish: Belteshazzar namp8ham kah n8wau, nussontimom, unnukquom8onk nuhkuhkonkqhettich neg sekeneunkqueaneg, kah ne anawuttam8m8uk en kummatwomut.
E.4.19 Then Daniel, whose name was Belteshazzar, was astonied for one hour, and his thoughts troubled him. The king spake, and said, Belteshazzar, let not the dream, or the interpretation thereof, trouble thee. Belteshazzar answered and said, My lord, the dream be to them that hate thee, and the interpretation thereof to thine enemies.

α.4.20 Mehtug ne nauman, ne neekuk kah manuhkag, ne sohkunkquok masishik kesukqut, kah neg nagig mamusse ohkeit.
E.4.20 The tree that thou sawest, which grew, and was strong, whose height reached unto the heaven, and the sight thereof to all the earth;

α.4.21 OOneepogwash wunnegenash kah ummeechummuonk monadt, kah ne$ut 8meechumumunneau wame, ne agwe ohteuhkone puppinashimwog aphetteup, kah noh 8tahqunit kesukque puppinshasog aphetteup.
E.4.21 Whose leaves were fair, and the fruit thereof much, and in it was meat for all; under which the beasts of the field dwelt, and upon whose branches the fowls of the heaven had their habitation:

α.4.22 Ken woi ketass8t, keneekean, kah manuhkesean: newutche kummissugkenuonk nekin, kah mussishin kesukqut, kah kenanawunnumoonk, en wehqshik ohke.
E.4.22 It is thou, O king, that art grown and become strong: for thy greatness is grown, and reacheth unto heaven, and thy dominion to the end of the earth.

α.4.23 Kah ketass8t nauont askuhwheteaenuh, kah waneetupanatamweyeuit n8keu wutch kesukqut, kah an8w[a]dt, tummehtham8k mehtug, kah nehto8k; qut sequnnum8k weehquanunkq ut ohkeit, kuhkepunau8k missehchuog kah brasse, ut ohteuhkone wuskeasqut, kah kesukque neechippog ogquehchippadtauutch, kah wutchippiyeumitch ohteuhkone puppinashimwoh, nô pajeh nesausuk tahshit nompe paumuhkongqut.
E.4.23 And whereas the king saw a watcher and an holy one coming down from heaven, and saying, Hew the tree down, and destroy it; yet leave the stump of the roots thereof in the earth, even with a band of iron and brass, in the tender grass of the field; and let it be wet with the dew of heaven, and let his portion be with the beasts of the field, till seven times pass over him;

α.4.24 Yeu nauwuttamun woi ketass8t, kah yeu ukkuhquttumoonk noh quanunkquapit, ne nohkuhkongquit nussontimom ketass8t.
E.4.24 This is the interpretation, O king, and this is the decree of the most High, which is come upon my lord the king:

α.4.25 Nag pish kussohh8kauoog wutch kenugke wosketompaut, kah kutayeuonk pish ut kenugke ohteuhkone puppinashimwut, kah pish kutogque meechuwahikquog moskehtuash oxinut, kah nag pish kutogqutchippanukquog kesukque neechippog, kah nesausuk tahshit ahquompiyeuash pish kutanuhkongquog, nô pajeh k8wahteauunat, noh quanunkquappit nanawunum wutass8tam8ongan8 wosketompaog, kah wuttinnumauon howane anantogeh.
E.4.25 That they shall drive thee from men, and thy dwelling shall be with the beasts of the field, and they shall make thee to eat grass as oxen, and they shall wet thee with the dew of heaven, and seven times shall pass over thee, till thou know that the most High ruleth in the kingdom of men, and giveth it to whomsoever he will.

α.4.26 Kah ann8teamohettit sequnnumunat wehquanunkquame wadchaubokash: kutass8tamoonk pish papaneyeu8 ut kuhhogkat, mache wahteauan kesukquash nanawunum.
E.4.26 And whereas they commanded to leave the stump of the tree roots; thy kingdom shall be sure unto thee, after that thou shalt have known that the heavens do rule.

α.4.27 Newutche woi ketass8t, nukkogahqutteam8onk tapeneunkquadtitch ut kuhhogkat, kah pohquenush kummatcheseongash nashpe sampweusseonk, kah kuppanneseongash nashpe monanumonat macheku, pôgwodche woh qunnehteauun k8nohteaonk.
E.4.27 Wherefore, O king, let my counsel be acceptable unto thee, and break off thy sins by righteousness, and thine iniquities by shewing mercy to the poor; if it may be a lengthening of thy tranquillity.

α.4.28 Wame yeu wunnuhkuhkongqun Nebuchadnezzar ketass8t.
E.4.28 All this came upon the king Nebuchadnezzar.

α.4.29 Mahtshahettit nabo neesuog nepauzsaog pomushau ut Babylone ketahs8tamoe mishekomukqut.
E.4.29 At the end of twelve months he walked in the palace of the kingdom of Babylon.

α.4.30 Ketass8t kutt8 kah n8wau, sunnummatta yeu mishe Babylon, ne ayim wutch ketass8tam88 kommuk, nashpe nummissugkenue menuhkesuonk, kah quttianatamunat nummamutta[n]ussuonk?
E.4.30 The king spake, and said, Is not this great Babylon, that I have built for the house of the kingdom by the might of my power, and for the honour of my majesty?

α.4.31 Kutt8onk ohtag ketass8t wutt8nut, wadtauatonkqussuonk 8m88 kesukqut, n8wau, woi ketass8t Nebuchadnezzar, ken kuttittean, ass8tamoonk kenukonuk.
E.4.31 While the word was in the king's mouth, there fell a voice from heaven, saying, O king Nebuchadnezzar, to thee it is spoken; The kingdom is departed from thee.

α.4.32 Kah pish kussohh8kungquog wutch wosketompahtu, kah kutayeuonk pish ohteuhkone puppinashimwut, pish kutogque meechhikquog moskehtuash oxinut; kah nesausuk tahshit pish kenuhkuhkongquog, nô pajeh k8wahteauunat anue quanunkquappit, noh nanawunum wutass8tam8ongan8 wosketompaog, kah wuttinnumauon howane anantogeh.
E.4.32 And they shall drive thee from men, and thy dwelling shall be with the beasts of the field: they shall make thee to eat grass as oxen, and seven times shall pass over thee, until thou know that the most High ruleth in the kingdom of men, and giveth it to whomsoever he will.

α.4.33 Ne nan howr ne nan n$nihyeup ut Nebuchadnezzarut, kah noh ama8hkauau wutch wosketompaut, kah ogque meechu moskeht[a]sh oxinut, kah wuhhog ogqushki wutch kesukque neechippog: nô pajeh 8weshaginash ogque nekik wompussikukquáut, kah wuhkossuh onatuh psuksesut.
E.4.33 The same hour was the thing fulfilled upon Nebuchadnezzar: and he was driven from men, and did eat grass as oxen, and his body was wet with the dew of heaven, till his hairs were grown like eagles' feathers, and his nails like birds' claws.

α.4.34 Kah mohtshunk kesukodtash, nen Nebuchadnezzar nuttahshinumup nuskesukquash en kesukqut, kah n8wohwohtam8onk qushkem8 en nuhhogkat, kah n8nanumomp noh quanunkquappit, kah n8woweenomomp, kah nukquehtianumomp noh macheme pomontog, noh wunnanawunnumoonk michemohtae nanawunnamoonk, kah wutass8tamoonk wutch pometuonganit onk yean pometuonganit.
E.4.34 And at the end of the days I Nebuchadnezzar lifted up mine eyes unto heaven, and mine understanding returned unto me, and I blessed the most High, and I praised and honoured him that liveth for ever, whose dominion is an everlasting dominion, and his kingdom is from generation to generation:

α.4.35 Kah wame wadohkitcheg ohkeit mat toh$hen tupanumoog: kah noh usseu ne anantog ut kesukque kenauwameonganit, kah kenugke wadohkitcheg ohkeit, kah matta howane oppeoh wunnutcheganit, asuh unnoou toh kutusse[m].
E.4.35 And all the inhabitants of the earth are reputed as nothing: and he doeth according to his will in the army of heaven, and among the inhabitants of the earth: and none can stay his hand, or say unto him, What doest thou?

α.4.36 Nenan ahquompag n8waantamoonk qushkem8 en nuhhogkat: kah papaume nukketass8tamoe sohsumoonk, nukquttianumitteaonk, kah n8wohsippasuonk qushkem8 en nuhhogkat, kah nukkogahqutteamweneumog, kah nussontimomog, n8wehquetumunkquog, kah nummenuhkehit ut nutass8tam8onganit, kah wanegik mamutanissuonk nukk8tnumo[u]t.
E.4.36 At the same time my reason returned unto me; and for the glory of my kingdom, mine honour and brightness returned unto me; and my counsellors and my lords sought unto me; and I was established in my kingdom, and excellent majesty was added unto me.

α.4.37 Yeuyeu nen Nebuchadnezzar, nuttabuttantamau, nummisheh kah nukquehtianum kesukque ketass8t, noh wame w[u]tanakausuongash sampw[a]gk, kah ummayash wussittum8onganu8ash, kah neh pahtuanumwe pomushanutche noh tapenum wuttiuhquonkqheonat.
E.4.37 Now I Nebuchadnezzar praise and extol and honour the King of heaven, all whose works are truth, and his ways judgment: and those that walk in pride he is able to abase.

α.5.1 BElshazzar ketass8t mishadtupweheau muttannonganogkussuoh wussontimom[uh], wuttattam wine ut anaquabhettit[,] mattannonganogkussuoh.
E.5.1 Belshazzar the king made a great feast to a thousand of his lords, and drank wine before the thousand.

α.5.2 Belshazzar qua[i]tog wine, an8team8 paudtauunat golde kah silvere wishquash, nish 8shoh Nebuchadnezaroh wadtinukish Temple ne ohtag Jerusalem, onk woh ketass8t, kah wussontimomoh ummittamwussoh, kah 8sk[a]ppeumoh 8tattamwohtinaoash.
E.5.2 Belshazzar, whiles he tasted the wine, commanded to bring the golden and silver vessels which his father Nebuchadnezzar had taken out of the temple which was in Jerusalem; that the king, and his princes, his wives, and his concubines, might drink therein.

α.5.3 Neit paudtauog golde wishquash, nish wadtinumukish temple God wekit, ne ohtag Jerusalem, kah ketass8t kah wussontimomoh, ummittamwussoh kah 8skoppeumoh nish 8tattamwohtinaoash.
E.5.3 Then they brought the golden vessels that were taken out of the temple of the house of God which was at Jerusalem; and the king, and his princes, his wives, and his concubines, drank in them.

α.5.4 Wuttattamwog wine, kah wowenodtumwog golde, kah silvere, kah brasse, kah missehchuogke, mehtugque, kah hassunne Manitt8og.
E.5.4 They drank wine, and praised the gods of gold, and of silver, of brass, of iron, of wood, and of stone.

α.5.5 Ne nan howr, muhpuhkukquanitcheash wosketompae wunnutcheganit sohham8m8ash, kah wussukwhos[u]m8ash ut piuhsukeh wequananteg[a]nuhtugqut, ut sussippo[n]gkomukque suss8chaganeganit ut ketass8t mishekommukqut, kah ketass8t naum kodchuhki menutcheg ne wussukwhosum8.
E.5.5 In the same hour came forth fingers of a man's hand, and wrote over against the candlestick upon the plaister of the wall of the king's palace: and the king saw the part of the hand that wrote.

α.5.6 Neit ketass8t wuttinnussuonk ôs8wem8, kah wuttenantam8ongash wuttamhik, newaj wuss[e]gane wutahtogunk n8chumwi, kah ukkuttukquoh mummussuhkô[a]dtuoh.
E.5.6 Then the king's countenance was changed, and his thoughts troubled him, so that the joints of his loins were loosed, and his knees smote one against another.

α.5.7 Ketass8t mishont8wau pas8onat, Astrologersog kah Caldeansog, kah pauwauog, kah ketass8t kutt8, kah ken8nau Babylone waantamwoh, howan maṣhammiit[,] yeu wussukwhonk kah nahtussit ne anawuttam8m8uk, pish hogk8 masquodtissausik, kah golde chaine ut wussittuppukanit, kah noh pish nishwe nanawunnuaenu8 ut ass8tam8onganit.
E.5.7 The king cried aloud to bring in the astrologers, the Chaldeans, and the soothsayers. And the king spake, and said to the wise men of Babylon, Whosoever shall read this writing, and shew me the interpretation thereof, shall be clothed with scarlet, and have a chain of gold about his neck, and shall be the third ruler in the kingdom.

α.5.8 Neit wame peyaog ketass8toh 8waantam8moh, qut nag n8nunumwog ogketamunat wussukwhe[g], kah matta wahteauwaheo8og ketass8toh ne an wuttam8m8uk.
E.5.8 Then came in all the king's wise men: but they could not read the writing, nor make known to the king the interpretation thereof.

α.5.9 Neit ketass8t Belshazzar mishe wuttamantam, kah wuttinnussuonk pe[n]uwunneunkquodt ut wuhhogkat, kah wussontimomo[h] chepshaoh.
E.5.9 Then was king Belshazzar greatly troubled, and his countenance was changed in him, and his lords were astonied.

α.5.10 Kehchesonkisq newutche ukkutt8wongash ketass8t, kah wussontimomuh, petuttean mishadtupp8e wetuomut, kah sonk[i]shq kutt8 kah n8wau, woi ketass8t, micheme pomantaj, ahque kuttenantam8ongash wuttamhukqush, kah ahque ôs8wem8utch kuttinnussuonk.
E.5.10 Now the queen by reason of the words of the king and his lords came into the banquet house: and the queen spake and said, O king, live for ever: let not thy thoughts trouble thee, nor let thy countenance be changed:

α.5.11 Na wutap[pi]n wosketomp ketass8tam8onganit noh apehtunkqut wunnashauanitt8m8uh wunneetupanatamwe manitt8og: kah ut ukkesukkodtumut k8sh, wequai, kah wohwohtam8o[n]k, kah waantam8onk, ogqueneunkquodt 8waantam8ongan8 manittoog namehteauónuh, neh ketass8t Nebuchadnezzar k8sh, ketass8t k8sh nanawunnumw[á]heau Pauwauoh, Astrologersoh, Caldeansoh, kah mamontumoh.
E.5.11 There is a man in thy kingdom, in whom is the spirit of the holy gods; and in the days of thy father light and understanding and wisdom, like the wisdom of the gods, was found in him; whom the king Nebuchadnezzar thy father, the king, I say, thy father, made master of the magicians, astrologers, Chaldeans, and soothsayers;

α.5.12 Newutche wunnetue nashauanit, kah wahteauonk, kah wohwohtamoonk, unnauwuttamunat unnukquomuongash, kah wahteauwahuwonat siogk8waongash, kah pa[h]keteauunat [ch]annantam8ongash, na[m]ehteauun noh nan Daniel, neh ketass8t as8wenompoh Belteshazzar, eyeu Daniel wehkomunach, kah noh woh wahteau[á]huwau ne anawuttam8m8uk.
E.5.12 Forasmuch as an excellent spirit, and knowledge, and understanding, interpreting of dreams, and shewing of hard sentences, and dissolving of doubts, were found in the same Daniel, whom the king named Belteshazzar: now let Daniel be called, and he will shew the interpretation.

α.5.13 Neit Daniel pas8au ut anaquabit ketass8t, kah ketass8t kutt8, kah unnau Danieloh, sun ken noh Daniel, wutch missinnae wunneecha[nin] Judah, neh ketass8t n8sh sohwunumpoh wutch Jury?
E.5.13 Then was Daniel brought in before the king. And the king spake and said unto Daniel, Art thou that Daniel, which art of the children of the captivity of Judah, whom the king my father brought out of Jewry?

α.5.14 Ken8tamwonsh, wunnashauanitt8moh manitt8og kutapehtunk, k[ù]h wequah, kah wohwohtamoonk, kah wamég[i]k waantamoonk kenamteo[n]tean.
E.5.14 I have even heard of thee, that the spirit of the gods is in thee, and that light and understanding and excellent wisdom is found in thee.

α.5.15 kah yeuyeu waantamwog, Astrologersog, pethúunóog ut anaquabeh, onk woh wutogketamunaóut yeu wussukwhonk, kah woh n8wahteauwahikqunnaóut ne anawuttam8m8uk: qut nag matta missohham8og ne anawuttam8m8uk.
E.5.15 And now the wise men, the astrologers, have been brought in before me, that they should read this writing, and make known unto me the interpretation thereof: but they could not shew the interpretation of the thing:

α.5.16 Kah ken8tamwo[u]sh, woh kummisham nauwuttam8ongash, kah woh k8wohshinum [chi]nnantam8ong[a]sh: yeuyeu tapenuman kutogketamunat yeu wussukwheg, kah wahteauwaheau ne anawuttam8m8uk, pish kuthogq masquodtissaús[u]k, kah golde chaine, ut kussittippuk[ka]nit; kah pish ken kenishwe nanawunnuaenu ut tahs8tam8onganit.
E.5.16 And I have heard of thee, that thou canst make interpretations, and dissolve doubts: now if thou canst read the writing, and make known to me the interpretation thereof, thou shalt be clothed with scarlet, and have a chain of gold about thy neck, and shalt be the third ruler in the kingdom.

α.5.17 Neit Daniel namp8ham, kah n8wau ut anaquabit ketass8t, kummag8ongash ohtaush ken, kah kutunkquatungash onkatuk aninnumau, qut onch nutogketamau wussukwheg ketass8t, kah n8wahteauwáh ne anawutta[m]8m8uk.
E.5.17 Then Daniel answered and said before the king, Let thy gifts be to thyself, and give thy rewards to another; yet I will read the writing unto the king, and make known to him the interpretation.

α.5.18 Woi ken ketass8t, anue quanunkquappit God aninnumauau Nebuchadnezzar k8shass8tamoonk; kah maumuttánussuonk, kah sohsumoonk, kah qutti[ah]ittuonk.
E.5.18 O thou king, the most high God gave Nebuchadnezzar thy father a kingdom, and majesty, and glory, and honour:

α.5.19 Kah wutche maumuttánussuonk ne anunnumauomp, wame missinninnúog wutohtimoneash kah wunnont8waongash nunnukshaog, kah wabesuog ut anaquabit, uttoh anantogeh wunnu[shó]h, kah howan unnantogeh uppomantamwaheuh, howane anantogeh ummishheuh, kah howane anantogeh wu[nn]8kinuh.
E.5.19 And for the majesty that he gave him, all people, nations, and languages, trembled and feared before him: whom he would he slew; and whom he would he kept alive; and whom he would he set up; and whom he would he put down.

α.5.20 Qut wuttah tahshem8uk, kah wuttenantam8onk menuhkag ut pittuánum8onganit, noh [n]8k8p wutch wutta[h]s8tam8e appuonganit, kah wutamaúnumauouh wussohsumóonk.
E.5.20 But when his heart was lifted up, and his mind hardened in pride, he was deposed from his kingly throne, and they took his glory from him:

α.5.21 Kah noh pum8hkeuop wutch wosketompaog wunnaumonaóut, kah wuttah ogquéhteauun puppinassimwut, kah ne áyit weeche touohkomukque assesog: wutogque assum[ó]uh moskehtuash, oxenut, kah wuhhog ogquéh[ch]ipop wutch kesukque neechippog nô pajeh 8wahteauunat anue quanunkquappit God nanawunnum wosketompae ass8tam8onk, k[à]h noh ukkúhquttumauun how[á]ne anantogeh.
E.5.21 And he was driven from the sons of men; and his heart was made like the beasts, and his dwelling was with the wild asses: they fed him with grass like oxen, and his body was wet with the dew of heaven; till he knew that the most high God ruled in the kingdom of men, and that he appointeth over it whomsoever he will.

α.5.22 Kah ken wunnaumonuh, woi Belshazzar matta kutahohpaheoh kuttah, tohkonogque k8wahteauunat yeu wame.
E.5.22 And thou his son, O Belshazzar, hast not humbled thine heart, though thou knewest all this;

α.5.23 Qut ayeuhkonittue kuttahshinnum kuhhog kesukque Lordut, kah paudtoog 8wetuome wishquash ut anaquabean, kah ken, kah kukkehtauaog, kummittamwussog ka[hsk]8skappeumog, kah nish ut wuttattamwog wine, kah k8woweenodtum, silvere kah golde kah brasse, kah missehchuogke, mehtugque kah [hu]ssunnee Manitt8og, neg matta naum8gig, kah matta n8tam8gig, kah matta wahteau8gig: kah Manit wunnutcheganit ke[ss]a[sh]àonk ohtag, kah wame kummayash wuttaiheash matta kussohsum[8]waheoh.
E.5.23 But hast lifted up thyself against the Lord of heaven; and they have brought the vessels of his house before thee, and thou, and thy lords, thy wives, and thy concubines, have drunk wine in them; and thou hast praised the gods of silver, and gold, of brass, iron, wood, and stone, which see not, nor hear, nor know: and the God in whose hand thy breath is, and whose are all thy ways, hast thou not glorified:

α.5.24 Neit kodchuhki menutcheg amaemo wutch wuhhogkat, kah yeu wussukwheg [un]ussukkuhwhosu.
E.5.24 Then was the part of the hand sent from him; and this writing was written.

α.5.25 Kah yeu wussukwhonk ne adt tannussukuhwhosik MENE, MENE, TEKEL, UPHARSIN.
E.5.25 And this is the writing that was written, MENE, MENE, TEKEL, UPHARSIN.

α.5.26 Yeu ne unnauwuttam88, MENE, God o[g]ketam kutass8tamoonk kah wohkukquoshitteauun.
E.5.26 This is the interpretation of the thing: MENE; God hath numbered thy kingdom, and finished it.

α.5.27 TEKEL, kukqutwhit ut putompagh8teganit, kah kenunk[in].
E.5.27 TEKEL; Thou art weighed in the balances, and art found wanting.

α.5.28 PERES, kutass8tamoonk chadchapem8, kah magun en Medsut kah Persiansut.
E.5.28 PERES; Thy kingdom is divided, and given to the Medes and Persians.

α.5.29 Neit Belshazzar ann8team8, kah nag hogquanaog Danieloh masquodtissausik, kah ponamwog golde chaine ut wussittippukanit kah wahteauwahuwaog papaume nagum, noh woh wunnishwe nanawunnuwaenuuneat ut ass8tam8onganit
E.5.29 Then commanded Belshazzar, and they clothed Daniel with scarlet, and put a chain of gold about his neck, and made a proclamation concerning him, that he should be the third ruler in the kingdom.

α.5.30 Ne nohkog Belteshazar Caldeanse ketass8t nushau.
E.5.30 In that night was Belshazzar the king of the Chaldeans slain.

α.5.31 Kah Darius um-Median neemunum ass8tamoonk, yeyeu nequtta adtahshinchage kodtumwohkog kah neese kodtum8.
E.5.31 And Darius the Median took the kingdom, being about threescore and two years old.

α.6.1 TApenum Darius nanawunnumwáheon tahs8tamoonk nequt pasuk88oh kah ne[e]snechag kussuoh sontimoh, neg woh nanawunukeg mamusse ass8tamoonk,
E.6.1 It pleased Darius to set over the kingdom an hundred and twenty princes, which should be over the whole kingdom;

α.6.2 Kah yeug nanawunukquog nishuoh kéhche sontimoh (nag wutch Daniel negonneyeuit) onk woh sontimóog 8nompaginnumauónaóut, kah ketass8t woh mo 8wanteauonganu.
E.6.2 And over these three presidents; of whom Daniel was first: that the princes might give accounts unto them, and the king should have no damage.

α.6.3 Neit yeuoh Daniel misheheau anue kehche sontimoh, kah nanaánuwánitcheh, ne$wutche wanegit nashauanit appéhtunk, kah ketass8t missontam uppononat mamusse ass8tam8onganit.
E.6.3 Then this Daniel was preferred above the presidents and princes, because an excellent spirit was in him; and the king thought to set him over the whole realm.

α.6.4 Neit keitauáog kah sontimóog, kodtinneanáog Danieloh papaume tahs8tam[ó]onk, qut nag matta namehteau8og kodtinneanáonk, newutche paubuhtanumukqussu, kah matta panneseonk asuh matcheseonk namehteauau.
E.6.4 Then the presidents and princes sought to find occasion against Daniel concerning the kingdom; but they could find none occasion nor fault; forasmuch as he was faithful, neither was there any error or fault found in him.

α.6.5 Neit yeug wosketompaog n8waog, matta woh teag kenamteau8un yeuoh Daniel, kuttumma namehteauogkut papaume wuttinnaumatuonguh um$Manitt8moh.
E.6.5 Then said these men, We shall not find any occasion against this Daniel, except we find it against him concerning the law of his God.

α.6.6 Neit yeug k[e]ihtauáog, kah sontimóog moéog ut ketass8tamwut, kah yeu wuttinnoneau, ketass8t Darius micheme pomantaj.
E.6.6 Then these presidents and princes assembled together to the king, and said thus unto him, King Darius, live for ever.

α.6.7 Wame kehtauáog ut ass8tam8onganit nanawunnuaenúog, kah sontimóog kogahqutteamwenuog, kah mugquompaog, moáe keket8kôadtamog, menehketeauunat tahs8tam8e kuhk8waonk, kah ayimunat menuhke quehtamóonk, howan wéhquetumauont howae manitto asuh wosketompuh teag shwinchagtikquinnu, qut webe ken woi ketass8t, noh pish petuhkon 8wonogk8wóut qunnon8og.
E.6.7 All the presidents of the kingdom, the governors, and the princes, the counsellors, and the captains, have consulted together to establish a royal statute, and to make a firm decree, that whosoever shall ask a petition of any God or man for thirty days, save of thee, O king, he shall be cast into the den of lions.

α.6.8 Yeuyeu, woi ketass8t, menehketeaush ne kuhquttumóonk, kah sealhash wussukwhosuonk, onk woh matta ôs8wunnum8un, neaunag wuttinnaumatuongan8 Medsog kah Persiansog, ne matta ôs8wun nu[m]wuhhetteg.
E.6.8 Now, O king, establish the decree, and sign the writing, that it be not changed, according to the law of the Medes and Persians, which altereth not.

α.6.9 Newaj ketass8t Darius sealham wussukwhosuonk kah kuhk8waonk.
E.6.9 Wherefore king Darius signed the writing and the decree.

α.6.10 Kah Daniel wahteunk wussukwhonk sealhausu, petutteau wekit, kah ukkenogkenegash wôshwohtáash nogque Jerusalem, ut wutchamberut, ukkuttukque uppesittukqussit nishwudt nompe pasuk kesuk, kah peantam, kah tabuttantam ut anaquabit um-Manitt8moh, ne aseip negonáeu.
E.6.10 Now when Daniel knew that the writing was signed, he went into his house; and his windows being open in his chamber toward Jerusalem, he kneeled upon his knees three times a day, and prayed, and gave thanks before his God, as he did aforetime.

α.6.11 Neit yeug wosketompaog moéog kah namehheaog Danieloh peantamwoh, kah wéhquttuk anaquabit God.
E.6.11 Then these men assembled, and found Daniel praying and making supplication before his God.

α.6.12 Neit nag pas8tshaog, kah kutt8og ut anaquabit ketass8t papaume ketass8t ukkuhquttum8onk, sunnummatta kussealhamup kuhk8waonk: howan wehquetumauont ne teag, howae manitto asuh wosketompuh, webe ken, shwinchagtikquinne woi ketass8t, pish petuhko[n] 8wónogk8wout qunnón8og? ketass8t namp8ham kah n8wau, ne wunnamuhkuteyeu8, neaunak wuttinnaumatuongan8 Medsog kah Persiansog ne matta ôs8wunnumóhetteg.
E.6.12 Then they came near, and spake before the king concerning the king's decree; Hast thou not signed a decree, that every man that shall ask a petition of any God or man within thirty days, save of thee, O king, shall be cast into the den of lions? The king answered and said, The thing is true, according to the law of the Medes and Persians, which altereth not.

α.6.13 Neit nag namp8hamwog, kah n8waog anaquabit ketass8t, Daniel, noh wutch missinóeu wunneechanin Judah, matta toh kuttin tuppanumuk8 ken, woi ketass8t, asuh kuhquttum8onk ne sealhaman, qut peantam nishwudt nompe pasuk kesukod.
E.6.13 Then answered they and said before the king, That Daniel, which is of the children of the captivity of Judah, regardeth not thee, O king, nor the decree that thou hast signed, but maketh his petition three times a day.

α.6.14 Neit ketass8t, n8tog ukkutt8wongan8oash, mishe neuanatamheau wuhhogkuh, kah wuttah ponam uppohquohwhunónat Danieloh, kah ukkod pohquohwhunuh nô pajeh wayónat.
E.6.14 Then the king, when he heard these words, was sore displeased with himself, and set his heart on Daniel to deliver him: and he laboured till the going down of the sun to deliver him.

α.6.15 Neit yeug wosketompaog moéog ut ketass8tamwut, kah unnaog ketass8toh, wahteaush, woi ketass8t, ne wuttinnaumatuonk Medsog kah Persiansog, matta teagwe kuhquttumoonk asuh naumatuonk ne ketass8t manuhkehteunk, ôs8wunnum8un.
E.6.15 Then these men assembled unto the king, and said unto the king, Know, O king, that the law of the Medes and Persians is, That no decree nor statute which the king establisheth may be changed.

α.6.16 Neit ketass8t ann8team8, kah pas8waog Daniel, kah nag uppetukkonáuh ut 8wonogk8out qunnón8og: kah ketass8t kutt8, kah unnau Danieloh, kum-Manitt8m noh nagwutteae waussumadt noh pish kuppohquohwhunuk.
E.6.16 Then the king commanded, and they brought Daniel, and cast him into the den of lions. Now the king spake and said unto Daniel, Thy God whom thou servest continually, he will deliver thee.

α.6.17 Kah qussuk paudtauun, kah ponamun wussaónogqut, kah ketass8t sealhamun nashpe nehenwonche wussealum, kah nashpe wussealum8 wussontimómuh, onk woh mo ôs8wunnum8un kuhk8waonk papaume Daniel.
E.6.17 And a stone was brought, and laid upon the mouth of the den; and the king sealed it with his own signet, and with the signet of his lords; that the purpose might not be changed concerning Daniel.

α.6.18 Neit ketass8t au ummishekomukqut, kah mat meetsu wompannu: kah wunnont8wae auwohteaongash matta paudtau8unash anaquabit, kah ukkouéunk nukkonuk.
E.6.18 Then the king went to his palace, and passed the night fasting: neither were instruments of musick brought before him: and his sleep went from him.

α.6.19 Neit ketass8t nompoáeu neepau, kah kenupshau en 8w[ô]nogk8óut qunnon8og.
E.6.19 Then the king arose very early in the morning, and went in haste unto the den of lions.

α.6.20 Kah paont wónogqut mishont8wae maumatamwe ken8nau Danieloh, kah ketass8t kutt8, kah unnau Danieloh, woi Daniel, wuttinnúmoh pomantamwae God, sun kum$Manitt8m noh nagwutteae wowussumadt tapenum kuppohquohwhunukqunat wutch qunnonóuut?
E.6.20 And when he came to the den, he cried with a lamentable voice unto Daniel: and the king spake and said to Daniel, O Daniel, servant of the living God, is thy God, whom thou servest continually, able to deliver thee from the lions?

α.6.21 Neit Daniel unnau ketass8toh, woi ketass8t micheme pomantaj.
E.6.21 Then said Daniel unto the king, O king, live for ever.

α.6.22 Num$Manitt8m ann8nau wut-angelumoh, kah kuppohham qunnón8og wutt8n8oash, kah matta n8woskhik8og: newutche ut anaquabit mat woskehuwaonk ohtano nuhhogkat, kah wonk anaquabean, woi ketass8t, matta n8woskhuóh.
E.6.22 My God hath sent his angel, and hath shut the lions' mouths, that they have not hurt me: forasmuch as before him innocency was found in me; and also before thee, O king, have I done no hurt.

α.6.23 Neit ketass8t umm8cheke weekontam8onuh, kah ann8team8 sohh8wunónat Daniel wutch wónogqut: kah Daniel sohwhunau wutch wonogqut, kah matta woskehettuonk namehteauau newutche wunnamptauau um-Manitt8moh.
E.6.23 Then was the king exceedingly glad for him, and commanded that they should take Daniel up out of the den. So Daniel was taken up out of the den, and no manner of hurt was found upon him, because he believed in his God.

α.6.24 Kah ketasst ann8team8, kah pas8wáog yeuh wosketompuh kodtinneanóhpanneg Danieloh, kah noh wuttinnuhkonáuh en wónogk8óut qunnón8og, nagumau, kah wunneechan8oh, kah ummittamwuss8oh, kah qunnón8og wussohkauóuh, kah sokshadtoog wame wuskon8ash ash papeahettegkup ohkeit ut wonogqut.
E.6.24 And the king commanded, and they brought those men which had accused Daniel, and they cast them into the den of lions, them, their children, and their wives; and the lions had the mastery of them, and brake all their bones in pieces or ever they came at the bottom of the den.

α.6.25 Neit ketass8t Darius wussukhamauau wame missinninn[ú]h, wutohtimoneash kah unnont8waongash neg ayitcheg wame ohkeit, wunohteaonk missaj ut kuhhogkaóut.
E.6.25 Then king Darius wrote unto all people, nations, and languages, that dwell in all the earth; Peace be multiplied unto you.

α.6.26 Nukkuhquttum, nishnoh ut ketass8tamóe nanawunnuwaonganit, wosketompaog nunnukshahettich kah wabesehettich ut anaquabit um-Manitt8moh Daniel: newutche noh pomantamwae God, kah micheme menuhkesu, kah wutass8tamoonk matta pagwatauouun, kah wunnanawunnuwaonk pish ohtau wehqshik.
E.6.26 I make a decree, That in every dominion of my kingdom men tremble and fear before the God of Daniel: for he is the living God, and stedfast for ever, and his kingdom that which shall not be destroyed, and his dominion shall be even unto the end.

α.6.27 Noh pohquohwhutteau kah wadchanuau kah ussu kuhkinneasuongash kah monchanatam8ongash, kesukqut kah ohkeit: noh pohquohwhunont Danieloh wutch ummenuhkesuongan8out qunnon8og.
E.6.27 He delivereth and rescueth, and he worketh signs and wonders in heaven and in earth, who hath delivered Daniel from the power of the lions.

α.6.28 Neit yeuoh Daniel wunayeu ut wunnanawunnuaonganit Darius, kah Cyrus up-Persian.
E.6.28 So this Daniel prospered in the reign of Darius, and in the reign of Cyrus the Persian.

α.7.1 UT negonne ukkodtum8mut Belshazzar Babylone ketass8t, Daniel unnukqu[ô]m, kah uppuhkukque monomansuongash ut wutappinneat, neit wussukwhau unnukquom8ongoh, kah wahteauwahuon, kahcheyeu8g.
E.7.1 In the first year of Belshazzar king of Babylon Daniel had a dream and visions of his head upon his bed: then he wrote the dream, and told the sum of the matters.

α.7.2 Daniel kutt8 kah n8wau, nunnauomp ut nuhkonaeu nummonomansuonganit, kah kusseh, yauekesukque wabanog ayeuwuttuog ut mishe ketahhannit.
E.7.2 Daniel spake and said, I saw in my vision by night, and, behold, the four winds of the heaven strove upon the great sea.

α.7.3 Kah yauog mishe puppinashimwog kuhkuhqueog wutch kehtahhannit chachabeneunkqussuog.
E.7.3 And four great beasts came up from the sea, diverse one from another.

α.7.4 Negonneyeuit ogqueneunkqussu qunnonouut kah wompussikukquae nuppohwhunau: nummonunneauop nô pajeh wunnuppohwhunoh pohqunnit kah waabu wutch ohkeit kah ogque ohpikkompau wusseetash, wosketompaut, kah wosketompae metah aninnumauau.
E.7.4 The first was like a lion, and had eagle's wings: I beheld till the wings thereof were plucked, and it was lifted up from the earth, and made stand upon the feet as a man, and a man's heart was given to it.

α.7.5 Kah kusseh, onkatuk puppinashim, nahohtoeu ogqueneunkqussu mosqut, & yôaeu waabeu, & nishwinash uhpeteagash ut wut8nut, weepitut, & nag yeu wuttitamuneau, omohkish, nehneeteapsh m8cheke weyaus.
E.7.5 And behold another beast, a second, like to a bear, and it raised up itself on one side, and it had three ribs in the mouth of it between the teeth of it: and they said thus unto it, Arise, devour much flesh.

α.7.6 Asuhkaue yeu, nummonunneamup, kah kusseh, onkatuk ogqueneunkqussu Leopard, uppusquanit appuoh yauoh puppinshase wunnuppuhwhunoh, puppinashim wonk yeuontupau, kah nanawunnumoonk aninnumauau.
E.7.6 After this I beheld, and lo another, like a leopard, which had upon the back of it four wings of a fowl; the beast had also four heads; and dominion was given to it.

α.7.7 Asuhkaue yeu, nunnaumup nuhkonae monomansuonganit, kah kusseh, yau88it puppinashim, qushae wunneunkqussu kah unkqueneunkqussu; kah mishe menuhkesu, kah mogkee missehchuogquompitteau: mahchipp8, kah wuss8kshanuh, kah sekupwoncheh wuttahtashkuhkauoh, kah penuwunneunkqussu onk neg wame puppinashimwog neg negonuhkauoncheg, kah piogquashkonau.
E.7.7 After this I saw in the night visions, and behold a fourth beast, dreadful and terrible, and strong exceedingly; and it had great iron teeth: it devoured and brake in pieces, and stamped the residue with the feet of it: and it was diverse from all the beasts that were before it; and it had ten horns.

α.7.8 Kah nunnatwanum askonog kah kusseh, na onkatuk 8ch sonkin askonemes, ut kenugke nagoh, noh ut anaquabit, nishuog negonappitcheg askonog pohquodchabuhkonoog: kah kusseh, yeu ut askonit wuskesuk8 onatuh wuskesukqut wosketomp, kah mutt8n magogish weogquttum.
E.7.8 I considered the horns, and, behold, there came up among them another little horn, before whom there were three of the first horns plucked up by the roots: and, behold, in this horn were eyes like the eyes of man, and a mouth speaking great things.

α.7.9 Nunnaumup nô pajeh tahs8tamoe appuongah penuhteamuk, kah noh sepepomontog appu, noh wuthogk8ongash agque wompag k8nit, kah uppuhkukque meesunk onatuheyeu8 wanegik w8l: wutappuonk ogqueneunkquot n8n8nae n8taut, kah 8wheelumash ogqueneunkquodtash nashqunae n8taut.
E.7.9 I beheld till the thrones were cast down, and the Ancient of days did sit, whose garment was white as snow, and the hair of his head like the pure wool: his throne was like the fiery flame, and his wheels as burning fire.

α.7.10 Qunuhqui n8tau kachém8 kah sohwheem8 wutch anaquabit: muttannunk muttannonganogkussuoh, wuttinneumuhkunk, kah piogque muttannungane, piogqut muttannunk nepóuh anaquabit: wussittumoonk wunohtauun, kah b8kash woshwohtaash.
E.7.10 A fiery stream issued and came forth from before him: thousand thousands ministered unto him, and ten thousand times ten thousand stood before him: the judgment was set, and the books were opened.

α.7.11 Neit natauwompip, wutche mishe mishont8wae kutt8wongash, nish askon án8wácheh: nunnatauwompip, nô pajeh puppinashim nushónat, kah wuhhog nehtauun, kah aninnumauon n8n8náe n8tau.
E.7.11 I beheld then because of the voice of the great words which the horn spake: I beheld even till the beast was slain, and his body destroyed, and given to the burning flame.

α.7.12 Papaume onkatogig puppinashimwog, wuñánawunnum8ongan8 amaunumun: qut uppomantam8ongan8 sepohteáhtauun, wutch utt8chéeu, kah ahquompi.
E.7.12 As concerning the rest of the beasts, they had their dominion taken away: yet their lives were prolonged for a season and time.

α.7.13 Nunnaumup nuhkonae monomansuonganit, kah kusseh, noh ogqueneunkqussit wunnaumonat wosketomp, weecháadtam kesukque mahtóhqus, kah peyauóneau sépepomantamunitcheh, kah nag pas8che pas8wóuh ut anaquabit.
E.7.13 I saw in the night visions, and, behold, one like the Son of man came with the clouds of heaven, and came to the Ancient of days, and they brought him near before him.

α.7.14 Kah aninnumauau nanánuwaonk, kah sohsumoonk, kah ketass8tamóonk: onk woh wame missinninnuog, wutohtimoinneash, kah unnont8waongash woh 8tinninneumuhkauóuh: wunnanawunnuwaonk ne michemohtae nanawunnumoonk, matta pish pamushán8g, kah wutass8tamoonk matta pish pagwatau8un.
E.7.14 And there was given him dominion, and glory, and a kingdom, that all people, nations, and languages, should serve him: his dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away, and his kingdom that which shall not be destroyed.

α.7.15 Nen Daniel ne[u]antamup ut nunnashauonganit ut nashaue nuhhogkat kah monomansuongash ut nuppuhkukqut n8taméhikqunash.
E.7.15 I Daniel was grieved in my spirit in the midst of my body, and the visions of my head troubled me.

α.7.16 Nuppas8sukauomp pasuk neg na kishke neepauitcheg, kah nunnat8tomauop wame yeu anawuttam8m8uk: neit nuttugqun, kah n8wahteauwáhik ne anawuttam8m8uk.
E.7.16 I came near unto one of them that stood by, and asked him the truth of all this. So he told me, and made me know the interpretation of the things.

α.7.17 Yeug mogke yaue puppinashimwog, yauog ketass8tamwog neg waapecheg wutch ohkeit.
E.7.17 These great beasts, which are four, are four kings, which shall arise out of the earth.

α.7.18 Qut 8neetupanatamomoh noh quanunkquappit, pish neemunnumwog ketass8tamoonk, kah pish michemohtoog tahs8tamoonk, micheme kah micheme.
E.7.18 But the saints of the most High shall take the kingdom, and possess the kingdom for ever, even for ever and ever.

α.7.19 Neit nukkodwahteóh ne anawuttog yau88it puppinashim, noh pénuinneunkqussit wutch wame onkatogig, ahcheh unkqueneunkqussu, noh w[a]épitit missehchuog, kah wuhkossoh brassú8oh, nehneeteap8, kah sohqshohteau, kah ashqshónitcheh wuttahtashkuhkauoh wusseetash.
E.7.19 Then I would know the truth of the fourth beast, which was diverse from all the others, exceeding dreadful, whose teeth were of iron, and his nails of brass; which devoured, brake in pieces, and stamped the residue with his feet;

α.7.20 Kah papaume piogqussinitcheh askonoh ut uppuhkukqut, kah papaume onktuk neh sonkit, kah noh ut anaquabit nishnoh panushonit, papaume noh askon woskesukqut, kah mutt8n neh an8wadt ahche magogish, noh pahtuánumweeuunkqussit onk neh weechayeumoncheh.
E.7.20 And of the ten horns that were in his head, and of the other which came up, and before whom three fell; even of that horn that had eyes, and a mouth that spake very great things, whose look was more stout than his fellows.

α.7.21 Kah natauwompip, kah nenan askon ayeuhkonau waneetupanatamunitcheh, kah wussohkauoh.
E.7.21 I beheld, and the same horn made war with the saints, and prevailed against them;

α.7.22 Nô pajeh noh sepepamontog uppeyonat, kah wussittumoonk aninnumauau 8neetupanatam8moh quanunkquappit, kah ahquompi pepaum8 waneetupanatogig ahtoog ass8tamoonk.
E.7.22 Until the Ancient of days came, and judgment was given to the saints of the most High; and the time came that the saints possessed the kingdom.

α.7.23 Yeu wussin, yau8it puppinashim noh pish yauunnú8k ass8tam8onk ut ohkeit, ne pish penuweyeuit wutch wame ass8tam8onganéhtu, kah pish mahchipp8 mamusse ohke; kah pish tahtashkuhkausu, kah sohquekausu.
E.7.23 Thus he said, The fourth beast shall be the fourth kingdom upon earth, which shall be diverse from all kingdoms, and shall devour the whole earth, and shall tread it down, and break it in pieces.

α.7.24 Kah piogqussitcheg askonog, wutch yeu ass8tam8onganit, piogqussuog ketass8tamwog pish waapeog: kah onkatuk pish ne wutasuhkaue waapeumoh, kah noh pish penoweyeu8 wutch negonneyeuwutcheg, kah noh pish sohkauau nishnoh ketass8toh.
E.7.24 And the ten horns out of this kingdom are ten kings that shall arise: and another shall rise after them; and he shall be diverse from the first, and he shall subdue three kings.

α.7.25 Kah noh pish ayeuhkonittue mishe kutt8wongash unnau, anue quanunkquappinitcheh, kah pish wussauunuh waneetupanatamunutcheh, kah pish kodtantam ôs8wunnumunat aquompiyeuash, kah naumatuongash: kah nish pish aninnumauónash ut wunnutcheganit, ahquompi, kah aquompiyeuash, kah chachaubenumwe aquompiyeuash.
E.7.25 And he shall speak great words against the most High, and shall wear out the saints of the most High, and think to change times and laws: and they shall be given into his hand until a time and times and the dividing of time.

α.7.26 Qut wussittumoonk pish wunohtauun, kah nag pish amaunumwog wunnánawunnumóonk, mohtupáñumunat, kah pagwutauunat pajeh wohkukquoshik.
E.7.26 But the judgment shall sit, and they shall take away his dominion, to consume and to destroy it unto the end.

α.7.27 Kah ass8tamoonk, kah nanawunnumoonk, kah mohsag ketass8tamoonk ut agwe mamusse kesukqut, pish aninnumauóneau ummissinninneumoh 8neetupanatam8moh noh quanunkquapit, noh wutass8tamóonk, michemohtaeu ass8tamoonk, kah wame nánawunnuwácheg, pish 8tinneumuhkauóuh, kah wunn8swehtauóuh.
E.7.27 And the kingdom and dominion, and the greatness of the kingdom under the whole heaven, shall be given to the people of the saints of the most High, whose kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and all dominions shall serve and obey him.

α.7.28 Yeu wehque wehqshinne teag, kah nen Daniel, nuttenanittam8ongash numm8cheku wuttamhik, kah nuttinnussuonk ôs8wem8 ut nuhhogkat: qut ne nupponamun nuttahhut.
E.7.28 Hitherto is the end of the matter. As for me Daniel, my cogitations much troubled me, and my countenance changed in me: but I kept the matter in my heart.

α.8.1 UT wunnishwe kodtumwae nanawunnuwaonganit Belshazzar, monomansuonk nunnaéhtunk, nen Daniel, asuhkaue ne negonne naéhtiit.
E.8.1 In the third year of the reign of king Belshazzar a vision appeared unto me, even unto me Daniel, after that which appeared unto me at the first.

α.8.2 Kah nunnaum ut monomansuonganit, (kah n$niyeup naumon nutappup Shushan mishe kommukqut, ne Elame wutohtimóijn) kah nunnaumup ut monoma[n]suonganit, kah nutappip kishke sepuut Ulai.
E.8.2 And I saw in a vision; and it came to pass, when I saw, that I was at Shushan in the palace, which is in the province of Elam; and I saw in a vision, and I was by the river of Ulai.

α.8.3 Neit nuttahshinumup nuskesukquash, kah nunnaum, kah kusseh, na wunnepauin anaquohtag sep, ram noh neesaskonont, kah nesuog askonog qunuhqussuog, qut pasuk anuunkqussúmau onkatogeh, kah noh anue quanukqussit maumachish sóntu
E.8.3 Then I lifted up mine eyes, and saw, and, behold, there stood before the river a ram which had two horns: and the two horns were high; but one was higher than the other, and the higher came up last.

α.8.4 Nunnaum ram quentáusu wutcheksuiyeu, kah nanummiyeu kah sowaniyeu: newaj matta howae puppinashim neepô8k anaquabit, kah matta howan pohquohham8 wutch wunnutcheganit, qut ussu uttoh kodtantog, kah nano missugken.
E.8.4 I saw the ram pushing westward, and northward, and southward; so that no beasts might stand before him, neither was there any that could deliver out of his hand; but he did according to his will, and became great.

α.8.5 Kah natwontamon, kusseh, nomposhimwe goat w8m wutcheksuiyeu, ut wuskeche mamusse ohkeit, kah matta mussuhkom8 ohke: kah goat mishe askonoh neepooh nashaue wuskesukqut.
E.8.5 And as I was considering, behold, an he goat came from the west on the face of the whole earth, and touched not the ground: and the goat had a notable horn between his eyes.

α.8.6 Kah peyaonau ramoh neesaskonónitcheh, noh nauog neepauit anaquohtag séip, kah ukquentauoh ut nashpe wutchenauausu[e] menuhkesuonganit.
E.8.6 And he came to the ram that had two horns, which I had seen standing before the river, and ran unto him in the fury of his power.

α.8.7 Kah nunnauóp pas8sukauàu ramoh kah wogkauém8 ummusquanumáonk, kah togkomau ramoh, kah pohquetahwhau nees8oh wutaskonoh, kah ram matta menuhkesuonganu neepauinneat anaquabit, qut wuttinnohkonuh ohkeit, kah wuttahtaskuhkauoh,, kah matta howan woh pohquohwhunóou ramoh wutch wunnutcheganit.
E.8.7 And I saw him come close unto the ram, and he was moved with choler against him, and smote the ram, and brake his two horns: and there was no power in the ram to stand before him, but he cast him down to the ground, and stamped upon him: and there was none that could deliver the ram out of his hand.

α.8.8 Newaj nomposhimwe goat ahche missugkenuk, kah manuhkesit, mishe askon pohqshau, kah noh nompeyeuutcheg yauog masugkenukeg, en nogque yauog kesukque wabanut.
E.8.8 Therefore the he goat waxed very great: and when he was strong, the great horn was broken; and for it came up four notable ones toward the four winds of heaven.

α.8.9 Kah wutch pasuk sohwetu askonemes, noh mahshegit en nogque Sowaniyeu kah en nogque wutchepwoiyeu, kah en nogque wunne ohkeit.
E.8.9 And out of one of them came forth a little horn, which waxed exceeding great, toward the south, and toward the east, and toward the pleasant land.

α.8.10 Kah mishetu en wehqshik kesukque kenauwameonganit, kah penuhteae nawhutche ukkenauwameonk, kah anogqsoh en ohkeit, kah wuttahtashkuhkauoh.
E.8.10 And it waxed great, even to the host of heaven; and it cast down some of the host and of the stars to the ground, and stamped upon them.

α.8.11 Nux, misheheau wuhhogkuh wehque kenauwamee sontimo[u]t, kah nagum nashpe asekesukoke sephausuonk amaunum, kah 8neetupanatamwe ayeuonk penuhkon.
E.8.11 Yea, he magnified himself even to the prince of the host, and by him the daily sacrifice was taken away, and the place of the sanctuary was cast down.

α.8.12 Kah kenauwameonk unninnumauau, ayeuhkonittue asekesukoke sephausuonk, newutche panneseonk, kah unnohteau wunnamuhkuteyeuuk ohkeit kah 8wowunnamuhtauun, kah 8niyeuteauun.
E.8.12 And an host was given him against the daily sacrifice by reason of transgression, and it cast down the truth to the ground; and it practised, and prospered.

α.8.13 Neit n[u]nn8tau pasuk wunneetupanatamweyeuit kutt8, & onkatuk waneetupanatamweyeuit unnau neh waneetupanatamweyeuinitcheh kodt8k[o]ncheh, toh utt8cheyeu8 pish monomansuōk papaume asekesukoke sephausuon & pagwanue panneseuonk, magunat naneeswe Sanctuary, kah kenauwameonk tahtashkuhkomunat ut agwe musseetut.
E.8.13 Then I heard one saint speaking, and another saint said unto that certain saint which spake, How long shall be the vision concerning the daily sacrifice, and the transgression of desolation, to give both the sanctuary and the host to be trodden under foot?

α.8.14 Kah nuttinuk, wehque neese mutannongane, kah nishwudt pasuk88ash kesukodtash: neit pish Sanctuary pahketeauun.
E.8.14 And he said unto me, Unto two thousand and three hundred days; then shall the sanctuary be cleansed.

α.8.15 Kah nniyeup, nen Daniel naumon yeu monomansuonk, kah kodwahteauon, neit kusseh, na wunneepauun ut anaquabeh noh ogqueneunkqussit wosketompaut.
E.8.15 And it came to pass, when I, even I Daniel, had seen the vision, and sought for the meaning, then, behold, there stood before me as the appearance of a man.

α.8.16 Kah nunn8tamup wosketompae wadtauatonkqussuonk ut nashaue Ulai wussapinuk, noh wehqutteamit kah n8wau, Gabriel, yeuoh wohtamwoh monomansuonk.
E.8.16 And I heard a man's voice between the banks of Ulai, which called, and said, Gabriel, make this man to understand the vision.

α.8.17 Neit kishke peyau ne neepauwe: kah paont n8wabesip, kah nuppenushadtam nuskesuk: qut nuttinuk, wahteaush woi wosketompae wunnaumoniin: ahquompi adt wohkukquoshik, neit pish ne monomansuonganu8.
E.8.17 So he came near where I stood: and when he came, I was afraid, and fell upon my face: but he said unto me, Understand, O son of man: for at the time of the end shall be the vision.

α.8.18 Kah noh keket8kiit, nummishikouem nashpe nuskesuk en ohkekontu: qut nummissunuk kah nunneepauwehik.
E.8.18 Now as he was speaking with me, I was in a deep sleep on my face toward the ground: but he touched me, and set me upright.

α.8.19 Kah n8wau, kusseh, k8wahteauwahesh uttoh pish ónak adt majish wohkukquoshik musquantamoonk: newutche kuhquttumuk, neit pish wohkukquoshin.
E.8.19 And he said, Behold, I will make thee know what shall be in the last end of the indignation: for at the time appointed the end shall be.

α.8.20 Ram noh nauadt, noh neesaskonont ne Mediae kah Persiae ketass8tamwog,
E.8.20 The ram which thou sawest having two horns are the kings of Media and Persia.

α.8.21 Kah mishe goat noh Greciae ketass8t kah mishe askon noh apit nashaue wuskesukq[u]t, noh negonne ketass8t.
E.8.21 And the rough goat is the king of Grecia: and the great horn that is between his eyes is the first king.

α.8.22 Kah noh pokqshont, yauoh nompekompauwehtunk, yauunash ass8tam8ongash pish neepau8m8ash wutch wutohtimoneat qut matta ut ummenuhkesuonganit.
E.8.22 Now that being broken, whereas four stood up for it, four kingdoms shall stand up out of the nation, but not in his power.

α.8.23 Kah nahen wohkukquoshik wutass8tam8ongan8, panneseaenuog tapissehettit, nushquet[u]enunkqussit ketass8t, wohtog siogk8waongash pish neepo.
E.8.23 And in the latter time of their kingdom, when the transgressors are come to the full, a king of fierce countenance, and understanding dark sentences, shall stand up.

α.8.24 Kah ummissugken8onk pish menuhki, qut matta nehenwonche nashpe ummenuhkesuonk: kah noh pish monchanatamwe pagwodtau, kah pish wunniyeu kah wunnompuwussu, kah pish pagwanau manuhkesinutche kah waneetupanatamunutcheh missinninnuh.
E.8.24 And his power shall be mighty, but not by his own power: and he shall destroy wonderfully, and shall prosper, and practise, and shall destroy the mighty and the holy people.

α.8.25 Kah nashpe 8nummoeonk wonk, pish wunniyeuhteau as8k[ek]odteamt8onk ut wunnutcheganit, kah noh pish misheheau wuhhogkut ut wuttahhut, kah nashpe wunohteaonk pish pagwanau monaoh: kah pish wonk ayeuhkone nepauwehtauau wussontimom8uh sontimoog, qut noh pish pohqshau ne tohut matta menutcheg.
E.8.25 And through his policy also he shall cause craft to prosper in his hand; and he shall magnify himself in his heart, and by peace shall destroy many: he shall also stand up against the Prince of princes; but he shall be broken without hand.

α.8.26 Kah monamansuonk papaume wunnunkquae kah nompoae, ne mashamuk, ne wunnamuhkuteyeu8: newutche onkwhush monomansuonk, newutche ne pish sepeyeu8.
E.8.26 And the vision of the evening and the morning which was told is true: wherefore shut thou up the vision; for it shall be for many days.

α.8.27 Kah nen Daniel natchadcheip, kah nummahchinop nawhutche kesukodtash: ompetak nutomohkeip, kah nutusseip ketass8t wutusseongash: kah nutchepshont[a]mup monomansuonk: qut matta howan 8wahtam8un.
E.8.27 And I Daniel fainted, and was sick certain days; afterward I rose up, and did the king's business; and I was astonished at the vision, but none understood it.

α.9.1 NEgonne ukkodtum8mut Darius wunnaumonuh Ahasuerus, 8skannemunnu Medsog, noh kohtass8tamwehteamuk Caldeanse wutass8tam8onganit.
E.9.1 In the first year of Darius the son of Ahasuerus, of the seed of the Medes, which was made king over the realm of the Chaldeans;

α.9.2 Ut wunnegonne nanawunnuae kodtum8mut, nen Daniel, n8wohtamup nashpe b8kash, ne adtahshik kodtum8ash, nish papaume wuttinn8waonk Jehovah peyaonuk Jeremiah quoshodtumwaen: woh pakojteo nesausuk tahshinchagkodtwash kodtum8ash ut Jerusaleme touishinneash.
E.9.2 In the first year of his reign I Daniel understood by books the number of the years, whereof the word of the LORD came to Jeremiah the prophet, that he would accomplish seventy years in the desolations of Jerusalem.

α.9.3 Kah nuttinnukquohtop nuskesuk en Lord manitt8ut, pomantamoe kah wehquetumoe natinneuhkonat, nashpe mat meetseonk man8tionak kah pukquee.
E.9.3 And I set my face unto the Lord God, to seek by prayer and supplications, with fasting, and sackcloth, and ashes:

α.9.4 Kah nuppeantamauomp Jehovah num-Manitt8m, kah nussamp8op, kah nussip, woi Lord, noh masugkenuk kah unkqueneunkqussit God, nanawehteunk wunn8waonk, kah monaneteaonk wutche neg womononcheg, kah neg nanawehteunkeg wuttinnaumatuongash:
E.9.4 And I prayed unto the LORD my God, and made my confession, and said, O Lord, the great and dreadful God, keeping the covenant and mercy to them that love him, and to them that keep his commandments;

α.9.5 Nummatcheussemun, kah nuppanneussemun, kah nunnishkeussemun, kah nutcheketamumun, wutche nukkodtumunat kukkuhk8tomwehteaongash kah k8sittum8ongash.
E.9.5 We have sinned, and have committed iniquity, and have done wickedly, and have rebelled, even by departing from thy precepts and from thy judgments:

α.9.6 Kah matta n8tauómun kuttinnúmog quoshodtumwaénuog, neg kôn8noncheg ut k8wesuonganit nukketass8tamómunónog, nussontimomunónog kah n8shunónog, kah en wame ohkee missinninnuog.
E.9.6 Neither have we hearkened unto thy servants the prophets, which spake in thy name to our kings, our princes, and our fathers, and to all the people of the land.

α.9.7 Woi Lord, sampweusseonk wutcháiyeúm8 kuhhogkat, qut quenauanumoe nuskesukquash wutchayeum8ash nuhhogkanonut, neane yeu kesukok: en Judae missinninnuut, kah en wadohkitcheg Jerusalem, kah en wame Israel, neg paswopitcheg, kah nôapitcheg, en papashpe wame wutohtimóneat, uttoh an8kauadt wutche ummatcheseongan8oash nish machenéhikqueógish.
E.9.7 O LORD, righteousness belongeth unto thee, but unto us confusion of faces, as at this day; to the men of Judah, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and unto all Israel, that are near, and that are far off, through all the countries whither thou hast driven them, because of their trespass that they have trespassed against thee.

α.9.8 Woi Lord, ut nuhhogkanonut quequánauánumoe nuskesuk, en nukketass8tamómunonut, en nussontimómunonut, en n8shunónut, newutche kummatchenehhennumun.
E.9.8 O Lord, to us belongeth confusion of face, to our kings, to our princes, and to our fathers, because we have sinned against thee.

α.9.9 En Lord num-Manitt8munónut monaneteaongash, kah kutahquontamúnk8onganun, tohkonogque nutcheketauónan.
E.9.9 To the Lord our God belong mercies and forgivenesses, though we have rebelled against him;

α.9.10 Kah matta n8sweetam8un 8wadtauatonkqussuonk J[é]hovah num-Manitt8mun, pomushaontamunat wuttinnaumatuongash nish ponukish anaquabeog nashpe wuttinneumoh quoshodtumwaénúh.
E.9.10 Neither have we obeyed the voice of the LORD our God, to walk in his laws, which he set before us by his servants the prophets.

α.9.11 Nux, wame Israel panneséhtam kittinnaumatuonk, nashpe amaéonk, onk woh nag matta n8swehtam8og k8wadtauatonkqussuonk; newaj matanittuonk sokenittonteáog, kah chadchekeyewaonk ne wásunkuhwhosit ut wuttinnaumatuonganit Moses wuttinneumoh God, newutche nummatcheneheóun.
E.9.11 Yea, all Israel have transgressed thy law, even by departing, that they might not obey thy voice; therefore the curse is poured upon us, and the oath that is written in the law of Moses the servant of God, because we have sinned against him.

α.9.12 Kah menehketeau ukkutt8wongash nish ayeuhkonittue unnukqueagish, kah ayeuhkonittue k8sittumwaenùmunónog nag wâsumukqueágig, nuhkenumunkqueog mahshe machuk: newutche ut agwe mamusse kesukqut ne matta a[unn]án8g, ne ának ut Jerusalem.
E.9.12 And he hath confirmed his words, which he spake against us, and against our judges that judged us, by bringing upon us a great evil: for under the whole heaven hath not been done as hath been done upon Jerusalem.

α.9.13 Neansikwhosik ut wuttinnaumatuonganit Moses, wame yeu machuk kenuhkuhkongqunan; qut onch, matta nuppeantamomun ut anaquabit Jehovah num-Manitt8mun; onk woh nukquinnuppinnumun wutch nummatcheseonga[n]ónut, kah woh n8wohtamumun k8namuhkutéyaeum.
E.9.13 As it is written in the law of Moses, all this evil is come upon us: yet made we not our prayer before the LORD our God, that we might turn from our iniquities, and understand thy truth.

α.9.14 Newaj Jehvoah askuhwhontog machuk, kah kenuhkenumunkqunan: newutche Jehovah num$Manitt8mun sampweuss[u] ut wame wutanakausuonganit, nish aseit, newutche matta nunnoswehtamómun 8wadtauatonkqussuonk.
E.9.14 Therefore hath the LORD watched upon the evil, and brought it upon us: for the LORD our God is righteous in all his works which he doeth: for we obeyed not his voice.

α.9.15 Kah yeuyeu, woi Lord num-Manitt8mun, ken sohh8wunadt kummissinninnúmog wutch Egypt nashpe mishe menutcheg, kah kummishe wesuongan, neane yeu kesukok, nummatchesemun, kah nuppannesemun.
E.9.15 And now, O Lord our God, that hast brought thy people forth out of the land of Egypt with a mighty hand, and hast gotten thee renown, as at this day; we have sinned, we have done wickedly.

α.9.16 Woi Lord, neaunak kussampweusseonk, k8wehquetumoush, kummusquantam8onk kah kutchena[u]ausuonk amaém8utch wutch Jerusalem kukkeitotanat, k8neetupanatamwe wadchúm, nawutche Jerusalem, kah kummissinninnúog nenawun nutushpanamutteámun en wame neg wéenuhkonkqueagig, wutch nummatcheseonganunonush, kah nuppaneseonganonash.
E.9.16 O LORD, according to all thy righteousness, I beseech thee, let thine anger and thy fury be turned away from thy city Jerusalem, thy holy mountain: because for our sins, and for the iniquities of our fathers, Jerusalem and thy people are become a reproach to all that are about us.

α.9.17 Newutche yeuyeu, woi num-Manitt8mun, n8tash uppeantamoonk kittinneum, kah 8wehquetum8ongash kah kuskesuk wôsumwehtoush ut kussanctuarieumut, ne táoushik, wutche Lord.
E.9.17 Now therefore, O our God, hear the prayer of thy servant, and his supplications, and cause thy face to shine upon thy sanctuary that is desolate, for the Lord's sake.

α.9.18 Woi num-Manitt8m nauansh kuhtauog kah n8tash: wôhshinush kuskesukquash, kah moninneash nuttauussinn8wonganun8ash, kah otan ne as8wesik wutche k8wesuonk, newutche matta nupponamómun n8wéhquetum8ongash ut anaquabean, wutche nussampweseonganit, qut wutch kummishe monaneteaongash.
E.9.18 O my God, incline thine ear, and hear; open thine eyes, and behold our desolations, and the city which is called by thy name: for we do not present our supplications before thee for our righteousnesses, but for thy great mercies.

α.9.19 Woi Lord n8tash, woi Lord ahquontash, woi Lord n8tash kah ussish pitchinnoéhkon wutche ken, woi num-Manitt8m, newutche kukkeitotan, kah kummissinninnumog neg másuhwhutcheg nashpe k8wesuonk.
E.9.19 O Lord, hear; O Lord, forgive; O Lord, hearken and do; defer not, for thine own sake, O my God: for thy city and thy people are called by thy name.

α.9.20 Kah ashpame keket8kôon, kah paontamon, kah samp8[á]on nummatcheseongash kah ummatcheseonk nummissinninnúmog Israel, kah ponamon n8wehquetum8onk ut anaquabit Jehovah num-Manitt8m, wutche 8neetupanatamwe wadcheum num-Manitt8m.
E.9.20 And whiles I was speaking, and praying, and confessing my sin and the sin of my people Israel, and presenting my supplication before the LORD my God for the holy mountain of my God;

α.9.21 Nux ashpame peantamoe keket8kôon, noh wosketomp Gabriel, noh monomansue nógkup wesku, kónupisheáe pt8áhit, nummussinuk papaume wunnonkquae sephausuonk.
E.9.21 Yea, whiles I was speaking in prayer, even the man Gabriel, whom I had seen in the vision at the beginning, being caused to fly swiftly, touched me about the time of the evening oblation.

α.9.22 Kah noh n8wahteauwahik, kah nukkeket8hkunk, kah n8wau, woi Daniel, eyeu nussohham, k8wohwóhtamwáhenunat, kah k8wahteauwáhenunat.
E.9.22 And he informed me, and talked with me, and said, O Daniel, I am now come forth to give thee skill and understanding.

α.9.23 Wutch waj kutchissik k8wéhquetum8ongash, ann8team8onk sohham8m8, kah kenonche wahteauwahunun, newutche kummishe womonit: newutche wohtash ne teag, kah natwontash monomansuonk.
E.9.23 At the beginning of thy supplications the commandment came forth, and I am come to shew thee; for thou art greatly beloved: therefore understand the matter, and consider the vision.

α.9.24 Nesausuk tahshinchage weeksash kuhquttumunash wutch kummissinninnumog, kah wutche k8neetupanatamwe keitotan, pakojteauunat panneusseonk, kah wohkukquoshitteauunat matcheseongash, kah wunohteatauunat wutch matcheseonk, kah petukodtauunat michemohteae sampweusseonk, kah sealhamunat monomansuonk, kah quoshodtumóonk, kah sussequnónat noh anue wunneetupanatamweyeuit.
E.9.24 Seventy weeks are determined upon thy people and upon thy holy city, to finish the transgression, and to make an end of sins, and to make reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in everlasting righteousness, and to seal up the vision and prophecy, and to anoint the most Holy.

α.9.25 Newutche wahteaush, kah wohwohtash, wutch sohham8m8uk ann8team8onk, nompohtauunat kah wekikontamunat Jerusalem, wehque Messiah ut Sontim, nesausuk tahshe weeksu8ash, kah nequtta tahshinchage, kah neese weeksu8ash, tauumaog pish wonk wekikkontamun, kah hassunneutunk, ut wuttamehpunae ahquompiyeuut.
E.9.25 Know therefore and understand, that from the going forth of the commandment to restore and to build Jerusalem unto the Messiah the Prince shall be seven weeks, and threescore and two weeks: the street shall be built again, and the wall, even in troublous times.

α.9.26 Kah mahtshunk nequtta tahshinchage kah neese weksash, Messiah pish tummetahwhau, qut matta wutche nagum; kah ummissinninnúmoh sontim noh pish paont, pish pagwatoog keitotan, kah sanctuary, kah adt wohkukquoshik pish nashpe tomogkon, kah adt wohkukquoshik mohtompog, touussinn8ongash kuhquttumun.
E.9.26 And after threescore and two weeks shall Messiah be cut off, but not for himself: and the people of the prince that shall come shall destroy the city and the sanctuary; and the end thereof shall be with a flood, and unto the end of the war desolations are determined.

α.9.27 Kah noh pish menehketeau wunn8waonk weeche monacheg, pasuk wek: kah ut nashaue ne week, pish wohkukquoshitteau sephausuonk kah mag8onk, kah wuteche wepágunnumwe unkqueneunkquok pish wuttaúushittauwáteauun, nó pajeh adt pakojteómuk, kah ne kohquttumuk pish sohkenumauon ne tauushik.
E.9.27 And he shall confirm the covenant with many for one week: and in the midst of the week he shall cause the sacrifice and the oblation to cease, and for the overspreading of abominations he shall make it desolate, even until the consummation, and that determined shall be poured upon the desolate.

α.10.1 WUnnishwe kodtum8mit Cyrus Persiae ketass8t, teag wahteauwáheâu Daniel (noh áhenit Belteshazzar) kah ne teag wunnamuhkuteyeu8, qut kukquttumoe ahquompi sepeyeu8, kah noh wohtam ne teag, kah wahteau ne monomansuonk.
E.10.1 In the third year of Cyrus king of Persia a thing was revealed unto Daniel, whose name was called Belteshazzar; and the thing was true, but the time appointed was long: and he understood the thing, and had understanding of the vision.

α.10.2 Yeush kesuodtash nen Daniel, nummauup niṣhwe weeksáe.
E.10.2 In those days I Daniel was mourning three full weeks.

α.10.3 Matta nummeech8 wekog petukqunneg, kah weyaus, kah wine matta peyaumun8 nutt8nut, kah matta nussusséqunau nuhhog nô pajeh nishwinash mamusse weeksash wohkukquoshinit.
E.10.3 I ate no pleasant bread, neither came flesh nor wine in my mouth, neither did I anoint myself at all, till three whole weeks were fulfilled.

α.10.4 Kah neesneechadtikqunhog kah yauunash kesukodtash, negonne nepauz: apeon kishketuk ne Hiddekel,
E.10.4 And in the four and twentieth day of the first month, as I was by the side of the great river, which is Hiddekel;

α.10.5 Neit nuttahshinnumup nuskesukquash, kah nadtauwompip, kah kusseh, pasuk wosketomp hogk8 hashabponak, wusseg puttukquobpissum8 wanegik Uphaz gold.
E.10.5 Then I lifted up mine eyes, and looked, and behold a certain man clothed in linen, whose loins were girded with fine gold of Uphaz:

α.10.6 Wuhhog wonk ogqueneunkquodt Beryl, kah wuskesuk ogqueneunkquodt ukkutshaumunut, kah wuskesukquash onkatuk n8tae lampsash: kah wuhpittenash kah wusseetash ogqueneunkquodt woôsuppánumwe brasse, kah ukkutt8wu wadtauatonkqussuonk tatuppeyeu8 8wadtauatonkqussuongan8 monacheg.
E.10.6 His body also was like the beryl, and his face as the appearance of lightning, and his eyes as lamps of fire, and his arms and his feet like in colour to polished brass, and the voice of his words like the voice of a multitude.

α.10.7 Kah nen Daniel nunnussu naum monomansuonk: newutche wosketompaog neg weetomukqueaneg, matta naum8og monomansuonk: qut mishe nunnukshaonk wunnuhkukauóuh, newaj wussemohettit kah puttogquehettit.
E.10.7 And I Daniel alone saw the vision: for the men that were with me saw not the vision; but a great quaking fell upon them, so that they fled to hide themselves.

α.10.8 Newaj nussiee, kah yeu nunnaumun mishe monomansuonk: kah matta n8menuhkesuonganu: newutche nuttinnussuonk quinnuppem8 en aninn8onganit, kah matta n8menuhkesuonganu.
E.10.8 Therefore I was left alone, and saw this great vision, and there remained no strength in me: for my comeliness was turned in me into corruption, and I retained no strength.

α.10.9 Qut nunn8tam 8wadtauatonkqussue kutt8wongash, kah n8tamon 8wadtauatonkqussue kutt8wongash, neit nukkussikkouem ut nuskesukqut, kah nuskesuk en ohkeiyeu.
E.10.9 Yet heard I the voice of his words: and when I heard the voice of his words, then was I in a deep sleep on my face, and my face toward the ground.

α.10.10 Kah kusseh, menutcheg nummussinuk, noh ápésetukqussumukqueh, kah nunnutcheg.
E.10.10 And, behold, an hand touched me, which set me upon my knees and upon the palms of my hands.

α.10.11 Kah nuttinuk, woi Daniel, wosketomp mashe womónit, wohtash kutt8wongash nish ánunnónish, kah neepaush: newutch en kuhhogkat yeuyeu nutann8nit, kah yeu [â]sit nunnuksháe neepop.
E.10.11 And he said unto me, O Daniel, a man greatly beloved, understand the words that I speak unto thee, and stand upright: for unto thee am I now sent. And when he had spoken this word unto me, I stood trembling.

α.10.12 Neit nuttinuk, wabesehkon Daniel: newutche wutche weske kesukodt ponaman kuskesuk wohwohtamunat, kah kussasamatahwhonat kuhhog ut anaquabit kum$Manitt8m, kukkutt8wongash n8tamunash, kah n8che peyam kukkutt8ongash.
E.10.12 Then said he unto me, Fear not, Daniel: for from the first day that thou didst set thine heart to understand, and to chasten thyself before thy God, thy words were heard, and I am come for thy words.

α.10.13 Qut sontim ut ukkeitass8tam8onganit Persia, nukkuppikkompauwéhtunk neesneechatikquinne, kah pasuk kesuk; qut kusseh, Michael pasuk keiche sontim nunnonche aninnumunk, kah na n8wetapemónah Persiae ketass8tamwog.
E.10.13 But the prince of the kingdom of Persia withstood me one and twenty days: but, lo, Michael, one of the chief princes, came to help me; and I remained there with the kings of Persia.

α.10.14 Yeuyeu n8che peyam k8wahteauwahenunat toh pish ánihettit kummissinninnúmog ut ohkomáe kesukodtut: newutche monomansuonk m8chetikqunnú8.
E.10.14 Now I am come to make thee understand what shall befall thy people in the latter days: for yet the vision is for many days.

α.10.15 Kah nish ásit, nutti[n]ohquohtop nuskesuk ohkekontu, kah nukkupputt8nomp.
E.10.15 And when he had spoken such words unto me, I set my face toward the ground, and I became dumb.

α.10.16 Kah kusseh, noh ogqueneunkq[u]ssit wosketomp wunnaumonuh nummussinnumunk nussissitt8n: neit n8wohshinomp nutt8n, kah nukket8komp, kah nuttinop noh neepauit anaquabeh, woi nussontimom, nashpe monomansuonk nutonkquomom8ongash nunnuhkukunk, kah matta n8menuhkesuonganu.
E.10.16 And, behold, one like the similitude of the sons of men touched my lips: then I opened my mouth, and spake, and said unto him that stood before me, O my lord, by the vision my sorrows are turned upon me, and I have retained no strength.

α.10.17 Newutche uttoh woh en yeuh wuttinneumoh nussontimom, keket8hka[u]o[n] yeuh nussontimomoh, newutche papaume nen, teanuk matta n8menuhkesuonganu, kah matta n8nashaonganu.
E.10.17 For how can the servant of this my lord talk with this my lord? for as for me, straightway there remained no strength in me, neither is there breath left in me.

α.10.18 Neit wonk peyau, kah nummussinuk howan agqueneunkqussit wosketompaut, kah nummenuhkeip.
E.10.18 Then there came again and touched me one like the appearance of a man, and he strengthened me,

α.10.19 Kah n8wau, woi wosketomp mahshe womonit wabesehkon, wunohteash, menuhkesish, nux menuhkesish: kah kôn8sit, nummenuhkehitteap, kah nussip, nussontimom ket8koush, newutche kummenuhkeheh.
E.10.19 And said, O man greatly beloved, fear not: peace be unto thee, be strong, yea, be strong. And when he had spoken unto me, I was strengthened, and said, Let my lord speak; for thou hast strengthened me.

α.10.20 Neit n8wau, sun k8wahteoh tohwaj peyâonun? kah eyeu nukqushkem ayeuhkononat Persiae Sontim: kah sohhamon, kusseh Greciae sontim pish peyau.
E.10.20 Then said he, Knowest thou wherefore I come unto thee? and now will I return to fight with the prince of Persia: and when I am gone forth, lo, the prince of Grecia shall come.

α.10.21 Qut kenahtinush ne wahteauwahuwomuk ut wunnamuhkutee wussukwhonganit: kah matta howan nummenuhkehik8 yeush ut, qut webe Michael kussontimom.
E.10.21 But I will shew thee that which is noted in the scripture of truth: and there is none that holdeth with me in these things, but Michael your prince.

α.11.1 WObk nen, ut weske kodtum8mut, Darius wut-Mede, nunneepoh nummenuhkeheonat kah nummenuhkezheonat.
E.11.1 Also I in the first year of Darius the Mede, even I, stood to confirm and to strengthen him.

α.11.2 Kah yeuyeu k8wahteomwahesh w[a]namuhkut-eyeuuk, kusseh, nishuog ketass8tamwog ash pish neepoog ut Persia, kah yau88it pish anunaueetu onk neg wame: kah nashpe 8weenauwetuongash pish ayeukonittue 8weenauwetuongash pish ayeukonittue wogkouunau wame Greciae ass8tamoonk
E.11.2 And now will I shew thee the truth. Behold, there shall stand up yet three kings in Persia; and the fourth shall be far richer than they all: and by his strength through his riches he shall stir up all against the realm of Grecia.

α.11.3 Kah masugkenuk ketass8t pish neepau, noh pish nanawunuk mishe nanawunnumoonk, kah pish ussu toh anantog.
E.11.3 And a mighty king shall stand up, that shall rule with great dominion, and do according to his will.

α.11.4 Kah neepauit wutass8tamoonk pish pokqsheau, kah pish chadchapem8 en nogque yaue kesukque wabanehtu, kah matta en wunneechanit, matta neaunak wutass8tamoonk, ne nanawunuk: newutche wutass8tamoonk pish kodtinnumun, wutchu onkatogig yeug chaubasitcheg.
E.11.4 And when he shall stand up, his kingdom shall be broken, and shall be divided toward the four winds of heaven; and not to his posterity, nor according to his dominion which he ruled: for his kingdom shall be plucked up, even for others beside those.

α.11.5 Kah sowaniyeue ketass8t pish menuhkesu, kah pasuk8 wussontimom, kah noh pish wutanu[é] menuhkesumoh kah pish wunnanawunuh, wunnanawunnumoonk pish missi piahquttumoonk.
E.11.5 And the king of the south shall be strong, and one of his princes; and he shall be strong above him, and have dominion; his dominion shall be a great dominion.

α.11.6 Kah mahtshunk kodtum8ash, nag pish moeu weech8whittuog: newutche wuttaunoh Sowaniyeue ketass8t, pish peyaonau nanummie ketass8toh, wunn8wonat, qut noh pish matta tapenumm8 wuhpittene menuhkesuonk: kah mat pish neepoou qut noh pish magun, kah neg pas8woncheg, kah noh waneechanit, kah noh manuhkeheont yeu ahquompag.
E.11.6 And in the end of years they shall join themselves together; for the king's daughter of the south shall come to the king of the north to make an agreement: but she shall not retain the power of the arm; neither shall he stand, nor his arm: but she shall be given up, and they that brought her, and he that begat her, and he that strengthened her in these times.

α.11.7 Qut wutch 8wutchaubaku wuttuhqunit pasuk8h pish neepauehtunk ut wuttinadchanum8onganit, noh pish nashpe peont kenauwameonk, kah pish petutteau ut 8wonkon8sinit nanummiyeue sontim, kah pish wutayeuhkonuh, kah wussohkauuh.
E.11.7 But out of a branch of her roots shall one stand up in his estate, which shall come with an army, and shall enter into the fortress of the king of the north, and shall deal against them, and shall prevail:

α.11.8 Kah noh missinoh uss8unau Egypt um-Manitt8moh weeche sontimoh, kah nashpe ummishoadtue gold kah silvere wishquash, kah noh pish sepappu m8cheke kodtum8ash onk nanummiyeue ketass8t.
E.11.8 And shall also carry captives into Egypt their gods, with their princes, and with their precious vessels of silver and of gold; and he shall continue more years than the king of the north.

α.11.9 Neit Sowaniyeue ketass8t pish peyau wutass8tam8onganit, kah pish qushkeu en nehenwonche wutohkit.
E.11.9 So the king of the south shall come into his kingdom, and shall return into his own land.

α.11.10 Qut wunnaumonuh wogkoueoh, kah pish mianum mataanukish mishe kenauwameongash, kah pasuk pish wunnamuhkut peyau, kah pish tommogkonnu, kah pish qushkodteau; neit pish qushkeu, kah pish wogkoueu wehque wonkan8sinit.
E.11.10 But his sons shall be stirred up, and shall assemble a multitude of great forces: and one shall certainly come, and overflow, and pass through: then shall he return, and be stirred up, even to his fortress.

α.11.11 Kah sowaniyeue ketass8t pish musquantam, kah pish sohham kah pish ayeuuhkonau, nanummiyeue Sontimuh, kah noh pish sohh8wunau mataanutcheh, qut mataanutcheh pish magunuh en wunnutcheganit.
E.11.11 And the king of the south shall be moved with choler, and shall come forth and fight with him, even with the king of the north: and he shall set forth a great multitude; but the multitude shall be given into his hand.

α.11.12 Kah amaunont monanutcheh, wuttah pish tahshinnumun: kah pish penuhteau monauh piogque muttannonganogkussuoh; qut matta pish 8ch menuhkesein.
E.11.12 And when he hath taken away the multitude, his heart shall be lifted up; and he shall cast down many ten thousands: but he shall not be strengthened by it.

α.11.13 Newutche nanummie sontim pish qushkeu, & pish sohh8wunau mataanutcheh monaog onk neg wesku, kah pish wunnamuhkut nashpe peyau (mahtshunk nawhutche kodtum8ash) mishe kenauwameonk, kah mishenaueetuonk.
E.11.13 For the king of the north shall return, and shall set forth a multitude greater than the former, and shall certainly come after certain years with a great army and with much riches.

α.11.14 Kah ut yeush aquompiy[e]uash monaog pish ayeuhkonittue neepauwehtauaog sowaniyeue ketass8toh: kah wonk nag mak8kinoncheg kummissinninnumoh pish misheheaog wuhhogkauh menehketeauunat monomansuonk, qut nag pish penushaog.
E.11.14 And in those times there shall many stand up against the king of the south: also the robbers of thy people shall exalt themselves to establish the vision; but they shall fall.

α.11.15 Neit nanumie sontim pish peyau, kah wadchuteaog, kah sohkomwog monatash hassunn8tae keitotanash, kah sowanie muhpittenash matta pish 8tamehik8unaoash, asuh matta uppepenamwu missinninnumoh, kah matta pish menuhkesumun8 ayeuhkonittue neepauinneat.
E.11.15 So the king of the north shall come, and cast up a mount, and take the most fenced cities: and the arms of the south shall not withstand, neither his chosen people, neither shall there be any strength to withstand.

α.11.16 Qut noh ayeuhkonittue peyauhonont pish ussu neaunak wuttenantam8onk, kah matta pish howan neepoou anaquabit: kah noh pish neepau ut sohsumoe ohkeit, ne, nashpe wunnutcheg pish mahchum8g.
E.11.16 But he that cometh against him shall do according to his own will, and none shall stand before him: and he shall stand in the glorious land, which by his hand shall be consumed.

α.11.17 Wonk pish wunohtau wuskesuk petukonat nashpe mamusse ukketass8tamoe menuhkesuonk, kah sampwesecheg weeche n[a]gum: yeu pish wutussen, noh pish wuttinninnumauoh mittamwossissue wuttaunin, a[n]nisheont; qut noh matta pish neh weechehumuh, asuh wutussi[n]8uh wuhhogkat.
E.11.17 He shall also set his face to enter with the strength of his whole kingdom, and upright ones with him; thus shall he do: and he shall give him the daughter of women, corrupting her: but she shall not stand on his side, neither be for him.

α.11.18 Yeu mahche n$nag pish qunnuppinnum wuskesuk en munnuhhannehtu, kah pish sohkauoh monaoh qut sontim wutche nagum nehenwonche, pish wohkukquoshitteau spunnamaonk ne aseit; matta ukkehkomonat wuhhogkuh, noh pish wunnuhkenumauon wuhhogkuh.
E.11.18 After this shall he turn his face unto the isles, and shall take many: but a prince for his own behalf shall cause the reproach offered by him to cease; without his own reproach he shall cause it to turn upon him.

α.11.19 Neit pish quinnuppinnum wuskesuk nogque en ummanskit ut nehenwonche wutohkit, qut nish$noh togkussittassun kah penushau, kah matta pish nameheau.
E.11.19 Then he shall turn his face toward the fort of his own land: but he shall stumble and fall, and not be found.

α.11.20 Neit pish neepauóm8 ut wuttinadchanum8onganit, noh ompwunnit, ut ketahs8tamoe wussohsum8onganit, qut ogguhsequinogok pish nushau, matta ut musquantam8onganit asuh ayeuwuttinneat.
E.11.20 Then shall stand up in his estate a raiser of taxes in the glory of the kingdom: but within few days he shall be destroyed, neither in anger, nor in battle.

α.11.21 Kah ut wuttinadchanum8onganit pish neepau nishkeneunkqussit neh matta pish anumauahettegeh ketass8tam8e quttianittuonk: qut noh pish wunohteae petutteau, kah pish ohto ass8tamoonk nashpe wunnónuhk8wáonk.
E.11.21 And in his estate shall stand up a vile person, to whom they shall not give the honour of the kingdom: but he shall come in peaceably, and obtain the kingdom by flatteries.

α.11.22 Kah nashpe tomogkonne muhpitte[n]ash nag pish nehtippaog wuch anaquabit, kah pish sukqusháog: nux, wonk wunn8waeu sontim.
E.11.22 And with the arms of a flood shall they be overflown from before him, and shall be broken; yea, also the prince of the covenant.

α.11.23 Kah mahche wunn8wáhettit, pish wunnompuwussue ussu, newutche noh pish kuhkuhqueu, kah pish menuhkesu nashpe ogguhse missinninnúh.
E.11.23 And after the league made with him he shall work deceitfully: for he shall come up, and shall become strong with a small people.

α.11.24 Noh pish wunohteae petutteau wunnogque wutohtimóinne ayeuongash, kah pish ussu ne 8shoh matta ásenégkup, asuh 8shoh, 8shoh, nah pish wusseáwhoh, ut kenugke sequttahham8onganit, kah mukk8kinnittuonganit kah weenauwetuonganit, nux, pish ayeuuhkonittue natwontam wunnompukodtauunat wonkon8sinash, ut aquompiyeuut.
E.11.24 He shall enter peaceably even upon the fattest places of the province; and he shall do that which his fathers have not done, nor his fathers' fathers; he shall scatter among them the prey, and spoil, and riches: yea, and he shall forecast his devices against the strong holds, even for a time.

α.11.25 Kah pish wogkouunum ummenuhkesuonk kah wutt8anatam8onk ayeuhkonittue sowaniyeue ketass8t, nashpe mishe kenauwameonk, kah sowaniyeue ketass8t pish wogkoueu en ayeuwuttinneat, nashpe mohsag kah manuhkag kenauwameonk: qut matta pish neepoou newutche pish wutayeuuhkonittue natwontamanóuh wunnombukonnittuongash.
E.11.25 And he shall stir up his power and his courage against the king of the south with a great army; and the king of the south shall be stirred up to battle with a very great and mighty army; but he shall not stand: for they shall forecast devices against him.

α.11.26 Nux, neg meechikeg wutchippiyeue meechum nag pish uppagwanóuh, kah ukkenauwameonk pish aneupa[u]: kah monaog pish nushae penushaog.
E.11.26 Yea, they that feed of the portion of his meat shall destroy him, and his army shall overflow: and many shall fall down slain.

α.11.27 Kah wuttahh8woash neeswe yeug ketass8tamwog kodwoskehuwôm8ash: kah n[â]g pish pann8wayeuog ut nenan tableut: qut matta pish wunayé[og]: qut ash wohkuhqupiyeum8 pish kuhquttumwe ahquompiyeu8.
E.11.27 And both of these kings' hearts shall be to do mischief, and they shall speak lies at one table; but it shall not prosper: for yet the end shall be at the time appointed.

α.11.28 Neit pish qushkeu en wutohkit nashpe mishénauétuonk, kah wuttah pish ayeuuhkontam8m8 wunneetupanatamwe wunn8waonk: kah noh pish menuhke ussu kah pish qushku en nehenwonche wutohkit.
E.11.28 Then shall he return into his land with great riches; and his heart shall be against the holy covenant; and he shall do exploits, and return to his own land.

α.11.29 Ut kukquttumóe ahquompiyeuut pish qushkeu kah peyau nogque Sowaniyeu; qut matta pish yaneunkquodtinn8, ne negonneyeuuk asuh ne maumachishú8k.
E.11.29 At the time appointed he shall return, and come toward the south; but it shall not be as the former, or as the latter.

α.11.30 Newutche Chittimme kuht8nogquash pish ayeuuhkonukqunash; newaj pish neuantog kah qushkeit, kah sekeneog wunneetupanatamwe wunn8waonk: ne pish wutussen pish qushkeu, pish attumunum wutaunchem8kaongan8 neg ahquontogig wunneetupanatamwe wunn8waonk.
E.11.30 For the ships of Chittim shall come against him: therefore he shall be grieved, and return, and have indignation against the holy covenant: so shall he do; he shall even return, and have intelligence with them that forsake the holy covenant.

α.11.31 Kah muhpittenash pish 8weech8humukqunash, kah nag pish nishketeauog menuhke sanctuarie, kah pish amaunumwog asekesukokú sephuasuonk, kah na pish ponamwog ne touishinwahuwae unkqueneunkquok.
E.11.31 And arms shall stand on his part, and they shall pollute the sanctuary of strength, and shall take away the daily sacrifice, and they shall place the abomination that maketh desolate.

α.11.32 Kah neg machesehtogig wunn8waonk, pish wanonuhk8wáeu annu[n], qut missinninnúog neg waheoncheg um-Manitt8moh pish menuhkesuog, kah pish menuhkeusseog.
E.11.32 And such as do wickedly against the covenant shall he corrupt by flatteries: but the people that do know their God shall be strong, and do exploits.

α.11.33 Kah neg wohtogeg ut kenugke missinninnuog, pish kuhk8tomauóog monaoh, qut onch pish penushaog ut togkodteganit, kah nashpe n8tau, naṣhpe missinooonk, kah nashpe mukk8kinittuonk m8chetikquinnu.
E.11.33 And they that understand among the people shall instruct many: yet they shall fall by the sword, and by flame, by captivity, and by spoil, many days.

α.11.34 Kah nag penushahettit, nag pish aninnumauoog nashpe ogkuhse aninnumoadtuonk: qut monaog pish wawunóuk8ae 8weech8hamouh.
E.11.34 Now when they shall fall, they shall be holpen with a little help: but many shall cleave to them with flatteries.

α.11.35 Kah nawhutche nag wohwohtogig pish penushaog, nag qutcheheonaout, kah pahkheonat, kah k8womheonaout, pajeh wohkukquoshik: newutche as[k]pumme wutch kukquttumoe ahquompi.
E.11.35 And some of them of understanding shall fall, to try them, and to purge, and to make them white, even to the time of the end: because it is yet for a time appointed.

α.11.36 Kah ketass8t pish ussu neaunak wuttenantam8onk, kah pish misheheou, wuhhogkuh, kah pish annu8kenheau wuhhogkuh nish$noh Manit, kah pish monchanatamwe unnau ayeukonittue um-Manitt8moh Manitt[t]8og, kah pish wunniyeu nô pajeh wohkukquoshik musquantam8onk; newutche ne kohquttumuk pish n$nih.
E.11.36 And the king shall do according to his will; and he shall exalt himself, and magnify himself above every god, and shall speak marvellous things against the God of gods, and shall prosper till the indignation be accomplished: for that that is determined shall be done.

α.11.37 Kah matta pish wutt8anumouh um-Manitt8moh 8shoh, asuh ukkodtantam8ongan8 mittamwussissog, kah matta tohhentupanumoou howae Manitto: newutche pish anue misheheau wuhhogkuh onk nag wame.
E.11.37 Neither shall he regard the God of his fathers, nor the desire of women, nor regard any god: for he shall magnify himself above all.

α.11.38 Qut ut wuttinadchanum8onganit pish quttianumau um-Manitt8m8uh k[e]nauwameongash: kah Manit, neh 8sh8uh matta waheonegeh, noh pish quttianumau, nashpe [p]old, kah silver, kah nashpe mishoadtue hassunash, kah wanegigish.
E.11.38 But in his estate shall he honour the God of forces: and a god whom his fathers knew not shall he honour with gold, and silver, and with precious stones, and pleasant things.

α.11.39 Yeu pish wutussen ut menuhkunk8nósinit weeche pen8e Manitto, neh pish waheoncheh, kah pish m8chekehteau sohsumoonk: kah pish nanawunnumwaheau monaoh, kah pish wutcheiyeue chadchaubenum ohke.
E.11.39 Thus shall he do in the most strong holds with a strange god, whom he shall acknowledge and increase with glory: and he shall cause them to rule over many, and shall divide the land for gain.

α.11.40 Kah ad wohkukquoshik, sowaniyeue sontim pish ukquentauoh kah nanumass8t pish wutogque ayeuuhkonau pemsquo[t], nashpe chariotsash kah horsmenog kah monatash kuht8nogquash, kah pish petutteau wutohtimoinneat, kah pish tommogkonnu8, kah pish pannupwushau.
E.11.40 And at the time of the end shall the king of the south push at him: and the king of the north shall come against him like a whirlwind, with chariots, and with horsemen, and with many ships; and he shall enter into the countries, and shall overflow and pass over.

α.11.41 Pish wonk petutteau sohsumoe ohkeit, kah monatash wutohtimoneash pish kepuhkonah: qut yeug pish pohquohham8og wutch wunnutcheg[a]nit, Edom kah Moab, kah k[ú]hchéyeuitcheg wunnaumonuh Ammon.
E.11.41 He shall enter also into the glorious land, and many countries shall be overthrown: but these shall escape out of his hand, even Edom, and Moab, and the chief of the children of Ammon.

α.11.42 Pish wonk summagunum wunnutcheg en wutohtimóneat, kah Egypte ohke matta pish pohquohham8mun8.
E.11.42 He shall stretch forth his hand also upon the countries: and the land of Egypt shall not escape.

α.11.43 Qut noh pish menuhkesuwontam silvere kah golde nompakouunash, kah wame Egypte mishôadtikish: kah Lybiansog kah Ethiopiansog pish appuoh wutántuonganit.
E.11.43 But he shall have power over the treasures of gold and of silver, and over all the precious things of Egypt: and the Libyans and the Ethiopians shall be at his steps.

α.11.44 Qut aunchemoongash wutch wutchepwoiyeu, kah wutch nanummiyeu pish 8taméhheóuh; newaj pish sohhog nashpe mishe musquanittuonk pagwohkonat, kah papaquanne ôshkomeheónat monáog.
E.11.44 But tidings out of the east and out of the north shall trouble him: therefore he shall go forth with great fury to destroy, and utterly to make away many.

α.11.45 Kah noh pish weekitteau ummishekommukque appuongash nashaue kehtahhanehtu, ut sohsumoe wunneetupanatamwe wadchuut, onk peyau 8wohkukquoiyeumut, kah matta pish howan wutannumauoh.
E.11.45 And he shall plant the tabernacles of his palace between the seas in the glorious holy mountain; yet he shall come to his end, and none shall help him.

α.12.1 KAh na ut ahquompag Michael pish neepau, mishe sontim noh wech8hamont wunneechan8oh kummissinninnumog, kah na pish wutamehpunáe ahquompi, ne matta anán8g nadteoh wadtohtimoimuk nô paj[a]h ne nan ahquompi: kah na ahquompag kummissinninnúmog pish pohquohwhunóog, nishnoh pasuk noh namehit wussukwhosu ut b8kut.
E.12.1 And at that time shall Michael stand up, the great prince which standeth for the children of thy people: and there shall be a time of trouble, such as never was since there was a nation even to that same time: and at that time thy people shall be delivered, every one that shall be found written in the book.

α.12.2 Kah monaog neg kauécheg ohkee puppissiyeuut pish t8keog, nawhutche en machemohtag pomantamoonk, kah nawhutche en akodchuonganit, kah machemohtag mishanántamoonk.
E.12.2 And many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt.

α.12.3 Kah neg waantogig, pish ogque wòsumwog wôsippáe kesuk, kah neg quanupinnoncheg monaoh en sampweseonganit onatuheyeu8og anogqsit micheme kah micheme.
E.12.3 And they that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament; and they that turn many to righteousness as the stars for ever and ever.

α.12.4 Qut ken, woi Daniel, kuppuhhash kutt8wongash, kah sealhash b8k nô pajeh wohkukquoshik: monaog pish papaumshaog, kah wahteauonk pish monat.
E.12.4 But thou, O Daniel, shut up the words, and seal the book, even to the time of the end: many shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall be increased.

α.12.5 Neit nen Daniel nunnatauwompip, kah kusseh, na onkatogig neesuog neepoog, pasuk wutuhshame sepuut, kah onkatuk na nogque wutch w[a]sâpinuk.
E.12.5 Then I Daniel looked, and, behold, there stood other two, the one on this side of the bank of the river, and the other on that side of the bank of the river.

α.12.6 Kah pasuk unnau wosketompoh agqunitcheh hashabponak, noh apit woskeche sepupogwut: toh pish utt8che wohkukquoshin yeush monch[á]natam8ongash.
E.12.6 And one said to the man clothed in linen, which was upon the waters of the river, How long shall it be to the end of these wonders?

α.12.7 Kah nunn8tau wosketomp noh hashabpónak agquit, noh apit woskeche sepue nippeit, waapinuk wuttinnohkou, kah ummenadchu en kesukqut, kah nashpe chadchekeyeuah neh micheme pomantaminitcheh, ne pish utt8cheyeu8, utt8cheyeu8ash, kah pohshe: kah mahche pakojteunk seahhamunat ummenuhkesuongan8 wunneetupanatamwe missinninnuog, wame yeush pish pakod[c]he n$niyeuash.
E.12.7 And I heard the man clothed in linen, which was upon the waters of the river, when he held up his right hand and his left hand unto heaven, and sware by him that liveth for ever that it shall be for a time, times, and an half; and when he shall have accomplished to scatter the power of the holy people, all these things shall be finished.

α.12.8 Kah nunn8tamup, qut matta n8wohtam8: neit nussip woi nussontimom, toh pish n$nih yeush wohkukquos[h]ik?
E.12.8 And I heard, but I understood not: then said I, O my Lord, what shall be the end of these things?

α.12.9 Kah n8wau, monchish Daniel: newutche kutt8wongash kuppuhhamunash, kah se[à]lhamunash nô pajeh wohkukquoshinit.
E.12.9 And he said, Go thy way, Daniel: for the words are closed up and sealed till the time of the end.

α.12.10 Monaog pish pahkhéoog kah wompheoog, kah qutcheheoog: qut matchet8[ó]g pish matcheusseog: kah matta howae matchetou pish wohtam8, qut waantamwog pish wohtamwog.
E.12.10 Many shall be purified, and made white, and tried; but the wicked shall do wickedly: and none of the wicked shall understand; but the wise shall understand.

α.12.11 Kah wutch ne ahquompi asekesukoke sephausuonk pish amaunum, kah touishinwáhuwáe unkqueneunkquok ohtag, nequt muttannongane neese pasuk8e kah pask8gun tahshinchage kesukodtash.
E.12.11 And from the time that the daily sacrifice shall be taken away, and the abomination that maketh desolate set up, there shall be a thousand two hundred and ninety days.

α.12.12 Wunanumunach noh p[a]htsit, kah paont wehque nequt muttannongane, nishwe pasuk kah nishwinchag kah napanna tahshe kesukodtash.
E.12.12 Blessed is he that waiteth, and cometh to the thousand three hundred and five and thirty days.

α.12.13 Qut monchish nô pajeh wohkukquoshik: newutche pish kutanwohsin, kah pish keneepau ut tanohtôadtuonganit adt wohkukquoshik kesukodtash.
E.12.13 But go thou thy way till the end be: for thou shalt rest, and stand in thy lot at the end of the days.