
α.1.1 KAh niyeup, pómonaog Ahasuerus (yeuoh Ahasuerus, noh kohtass8tam8it, wutch India, wehque Ethiopia, nequt pasuk8e, kah nesnehchage kah nesausuk wutohtim[ó]neash.)
E.1.1 Now it came to pass in the days of Ahasuerus, (this is Ahasuerus which reigned, from India even unto Ethiopia, over an hundred and seven and twenty provinces:)

α.1.2 Yeush kesukodtash, ketass8t Ahasuerus, ápit ukketass8tamóe appuonganit, ne ut Shushan mishekomukqut.
E.1.2 That in those days, when the king Ahasuerus sat on the throne of his kingdom, which was in Shushan the palace,

α.1.3 Nashwe kodtumwáe kehtass8tam8it, mishadtu[p]wéheau wame wussontimósumoh, kah wuttinneumoh, ummenuhkesuongan8 Persia kah Media, wutohtimóinneahtu[s]kauáog, kah sontimóog neg apitcheg anaquabenit.
E.1.3 In the third year of his reign, he made a feast unto all his princes and his servants; the power of Persia and Media, the nobles and princes of the provinces, being before him:

α.1.4 Nahtitteadt wutass8tamóe sohsum[ô]e ween[a]uwetuongash, kah wanegik quttiánittue wohquanittúonk, m[8]che[t]ikquinne, nequt pasuk8e, kah shwosuktahshinchage kesukodt[á]e.
E.1.4 When he shewed the riches of his glorious kingdom and the honour of his excellent majesty many days, even an hundred and fourscore days.

α.1.5 Kah yeush kesukodtash ma[h]tshunk, ketass8t mishadtupwéheau wame missinninnuh, neg apitcheg Shushanne mishekomukqut, naneswe matikkenutcheh kah papeississi[n]itcheh, nesausuk tahshikquinne, ut ta[n]o[h]k[e]teaong[a]ne chippinneutonganit, ut ummishekomukqut ketass8t
E.1.5 And when these days were expired, the king made a feast unto all the people that were present in Shushan the palace, both unto great and small, seven days, in the court of the garden of the king's palace;

α.1.6 Na wompiyeuash, ashkoshkiyeuash, kah 8nôiyeuash wôashadtu[n]gish, kishpissuash nashpe wun[neh]ashpo[h]togquash, kah purple pemeneahtonash, silvere ringsehtu, kah marble neepattunkqu[o]nkash, appinneash goldeu8ash, kah silvereu8ash, ut m8sompskinausuut ut nashpe musque, kah 8nôe kah wompi, kah m8i marble.
E.1.6 Where were white, green, and blue, hangings, fastened with cords of fine linen and purple to silver rings and pillars of marble: the beds were of gold and silver, upon a pavement of red, and blue, and white, and black, marble.

α.1.7 Kah 8tattamwaheouh nashpe golde wishquash (auwohteaongash eiyanishquash) kah ketass8tam8e wine m8cheke, neáhunniit ketass8t.
E.1.7 And they gave them drink in vessels of gold, (the vessels being diverse one from another,) and royal wine in abundance, according to the state of the king.

α.1.8 Kah wuttattamóonk neaunak wunnaumatuonk, matta wuttattamwehettéog: newutche ktass8t ann8nau wame wutannohsueneumoh ut wekit, wutussenaóont nish$noh wosketmp wuttapeneaum8onk.
E.1.8 And the drinking was according to the law; none did compel: for so the king had appointed to all the officers of his house, that they should do according to every man's pleasure.

α.1.9 Kah wonk Vasthi kehche-sonkusq mishadtupwéheau wame mittamwussissoh, ut ketass8tam8e komukqut, ne wuttaihe ketass8t Ahasuerus.
E.1.9 Also Vashti the queen made a feast for the women in the royal house which belonged to king Ahasuerus.

α.1.10 Nesausuk adtahshikquinogkok, ketass8t wuttah weekontam8m8uk nashpe wine, ann8nau Mehuman, Biztha, Harbona, Bigtha, kah Abagtha, Zethar, kah Carkas, nesausuk tahsuog Euneuksog, neg wadtinninneumukig ut [à]naquabit ketass8t Ahasuerus.
E.1.10 On the seventh day, when the heart of the king was merry with wine, he commanded Mehuman, Biztha, Harbona, Bigtha, and Abagtha, Zethar, and Carcas, the seven chamberlains that served in the presence of Ahasuerus the king,

α.1.11 Pas8[ó]nat Vasthi kehche sonksq, anaquabit ketass8t, nashpe ketass8tam8e chetuhquab, wunnahtinónat missinninnúh, kah sontimósoh 8neetuonk: newutche wunnompamukqussu. 
E.1.11 To bring Vashti the queen before the king with the crown royal, to shew the people and the princes her beauty: for she was fair to look on.

α.1.12 Qut Kehchissunkisq Vasthi, sekeneam peyonat, ketass8t ann8teamwit nashpe wut-Euneuksumoh, newaj ketass8t m8cheke musquantog, kah ummusquanittam8onk wutchikossikqun.
E.1.12 But the queen Vashti refused to come at the king's commandment by his chamberlains: therefore was the king very wroth, and his anger burned in him.

α.1.13 Neit ketass8t unnau waantamwenúh, neg wahteunkig utt8cheyeu8ash (newutche ne ketass8t wuttéhenneheon wame neh waheoncheh naumatuonguh, kah wussittum8onguh.
E.1.13 Then the king said to the wise men, which knew the times, (for so was the king's manner toward all that knew law and judgment:

α.1.14 Kah noh asuhkunk, Carshena, Shethar, Admatha, Tarshis, Meres, Marsena, Memucan, nesausuk tahsuog Persiae kah Medie sontimóog, neg nagig ketass8t wuskesuk, neg negonne apupanneg ut ketass8tam8onganit.)
E.1.14 And the next unto him was Carshena, Shethar, Admatha, Tarshish, Meres, Marsena, and Memucan, the seven princes of Persia and Media, which saw the king's face, and which sat the first in the kingdom;)

α.1.15 Toh kuttinneheóun kehchesonksq Vasthi, neaunak unnaumatuonk, newutche matta ussu wutann8team8o[u]k ketass8t Ahasuerus, nashpe euneuksog? 
E.1.15 What shall we do unto the queen Vashti according to law, because she hath not performed the commandment of the king Ahasuerus by the chamberlains?

α.1.16 Kah Memucan namp8ham ut anaquabit ketass8t, kah sontimóog, Vasthi kehchisonksq matta webe matchenéheóou ketass8toh, qut wonk wame sontimósoh, kah wame missinninnúh, ut wame wutohtimóneat ketass8t Ahasuerus.
E.1.16 And Memucan answered before the king and the princes, Vashti the queen hath not done wrong to the king only, but also to all the princes, and to all the people that are in all the provinces of the king Ahasuerus.

α.1.17 Newutche yeu wutuss[e]onk kehchesonksq, pish poquadchit peyom8 en wame mittamwossissehtu, newaj pish sekeneauáhettit wessuk8oh ut wuskesuk8óut, aunchem8ónta[m]uk: ketass8t Ahasuerus ann8team8, Vasthi kehchesonksq pas8ónat anaquabit, qut matta peyau. 
E.1.17 For this deed of the queen shall come abroad unto all women, so that they shall despise their husbands in their eyes, when it shall be reported, The king Ahasuerus commanded Vashti the queen to be brought in before him, but she came not.

α.1.18 Netatupe, wame Persiae kah Mediae kehchesquaog ne pish unnâog yeu kesukok, wame ketass8t wussontimósimoh, neg n8togig wutusseonk kehchesonksq, newaj wussaumeyeu8k sekeneáittúonk kah musquanittuonk.
E.1.18 Likewise shall the ladies of Persia and Media say this day unto all the king's princes, which have heard of the deed of the queen. Thus shall there arise too much contempt and wrath.

α.1.19 Tapeneog ketass8t noh wutch sohham8m8utch ketass8tamóe ann8teám8onk, & wussukwhositch ut kenugke Persianse kah Medse unnaumatuonganit, matta onchehteau8unat, Vasthi woh matta wonk peyoou anaquabit ketass8t Ahasuerus, kah ketass8t, anninnumauonch ukketass8tam8e n$niyeuonk onkatogeh, noh [á]neuhkonkqutcheh.
E.1.19 If it please the king, let there go a royal commandment from him, and let it be written among the laws of the Persians and the Medes, that it be not altered, That Vashti come no more before king Ahasuerus; and let the king give her royal estate unto another that is better than she.

α.1.20 Kah ketass8t wuttinnaumatuonk ne woh ayik, wateauwáhuwamuk papannuppe wame wutass8tam8onganit, (newutche missi) wame ummittamwussinneunk pish quttiánumaog wessuk88oh, naneswe matikkenukeg kah papeississitcheg.
E.1.20 And when the king's decree which he shall make shall be published throughout all his empire, (for it is great,) all the wives shall give to their husbands honour, both to great and small.

α.1.21 Kah ne unn8waonk 8sekittahikqun ketass8t, kah sontimósog, kah ketass8t usseu neaunak wuttinn8waonk Memucan.
E.1.21 And the saying pleased the king and the princes; and the king did according to the word of Memucan:

α.1.22 Newutche negonsh[h]ua wussukwhongash en wame 8tohtimone8mash ketass8t, en nishnoh wutohtimóin, neaunak ne 8sukuhwhonk, kah en nishnoh missinninnúog, neánont8wáhettit, nishnoh pasuk wosketomp pish nanawunnum nehenwonche wek, kah ne pish wahteauwáhuon neanont8wahettit wame missinninnúog.
E.1.22 For he sent letters into all the king's provinces, into every province according to the writing thereof, and to every people after their language, that every man should bear rule in his own house, and that it should be published according to the language of every people.

α.2.1 YEush mahche n$nag, ummusquantam8onk ketass8t Ahasuerus anwôshik, mehquanumau Vasthi, kah uttoh aseit, kah ne teag ayeuuhkonittue wôsittumauont.
E.2.1 After these things, when the wrath of king Ahasuerus was appeased, he remembered Vashti, and what she had done, and what was decreed against her.

α.2.2 Neit wuttinneumoh ketass8t neh wadtinninneumuhkongqutcheh, n8waog, natinnehamauunach wunneetue peenompoh.
E.2.2 Then said the king's servants that ministered unto him, Let there be fair young virgins sought for the king:

α.2.3 Kah ketass8t kehtimonch annohsuénúh ut wame wutass8tam8e wutohtimóneat, onk woh nag miyanáog wame waunéginitcheh peenompoh, en Shushanut mishikkomukqut, mittamwussissog wek8óut, ut wunnutcheganit Hege ketass8t wut-Euneukumoh, noh nanawunont mittamwussissoh, kah aninnumauunach ne teag ne pahkhukqhettit.
E.2.3 And let the king appoint officers in all the provinces of his kingdom, that they may gather together all the fair young virgins unto Shushan the palace, to the house of the women, unto the custody of Hege the king's chamberlain, keeper of the women; and let their things for purification be given them:

α.2.4 Kah peenomp noh wasukkitteahont ketass8toh, noh nompe kehchesonkqsuomonch Vasthioh, kah ketass8t ne wuttapeneamun, kah ne wutussen.
E.2.4 And let the maiden which pleaseth the king be queen instead of Vashti. And the thing pleased the king; and he did so.

α.2.5 Ut Shushne mishikommukqut, na wutapin pasuk Jew, noh ussowesu Mordecai, wunnaumonuh Jair, wunnaumonuh Shimei, wunnaumonuh Kish, up-Benjamite.
E.2.5 Now in Shushan the palace there was a certain Jew, whose name was Mordecai, the son of Jair, the son of Shimei, the son of Kish, a Benjamite;

α.2.6 Noh wuss8wóus Jerusalem, kenugke missinnóog, neg monchanutcheg weeche Jekoniah Judae ketass8t, neh Nebuchadnezzar Babylone ketass8t monchanumpoh.
E.2.6 Who had been carried away from Jerusalem with the captivity which had been carried away with Jeconiah king of Judah, whom Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon had carried away.

α.2.7 Kah noh wadchanau Hadassah, noh Esther, wuttaunoh wussissesoh, newutche noh matta wut8sheu asuh wutokas[e]u, kah peenomp wunnompamukqussu kah wunneetu, noh Mordecai (8shoh kah okasoh napinit) wunnemunoh nehenwonche 8tauninneat.
E.2.7 And he brought up Hadassah, that is, Esther, his uncle's daughter: for she had neither father nor mother, and the maid was fair and beautiful; whom Mordecai, when her father and mother were dead, took for his own daughter.

α.2.8 Neit n$niyeup, ketass8t wutann8team8onk kah wuttinnaumatuonk n8tunkquok, kah monaog penompaog môaéhettit, ut Shushane mishe komukqut, ut wunnutcheganit Hegai, Esther pas8au ketass8t wekit, ut wunnutcheganit Hegai nanawunont mittamwussissoh.
E.2.8 So it came to pass, when the king's commandment and his decree was heard, and when many maidens were gathered together unto Shushan the palace, to the custody of Hegai, that Esther was brought also unto the king's house, to the custody of Hegai, keeper of the women.

α.2.9 Kah penomp tapheau, kah wunnampteauoh 8womoausuonk, kah teanuk wuttinnumauoh nish pahkhuóm8ugish, kah nish wadchiogish wuhhogkat, kah nesausuk tahsuoh nunksquoh, neh tapeneunkqussinitcheh aninnumauónat, wutch ketass8t wekit, kah wuttahshinau, kah ummaidumoh en kehche ayeuonganit, wekuóut mittamwussissog.
E.2.9 And the maiden pleased him, and she obtained kindness of him; and he speedily gave her her things for purification, with such things as belonged to her, and seven maidens, which were meet to be given her, out of the king's house: and he preferred her and her maids unto the best place of the house of the women.

α.2.10 Esther asquam wuttinnóon ummissinninneumoh, asuh a[n]onkumoncheh: newutche Mordecai ummechumuhkonuh matta wuttinn8wauneinneat.
E.2.10 Esther had not shewed her people nor her kindred: for Mordecai had charged her that she should not shew it.

α.2.11 Kah Mordecai asekesukokish pomushau anaquohtag chippinneutunkanit mittamwossissekomukqut, wahteauunat uttoh aniit Esther, kah uttoh pish âniit.
E.2.11 And Mordecai walked every day before the court of the women's house, to know how Esther did, and what should become of her.

α.2.12 Kah ne woh adt8che petutteadt, nish$noh nunksq en ketass8t Ahasuerus, mahche na apit nabo nees8oh nepauzsaoh, ne ahennihettit mittamwossissog (newutche ne ne uppahk8t[ó]sue kesukodtum8oash mahtshunk, shwosuk tahsuog nepauzsaog nashpe myrhe pumme, kah nequttat tahsuog nepauzsaog nashpe weetemungquodtee, kah onkatoganash pahkeheonat mittamwossissog)
E.2.12 Now when every maid's turn was come to go in to king Ahasuerus, after that she had been twelve months, according to the manner of the women, (for so were the days of their purifications accomplished, to wit, six months with oil of myrrh, and six months with sweet odours, and with other things for the purifying of the women;)

α.2.13 Neit yeu wuttinne peyau nishnoh peenomp ketass8tamwut, uttoh an kodtantog ne aninnumauon, 8weechauónat wutch wek8óut mittamwossissog en ketass8t wekit.
E.2.13 Then thus came every maiden unto the king; whatsoever she desired was given her to go with her out of the house of the women unto the king's house.

α.2.14 Wunnonkquae monchu, kah nompuhkeit qushkeu en nahohtôeu mittamwossisse wekuóut, ut wunnutcheganit Shaasgaz, ketass8t wut-euneuksumut, noh nanaweheont wushkoppu: matta wonk petukauóou ketass8toh, kuttumma ketass8t tapeneauont, kah wesuongane wehkomont.
E.2.14 In the evening she went, and on the morrow she returned into the second house of the women, to the custody of Shaashgaz, the king's chamberlain, which kept the concubines: she came in unto the king no more, except the king delighted in her, and that she were called by name.

α.2.15 Kah Esther, wuttaunoh Abihail, wussissesoh Mordecai (noh neh anadchononcheh nehenwonche wuttaunut) wututt8chiyeum paom8uk petukauonat ketass8t, wanne teag wehquetum8, qut ne Hegai, wut-euneukumoh ketass8t, noh nanaweheont mittamwossissoh, neáne kuhquttuk: kah Esther ahto tapeneoadtuonk ut anaquabhettit wame neg mônunneauoncheg.
E.2.15 Now when the turn of Esther, the daughter of Abihail the uncle of Mordecai, who had taken her for his daughter, was come to go in unto the king, she required nothing but what Hegai the king's chamberlain, the keeper of the women, appointed. And Esther obtained favour in the sight of all them that looked upon her.

α.2.16 Neit Esther neemunau en Ahasuerus ketass8tamwut, en ukketass8tamukkomukqut, ut piogqussit nepauz (noh Tabethe nepâuz) nesausuk adtasheh kodtumwae nanauunuadt.
E.2.16 So Esther was taken unto king Ahasuerus into his house royal in the tenth month, which is the month Tebeth, in the seventh year of his reign.

α.2.17 Kah ketass8t anue womonau Estheroh onk wame mittamwossissoh, kah noh ohtoou tapeneôadtuonk, kah womonittuonk ut anaquabit, anue onk wame penompaog: newaj ponamauont ketass8tamóe chetuhquab ut upuhkukqut, kah ukk[e]htussonksquaheuh nompe Vasthi.
E.2.17 And the king loved Esther above all the women, and she obtained grace and favour in his sight more than all the virgins; so that he set the royal crown upon her head, and made her queen instead of Vashti.

α.2.18 Neit ketass8t mishadtupweheau wame wussontimósumoh, kah wuttinneumoh, Esther ummishadtupp8onk, kah onwohshitteau wutohtimoineash, kah mag8 mag8ongash, neaunak wuttinniyeuonk ketass8t.
E.2.18 Then the king made a great feast unto all his princes and his servants, even Esther's feast; and he made a release to the provinces, and gave gifts, according to the state of the king.

α.2.19 Kah penompaog moiaéhettit nahohtôeu, neit Mordecai appu ketass8t 8squontamut.
E.2.19 And when the virgins were gathered together the second time, then Mordecai sat in the king's gate.

α.2.20 Esther asquam wunnahtinóuh anonkumonch[e]h, asuh ummissinninneumoh, neane meechumuhkonuh Mordecai, newutche Esther ussu wutan8team8onk Mordecai, onatuh éyeuwinnit.
E.2.20 Esther had not yet shewed her kindred nor her people; as Mordecai had charged her: for Esther did the commandment of Mordecai, like as when she was brought up with him.

α.2.21 Ut yeush kesukodtash, (Mordecái apit ketass8t 8squontamut) nees8og ketass8t wut-euneuksumoh Bigthan kah Teresh, yeug nanawehteunkig usquont, musquantamwog, kah kod nushaog ketass8t Ahasuerus.
E.2.21 In those days, while Mordecai sat in the king's gate, two of the king's chamberlains, Bigthan and Teresh, of those which kept the door, were wroth, and sought to lay hands on the king Ahasuerus.

α.2.22 Kah ne 8wahteauun Mordecai, noh anont Estheroh sonksquoh, kah Esther wuttinnon ketass8toh ut 8wesuonganit Mordecai.
E.2.22 And the thing was known to Mordecai, who told it unto Esther the queen; and Esther certified the king thereof in Mordecai's name.

α.2.23 Kah ne nadwushitteómuk, namehteauun, newaj neeswe kechequabit ut mehtugqut: kah wussukwhosu ut mehquontam[ô]e [k]8kut, ut anaquabit ketass8t.
E.2.23 And when inquisition was made of the matter, it was found out; therefore they were both hanged on a tree: and it was written in the book of the chronicles before the king.

α.3.1 MAhche yeush n$nag, ketass8t Ahasuerus tohshinau Hamanoh wunnaumonuh Amedatha wutAgagit, kah wuttashinuh, kah wutanue ponamauog wutappuonk onk wme ne sontimoh neh weetomukqutcheh.
E.3.1 After these things did king Ahasuerus promote Haman the son of Hammedatha the Agagite, and advanced him, and set his seat above all the princes that were with him.

α.3.2 Kah wame wuttinneumoh ketass8t ut ketass8t wutussquontamut, nauwaeog, kah quehtianumwe wunehteaog Hamanoh, newutche ne wuttinann8teamun ketass8t papaume nehoh: qut Mordecai matta nauwaeu asuh ukquehtiánumwe unnehheuh.
E.3.2 And all the king's servants, that were in the king's gate, bowed, and reverenced Haman: for the king had so commanded concerning him. But Mordecai bowed not, nor did him reverence.

α.3.3 Neit ketass8t wuttinneumoh, neg wutusquontamut ketass8t, unnaog Mordecai, tohwaj panneussehtaman wutann8team8onk ketass8t.
E.3.3 Then the king's servants, which were in the king's gate, said unto Mordecai, Why transgressest thou the king's commandment?

α.3.4 Kah nniyeup, asekesukokish weadtimahettit, kah matta wunn8tauuh, unnaog Hamanoh, naumunat uttoh en Mordecai wuttinniyeuongash menuhkohteau, newutche nah wuttinuh noh Jew.
E.3.4 Now it came to pass, when they spake daily unto him, and he hearkened not unto them, that they told Haman, to see whether Mordecai's matters would stand: for he had told them that he was a Jew.

α.3.5 Kah Haman nag Mordecai matta nauwaeu, kah matta ukquehtianumwe unnehik8oh, neit Haman mishe musquantam.
E.3.5 And when Haman saw that Mordecai bowed not, nor did him reverence, then was Haman full of wrath.

α.3.6 Kah manauwontam wunnusse tohqunonat Mordecai, newutche nag wunnahtinouh ummissinninneumoh Mordecai: newaj Haman kodtantog paguanonat wame Jewsog, pannuppe wame wutass8tam8onganit Ahasuerus, ummissinninneumoh Mordecai. 
E.3.6 And he thought scorn to lay hands on Mordecai alone; for they had shewed him the people of Mordecai: wherefore Haman sought to destroy all the Jews that were throughout the whole kingdom of Ahasuerus, even the people of Mordecai.

α.3.7 Negonne nepauzaug (noh Nisane nepauz) nabo neese kodtum8mit Ahasuerus ketass8t, tohshonteaog Pur, ne tanohtoadtuonk ut anaquabit Haman, asekesukokish, kah uhosuka[u]e nepauzsae, pajeh nabo nees8it jepauz ne Adare nepauz.
E.3.7 In the first month, that is, the month Nisan, in the twelfth year of king Ahasuerus, they cast Pur, that is, the lot, before Haman from day to day, and from month to month, to the twelfth month, that is, the month Adar.

α.3.8 Kah Haman unnau ketass8toh, Ahasuerusoh, na nawhutch missinniñuog nanwiyeuog, kah sepakeog, ut kenugke missinninnutu, ut wame ketass8tamoe wutohtimoneat, kah wuttinnaumatuongan8 pen8weyeu8 wutch wame missinninnuut kah matta nanaweheoog ketass8t wuttinnaumatuonk, newaj matta ne ketass8t 8chiyeuonganein mukk8naonaoont.
E.3.8 And Haman said unto king Ahasuerus, There is a certain people scattered abroad and dispersed among the people in all the provinces of thy kingdom; and their laws are diverse from all people; neither keep they the king's laws: therefore it is not for the king's profit to suffer them.

α.3.9 Tapeneog ketass8t, wussukwhositch, onk woh nag, askomehtahwhoog: kah nen nutôadtuhkauoog piogque muttannonganogkodtash silvere tallentsash, ut wunnutchegan8out yeug meechumuhkonitcheg ut ne usseonk, paudtauunat en ketass8t wunnompek8unekomukquehtu.
E.3.9 If it please the king, let it be written that they may be destroyed: and I will pay ten thousand talents of silver to the hands of those that have the charge of the business, to bring it into the king's treasuries.

α.3.10 Kah ketass8t neemunum uppethennitchab wutch wunnutcheganit, kah wuttinnumauoh Hamanoh wunnaumonuh Amedatha, wut-Agagit ummatwom8oh Jewsog.
E.3.10 And the king took his ring from his hand, and gave it unto Haman the son of Hammedatha the Agagite, the Jews' enemy.

α.3.11 Kah ketass8t unnau Hamanoh, silver kittinn[u]ontean, missinninnuog wonk unnehheoneat uttoh an tapeneaman.
E.3.11 And the king said unto Haman, The silver is given to thee, the people also, to do with them as it seemeth good to thee.

α.3.12 Neit ketass8t wuscribsumoh wehkomoog nabo neese quinhog negonne nepauz, kah na$ut wussukwhosu neaunak wame ne Haman anann8teamit, en ketass8t wul-Leiftenantsumut, kah en nanawunnuenuut neg apitcheg ut nish$noh wutohtimoinneat, kah en nanawunnuenuut, wame missinninnuog ut nishnoh wutohtimoinneat, neaunak ne wussukwhonk, kah en nishnoh missinniñuut neaunak wuttinnont8waongan8, ut 8wesuonganit ketass8t Ahasuerus, wussukwhosu, kah sealhausu nashpe ketass8t uppehthennitchab.
E.3.12 Then were the king's scribes called on the thirteenth day of the first month, and there was written according to all that Haman had commanded unto the king's lieutenants, and to the governors that were over every province, and to the rulers of every people of every province according to the writing thereof, and to every people after their language; in the name of king Ahasuerus was it written, and sealed with the king's ring.

α.3.13 Kah Lettersash negonshhuonash nashpe konupshoncheg, en wame ketass8t wutohtimoneat, paguanonat, kah nushonat kah ushkomeheounaoont wame Jewsog, papeissitcheg kah kehcheiog, mukkiesog kah mittamwussissog, pasuk kesuk, ut nabo nashikquinhog, nabo nees8it nep[a]uz (noh Adare nepauz) kah nemun8k sequttahhamauongn8oash, wutche k8sequttahham8onk.
E.3.13 And the letters were sent by posts into all the king's provinces, to destroy, to kill, and to cause to perish, all Jews, both young and old, little children and women, in one day, even upon the thirteenth day of the twelfth month, which is the month Adar, and to take the spoil of them for a prey.

α.3.14 Nompsukhum8e wussukwhonk, wutche ann8teám8onk magunat en nishnoh wutohtimóinneat, wahteauwaheoneau wame missinninnúog, onk woh uppogkodch nanashweenaóo[u]t ne kesukok.
E.3.14 The copy of the writing for a commandment to be given in every province was published unto all people, that they should be ready against that day.

α.3.15 Kônupishoncheg sohhamwog, kenupshahéoog nashpe ketass8t wutann8team8onk, kah unnaumatuonk magun ut Shushanne mishe komukqut, kah ketass8t kah Haman nummattappuog wuttattamun[a]t, qut keitotan Shushan wuttamehpunáog.
E.3.15 The posts went out, being hastened by the king's commandment, and the decree was given in Shushan the palace. And the king and Haman sat down to drink; but the city Shushan was perplexed.

α.4.1 MOrdecai wahteunk wame neaunag, Mordecai neh nekikom wuthogk8un[ash], kah hogk8 man8tiónak kah pukquee, kah sohham en nashaue keitotanat, kah mishont8ae, kah weesogohpôsue mau.
E.4.1 When Mordecai perceived all that was done, Mordecai rent his clothes, and put on sackcloth with ashes, and went out into the midst of the city, and cried with a loud and a bitter cry;

α.4.2 Kah peyau anaquohtag ketass8t 8squontamut: newutche matta howan woh petutteoou ketass8t 8squontamut, agquit man8tiónak.
E.4.2 And came even before the king's gate: for none might enter into the king's gate clothed with sackcloth.

α.4.3 Kah ut nishnot wutohtimóinneat, uttoh ketass8t wutann8team8onk, kah wuttinnaumatuonk paóm88k, mishe mauonganú8, ut kenugke Jewsut, kah mat meetseonk, kah mauonk, kah maumuttam8onk, kah monaog nashpe kouéog man8tiónak kah pukque.
E.4.3 And in every province, whithersoever the king's commandment and his decree came, there was great mourning among the Jews, and fasting, and weeping, and wailing; and many lay in sackcloth and ashes.

α.4.4 Neit ummaidumoh Esther, kah wut-Euneuksumoh, nag peyaog kah wuttinnóneau: neit keichesonksq mishe neuántam, kah negonshhuau hogk8onk wuthogquñeat Mordecai, kah amaunumauônat man8tiónak wutch wuhhogkat: qut matta wutattumunnum8un.
E.4.4 So Esther's maids and her chamberlains came and told it her. Then was the queen exceedingly grieved; and she sent raiment to clothe Mordecai, and to take away his sackcloth from him: but he received it not.

α.4.5 Neit Esther wehkomau Hatach, pasuk8 ketass8t wut-Euneuksumoh, neh kahtimoncheh 8tinninneumuhkongqunat, kah ann8team8 en Mordecaiit, wahteauunat toh aunak, kah tohwutch.
E.4.5 Then called Esther for Hatach, one of the king's chamberlains, whom he had appointed to attend upon her, and gave him a commandment to Mordecai, to know what it was, and why it was.

α.4.6 Neit Hatach sohham en Mordecaiut, en keitotanáe toumaogquehtu, ne anaquohtag ketass8t 8shsquont.
E.4.6 So Hatach went forth to Mordecai unto the street of the city, which was before the king's gate.

α.4.7 Kah Mordecai wuttinnon, wame ne ashpunadt, kah uttoh adtahshik teaguas, nish Haman quoshomoncheh, ôadtuhkonat ut ketass8t wunnompakou[u]nehtu, wutche Jewsog, paguanonaòont.
E.4.7 And Mordecai told him of all that had happened unto him, and of the sum of the money that Haman had promised to pay to the king's treasuries for the Jews, to destroy them.

α.4.8 Wonk wuttinnumauoh nompwussukhum8e naumatue wussukwhosuonk, ne anumauut, ut Shushan, na uppaguanònat, wunnahtinónat Estheroh, kah 8wahteauwaheónat: kah ummeechumuhkonónat, woh petukauónat ketass8toh, wehquetumauónat, kah wunnanampasumónat ut anaquabenit wutche ummissinninneumoh.
E.4.8 Also he gave him the copy of the writing of the decree that was given at Shushan to destroy them, to shew it unto Esther, and to declare it unto her, and to charge her that she should go in unto the king, to make supplication unto him, and to make request before him for her people.

α.4.9 Kah Hatach peyau, kah wuttinnonash Estheroh ukkutt8wongash Mordecai.
E.4.9 And Hatach came and told Esther the words of Mordecai.

α.4.10 Wonk Esther ken8nau Hatach, kah ann8nau en Mordecai.
E.4.10 Again Esther spake unto Hatach, and gave him commandment unto Mordecai;

α.4.11 Wame wuttinneumoh ketass8t, kah missinninnúog ketass8t wutohtimóneatu, nag wahteauog, wuttinniin howan asuh wosketomp asuh mittamwossis peyaonont ketass8toh, anomeneutunkanit, noh matta wehkomóont, pasuk8 nont wuttinnaumatuonguh, nushonat, qut kuttuma neh ketass8t samogkinnumauoncheh golde scepter, onk woh pomantam: qut nen asquam n8wehkomutteuh petukauônat ketass8t, shwinchadtikquinne.
E.4.11 All the king's servants, and the people of the king's provinces, do know, that whosoever, whether man or women, shall come unto the king into the inner court, who is not called, there is one law of his to put him to death, except such to whom the king shall hold out the golden sceptre, that he may live: but I have not been called to come in unto the king these thirty days.

α.4.12 Kah wuttinonaoash Mordecaioh, ukkutt8wongash Esther.
E.4.12 And they told to Mordecai Esther's words.

α.4.13 Neit Mordecai ann8team8 namp8hamauónat Esther, unnantogon, pish nuppohquohham ut ketass8t wekit, anue onk neg wame Jewsog.
E.4.13 Then Mordecai commanded to answer Esther, Think not with thyself that thou shalt escape in the king's house, more than all the Jews.

α.4.14 Newutche mamusse netahshuwáan yeu ahquompak, neit pohquanittuonk kah pohquohwhunnittuonk pish waápehtunkquog Jewsog wutch onkatuk ayeuonganit, qut ken kah k8sh wek pish kutôshkomitteáwhutteámw8: kah howan wahteunk toh kittin peyonat ass8tam8onganit, ne utt8cheyeu8ut?
E.4.14 For if thou altogether holdest thy peace at this time, then shall there enlargement and deliverance arise to the Jews from another place; but thou and thy father's house shall be destroyed: and who knoweth whether thou art come to the kingdom for such a time as this?

α.4.15 Neit Esther wuttinuh yeu qushkinnumôk Mordecai.
E.4.15 Then Esther bade them return Mordecai this answer,

α.4.16 Monchish, miyán wame Jewsog neg namhetcheg Shushan, kah mat meetseanshek, meetsehteok asuh wuttattam8teok nishikkesukquae, nukonáe asuh kesukodáe, nen wonk kah num-maidumog mat nummeetseumun: neit pish nuppetutteam in ketass8tamut, ne matta neaunán8g naumatuonk, kah nupp8on, nunnup.
E.4.16 Go, gather together all the Jews that are present in Shushan, and fast ye for me, and neither eat nor drink three days, night or day: I also and my maidens will fast likewise; and so will I go in unto the king, which is not according to the law: and if I perish, I perish.

α.4.17 Neit Mordecai monchu, kah ussu wame ne Esther ánann8nont.
E.4.17 So Mordecai went his way, and did according to all that Esther had commanded him.

α.5.1 KAh n$niyeup, nashikquinogok, Esther hogk8 ukketass8tamwe hogk8unash, kah neepau anome chippinneutonganit ut ketass8t wekit, piuhsuke ketass8t wekit, kah ketass8t quenappu ukketass8tamóe appuonganit, ut ketass8tamukkomukqut, piuhsuke wetuóme squontamut.
E.5.1 Now it came to pass on the third day, that Esther put on her royal apparel, and stood in the inner court of the king's house, over against the king's house: and the king sat upon his royal throne in the royal house, over against the gate of the house.

α.5.2 Kah n$niyeup, ketass8t nauont Estheroh, neepau chippinneutonganit, namehteau kittamonteanittuonk ut anaquabenit, kah ketass8t summagunnumauau golde scepter en Estherut: neit Esther pas8tshau, kah mussinnum wannashque scepter.
E.5.2 And it was so, when the king saw Esther the queen standing in the court, that she obtained favour in his sight: and the king held out to Esther the golden sceptre that was in his hand. So Esther drew near, and touched the top of the sceptre.

α.5.3 Neit ketass8t wuttinuh, teag kukkodtantam sonksq Esther? kah teag k8wehquetumóonk? pish kittinnumont pajeh pohshe ass8tam8onganit.
E.5.3 Then said the king unto her, What wilt thou, queen Esther? and what is thy request? it shall be even given thee to the half of the kingdom.

α.5.4 Kah Esther namp8ham, tapeneog ketass8t, ketass8t kah Haman peyaontaj yeu kesukok banquet ne quagquoshwehtamauog.
E.5.4 And Esther answered, If it seem good unto the king, let the king and Haman come this day unto the banquet that I have prepared for him.

α.5.5 Neit ketass8t n8wau, kenupwushah Haman, onk woh ussu Esther ne an8wadt, neit ketass8t kah Haman peyaontamwog banquet ne Esther quagquoshwunuk,
E.5.5 Then the king said, Cause Haman to make haste, that he may do as Esther hath said. So the king and Haman came to the banquet that Esther had prepared.

α.5.6 Kah ketass8t unnau Estheroh ut wine banquet, teaguas k8wehquetumoonk, kah pish kittinnumontean? kah teaguas kenanompanwaonk? pajeh pohshe ass8tam8onganit pish ussen.
E.5.6 And the king said unto Esther at the banquet of wine, What is thy petition? and it shall be granted thee: and what is thy request? even to the half of the kingdom it shall be performed.

α.5.7 Neit Esther namp8ham, kah n8wau ne n8wehquetum8onk, kah nunnanompanwaonk.
E.5.7 Then answered Esther, and said, My petition and my request is;

α.5.8 Namehteauon kitteamonteanittuonk ut anaquabit ketass8t, kah tapeneadt ketass8t 8namptamunat n8wehquetumoonk, kah ussenat nunnanampanwaonk: ketass8t kah Haman peyaontamwehettich banquet ne pish nag quagquoshwehtamauog, kah saup pish nutussen ne ketass8t an8wadt.
E.5.8 If I have found favour in the sight of the king, and if it please the king to grant my petition, and to perform my request, let the king and Haman come to the banquet that I shall prepare for them, and I will do to morrow as the king hath said.

α.5.9 Néit Haman weekontamwe sohham ne kesukok, kah nashpe weekontamwe metah, kah Haman nauont Mordicai ketass8t 8squontamut, matta neepoou, asuh matta ummamonchehtauoh, numwabehtunk musquanittam8onk ayeuuhkonittue Mordecaioh.
E.5.9 Then went Haman forth that day joyful and with a glad heart: but when Haman saw Mordecai in the king's gate, that he stood not up, nor moved for him, he was full of indignation against Mordecai.

α.5.10 Qut Haman ukkehchetuhhónuh, kah paont wekit, ann8team8, kah wehkomau weetompuh, kah Zereshah ummittamwussoh.
E.5.10 Nevertheless Haman refrained himself: and when he came home, he sent and called for his friends, and Zeresh his wife.

α.5.11 Kah Haman ummishamauoh wussohsumóe weenauwetuongash, kah wutch mattaánutcheh wunneechanoh, kah wame nish ne adt ketass8t tahshinnumauoncheh, kah uttoh an tahshinont ánue onk neg sontimóog, kah wuttinneumoh ketass8t.
E.5.11 And Haman told them of the glory of his riches, and the multitude of his children, and all the things wherein the king had promoted him, and how he had advanced him above the princes and servants of the king.

α.5.12 Kah Haman n8wau, nano, nux, Esther sonksq wanne howane unnanumaú8 8weeche peyaontam8mónat ketass8toh banquet, webe nen, kah saup wonk n8wehkumit weeche ketass8t.
E.5.12 Haman said moreover, Yea, Esther the queen did let no man come in with the king unto the banquet that she had prepared but myself; and to morrow am I invited unto her also with the king.

α.5.13 Qut onch wame yeu monteaguninno nô pajeh nunnauónat Mordecai noh Jew appu ketass8t wutusquontamut.
E.5.13 Yet all this availeth me nothing, so long as I see Mordecai the Jew sitting at the king's gate.

α.5.14 Neit Zeresh ummittamwussoh, kah wame weetompuh wuttinóuh, ahhut kechequabenittimuk, napanna tahshinchag isquanáe sohkunkqutteauunach: kah saup ken8s ketass8t onk Mordecai woh 8waáshunk: neit wekontamwe weeche petutteom ketass8t en banquet, kah ne wuttapeneámun Haman, kah ayimwohtou ahhut kehchequabenitimuk.
E.5.14 Then said Zeresh his wife and all his friends unto him, Let a gallows be made of fifty cubits high, and to morrow speak thou unto the king that Mordecai may be hanged thereon: then go thou in merrily with the king unto the banquet. And the thing pleased Haman; and he caused the gallows to be made.

α.6.1 NE nohkog ketass8t matta kouweu, kah ann8team8 paudtauunat mehquontamwáe b8k, kah nish ogketamunash ut anaquabit ketass8t.
E.6.1 On that night could not the king sleep, and he commanded to bring the book of records of the chronicles; and they were read before the king.

α.6.2 Kah namehteau wussukwhosu, Mordecai paudaunchem8kau papaume Bigthana kah Teresh, nees8oh ketass8t wut-Euneuksumoh, nanausquontamácheg, nag natinnehamwog nushonat ketass8t Ahasuerus.
E.6.2 And it was found written, that Mordecai had told of Bigthana and Teresh, two of the king's chamberlains, the keepers of the door, who sought to lay hand on the king Ahasuerus.

α.6.3 Kah ketass8t n8wau, chaugua quttiánittuonk kah mishanittuonk ne anhit Mordecai yeu$wutche? neit ketass8t wuttinneumoh neh wadtinninneumuhkongqutcheh, n8waog, wanne teag unneheau.
E.6.3 And the king said, What honour and dignity hath been done to Mordecai for this? Then said the king's servants that ministered unto him, There is nothing done for him.

α.6.4 Kah ketass8t n8wau, howan ápit chippinneutunkanit? (kah Haman mahche peyau poquadche chippinneutunkanit ketass8t, ken8nonat ketass8t kehchequabinónat Mordecai ut ahhut kechequabenittimuk ne quagquoshwehtauont.)
E.6.4 And the king said, Who is in the court? Now Haman was come into the outward court of the king's house, to speak unto the king to hang Mordecai on the gallows that he had prepared for him.

α.6.5 Kah ketass8t wuttinneumoh wuttinóuh, kusseh, Haman neepau chippinneutunkanit, kah ketass8t n8wau, petutteaj.
E.6.5 And the king's servants said unto him, Behold, Haman standeth in the court. And the king said, Let him come in.

α.6.6 Neit Haman petutteau, kah ketass8t wuttinuh, toh woh unnéheau wosketomp, neh ketass8t tapeneauoncheh ukqui[h]tiánumukqunat? (neit Haman unnantam ut wuttahut, howane ketass8t tapeneaúont ukquttianumukqunat ánue onk nen?)
E.6.6 So Haman came in. And the king said unto him, What shall be done unto the man whom the king delighteth to honour? Now Haman thought in his heart, To whom would the king delight to do honour more than to myself?

α.6.7 Kah Haman namp8hamauau ketass8toh, wutche wosketomp neh ketass8t tapeneamauonche ukquehtiánumukqunat.
E.6.7 And Haman answered the king, For the man whom the king delighteth to honour,

α.6.8 Ketass8tamóe hogk8ongash, nish ketass8t ahhogqutcheh, paudtauunaj, kah horse ne ketass8t na8mukqutcheh, kah ketass8tamóe chetuhquab ne ponuk uppuhkukqut.
E.6.8 Let the royal apparel be brought which the king useth to wear, and the horse that the king rideth upon, and the crown royal which is set upon his head:

α.6.9 Kah yeu hogk8onk kah horse, ponamunach wunnutcheganit, pasuk ánue masugkenutcheh ketass8t wussontimósumoh, onk woh nish wutogquannonáoash wosketompoh neh ketass8t tapeneamauoncheh ukquttianumukqunat, kah paudtunkquit ut horses uppusquanit, papashpe keitotanáe toumaogqut, kah mishont8ánitch ut anaquabit, ne woh unnéheon wosketomp neh ketass8t tapeneamauoncheh ukquhtianumukqunat.
E.6.9 And let this apparel and horse be delivered to the hand of one of the king's most noble princes, that they may array the man withal whom the king delighteth to honour, and bring him on horseback through the street of the city, and proclaim before him, Thus shall it be done to the man whom the king delighteth to honour.

α.6.10 Neit ketass8t unnau Hamanoh, kenupsash nemunush hogk8onk, kah horse, ne an8wáan, kah ne unnéheuk Mordecai noh Jew, noh ápit ketass8t 8squontamut: teag punushunkitch, wame ne án8wáan.
E.6.10 Then the king said to Haman, Make haste, and take the apparel and the horse, as thou hast said, and do even so to Mordecai the Jew, that sitteth at the king's gate: let nothing fail of all that thou hast spoken.

α.6.11 Neit Haman nemunum hogk8onk, kah horse, kah hogquannau Mordecaioh, kah uppas8oh ut horses uppusquanit, papashpe keitotanáe toumáogq[u]ehtu, kah mishont8au anaquabenit, newoh unnéheon wosketomp neh ketass8t tapeneamauoncheh ukquhtianumukqunat.
E.6.11 Then took Haman the apparel and the horse, and arrayed Mordecai, and brought him on horseback through the street of the city, and proclaimed before him, Thus shall it be done unto the man whom the king delighteth to honour.

α.6.12 Kah Mordecai wonk peyau ketass8t 8squontamut: qut Haman kenupshau en wekit, mau kah onkham uppuhkuk.
E.6.12 And Mordecai came again to the king's gate. But Haman hasted to his house mourning, and having his head covered.

α.6.13 Kah Haman wuttinno[u] Zerish ummittamwussoh, kah wame weetompuh, nish$noh teag ne ashpinadt, neit 8waantam8moh n8waoh, kah Zereshoh ummittamwussoh wuttinuh, Mordecai wutchiit Jewsue wuskannemunit, noh anaquabit n8che kuppenushom, matta pish kussohkauoh, qut pish wunnamuhkut kuppenusham ut anaquabit.
E.6.13 And Haman told Zeresh his wife and all his friends every thing that had befallen him. Then said his wise men and Zeresh his wife unto him, If Mordecai be of the seed of the Jews, before whom thou hast begun to fall, thou shalt not prevail against him, but shalt surely fall before him.

α.6.14 Kah ashpame keket8kauahettit, ketass8t wut-euneuksumoh peyaog, kah kenupshaog pas8onat Haman en banquet ne Esther quagquashwunuk.
E.6.14 And while they were yet talking with him, came the king's chamberlains, and hasted to bring Haman unto the banquet that Esther had prepared.

α.7.1 NEit ketass8t kah Haman peyaontamwog Banquet weéche Estheroh kehchesonksquoh.
E.7.1 So the king and Haman came to banquet with Esther the queen.

α.7.2 Kah ketass8t wonk unnau Estheroh, nahohtô[e]u kesukok ut wine banquet, teaguas k8wehquettum8onk Esther kehchesonksq, kah pish kittinnumontean, kah teaguas ke[na]numpanwaonk, kah pish n$nih pajeh pohshe ass8tamóonk.
E.7.2 And the king said again unto Esther on the second day at the banquet of wine, What is thy petition, queen Esther? and it shall be granted thee: and what is thy request? and it shall be performed, even to the half of the kingdom.

α.7.3 Neit Esther kehchesonksq namp8ham kah n8wau, namehteauon kitteamonteanittuonk ut anaquabean, woi ketass8t, kah tapeneuk ketass8t, nuppomantamóonk aninnumiineaj, wehquetumon, kah nummissinninneumog ut nanumpanwaonganit.
E.7.3 Then Esther the queen answered and said, If I have found favour in thy sight, O king, and if it please the king, let my life be given me at my petition, and my people at my request:

α.7.4 Newutche, magun nuhhogkanónash, nen, kah nummissinninneumog, paguanittinneat, nushittinneat, kah nuppunat: qut magumuk nuhhogkanonash missinnáinneat wosketompaog kah mittamwossissog, woh nutchequnap, tohkônogque matwau, matta woh taphumm8 ketass8t matcheneheáonk.
E.7.4 For we are sold, I and my people, to be destroyed, to be slain, and to perish. But if we had been sold for bondmen and bondwomen, I had held my tongue, although the enemy could not countervail the king's damage.

α.7.5 Neit ketass8t Ahasuerus namp8ham kah unnau Estheroh keichesonksquoh, howan noh? kah uttoh wutappin, noh nomwaméchumik ne ussenat?
E.7.5 Then the king Ahasuerus answered and said unto Esther the queen, Who is he, and where is he, that durst presume in his heart to do so?

α.7.6 Kah Esther n8wau, ayeuteaen kah matwau, noh matcheseaénue Haman. Neit Haman wabesu ut anaquabhettit ketass8t kah kehchesonksq.
E.7.6 And Esther said, The adversary and enemy is this wicked Haman. Then Haman was afraid before the king and the queen.

α.7.7 Kah ketass8t neepau wutch wine banquet ut ummusquanittam8onganit, au mishitteae komukque tanohketeaonganit: kah Haman neepau wunnanampassumonat wutch ukketeaonk, Estheroh kehchesonksquoh: newutche naum ketass8t uppogkodta[n]tamauoh machuk.
E.7.7 And the king arising from the banquet of wine in his wrath went into the palace garden: and Haman stood up to make request for his life to Esther the queen; for he saw that there was evil determined against him by the king.

α.7.8 Neit ketass8t qushkeu wutch mishekomukque tanohketeaonganit, en wine banquete ayeuonganit, kah Haman kepshau ut appinneat ne apit Esther: neit n8wau ketass8t, sun chekeheau wonk kehchesonksquoh, ut anaquabeh, ut wetuómut? ne kutt8onk sohham8m8uk ketass8t wutt8nuh, nag unkhumwog wuskesuk Haman.
E.7.8 Then the king returned out of the palace garden into the place of the banquet of wine; and Haman was fallen upon the bed whereon Esther was. Then said the king, Will he force the queen also before me in the house? As the word went out of king's mouth, they covered Haman's face.

α.7.9 Kah Harbonah pasuk Euneuch, n8wau ut anaquabit ketass8t, kusseh wonk ahhut kechequabenittimuk napañatahshinchag ishquanogkod ne sohkunkquok, ne Haman ayimauont Mordecaioh, noh wânónuk8adt wutche ketass8t, neepatteau wekit Haman. Neit ketass8t n8wau, ne waashun8k.
E.7.9 And Harbonah, one of the chamberlains, said before the king, Behold also, the gallows fifty cubits high, which Haman had made for Mordecai, who spoken good for the king, standeth in the house of Haman. Then the king said, Hang him thereon.

α.7.10 Neit 8waashanóuh Hamanoh, ahhut kechequabenittimuk, ne quagquoshwehtamauomp Mordecaioh: neit ketass8t ummusquanittam8onk pamsheau.
E.7.10 So they hanged Haman on the gallows that he had prepared for Mordecai. Then was the king's wrath pacified.

α.8.1 NE kesukok ketass8t Ahasuerus, aninnumauau Estheroh kehchesonksquoh, wek Haman, ummatwom8uh Jewsog, kah Mordecai peyau anaquabit ketass8t: newutche Esther wuttinopuh uttoh ánauwómont.
E.8.1 On that day did the king Ahasuerus give the house of Haman the Jews' enemy unto Esther the queen. And Mordecai came before the king; for Esther had told what he was unto her.

α.8.2 Kah ketass8t amaunum uppethennitchab, ne amaunuk wutch Hamanáut, kah wuttinnumauun Mordecaioh: kah Esther nanawunnumwáheau Mordecaioh wek Haman.
E.8.2 And the king took off his ring, which he had taken from Haman, and gave it unto Mordecai. And Esther set Mordecai over the house of Haman.

α.8.3 Kah Esther wonk ket8hkau anaquabit ketass8t, kah penushau ut wusseetut, kah wunnanampassumoh nashpe wussippeguash amaunumunat 8woskhuwaonk Haman wut-Agagit, kah pogkodtantam8onk ne pâkodtantamauont Jewsoh.
E.8.3 And Esther spake yet again before the king, and fell down at his feet, and besought him with tears to put away the mischief of Haman the Agagite, and his device that he had devised against the Jews.

α.8.4 Neit ketass8t summagunum golde scepter en Estherut, neit Esther omohkeu, kah neepau ut anaquabit ketass8t,
E.8.4 Then the king held out the golden sceptre toward Esther. So Esther arose, and stood before the king,

α.8.5 Kah n8wau, tapeneog ketass8t, kah namehteauon kitteamonteanittuonk ut anaquabit, kah ne sampweneunkquok ut anaquabit ketass8t, kah tapeneámuk ut wuskesukqut: wussukwhositch omphimunat, wussukwonkanash nish pogkodtantogish Haman wunnaumonuh Amedatha wut-Agagit, nish wasukúhwhukish paguanonat wame Jewsog, neg apitcheg wame wutohtimóont ketass8t.
E.8.5 And said, If it please the king, and if I have favour in his sight, and the thing seem right before the king, and I be pleasing in his eyes, let it be written to reverse the letters devised by Haman the son of Hammedatha the Agagite, which he wrote to destroy the Jews which are in all the king's provinces:

α.8.6 Newutche, uttoh woh nuttin tapenumun naumunat, machuk ne woh nohkukkúnkqhettit nummissinninneumog? asuh uttoh woh nuttin tapeneamun naumunat uppaguanuongan8 anunkumogig?
E.8.6 For how can I endure to see the evil that shall come unto my people? or how can I endure to see the destruction of my kindred?

α.8.7 Neit ketass8t Ahasuerus unnau Estheroh kehchesonksquoh, kah Mordekaioh noh Jew, kusseh, mahche nuttinnumau Esther wek Haman, kah neh 8waoshinouh ut ahhut kechequabenittimuk newutche wunnutcheg ponum Jewsut.
E.8.7 Then the king Ahasuerus said unto Esther the queen and to Mordecai the Jew, Behold, I have given Esther the house of Haman, and him they have hanged upon the gallows, because he laid his hand upon the Jews.

α.8.8 Kenaau wussukhumwanshheuk Jewsog, neane tapeneamog, ut ketass8t 8wesuonganit, kah sealham8k nashpe ketass8t uppethennitchab: newutche wussukwhonk ne adt wussukwhosik ketass8t 8wesuonk, kah sealhausik nashpwe uppethennitchab ketass8t, matta howan woh wutompinnum8un.
E.8.8 Write ye also for the Jews, as it liketh you, in the king's name, and seal it with the king's ring: for the writing which is written in the king's name, and sealed with the king's ring, may no man reverse.

α.8.9 Neith keass8t 8sukuhwhosueneumoh wehkomoog na ahquompak, nash8it nepauz (ne Sivane nepáuz) nesnehchage kah nashikquinogok, kah wussukwhosu, (neaunak wame, ne Mordecai anann8teamwit) en Jewsut, kah Leiftenantsut, kah Deputisut, kah wutohtimoinne nanawunnuenuog, nish wutch India wehque Ethiopia, nequt pasuk88ash, neesuehchag kah nesausuk tahshinash wutohtimoneash, en nish$noh wutohtimoin neakunussukkuhhumohettit, kah en nish$noh missinninnuog, ne unnont8ahettit, kah en Jewsut teahunussukkuhhumwéhettit, kah en unnont8wahettit.
E.8.9 Then were the king's scribes called at that time in the third month, that is, the month Sivan, on the three and twentieth day thereof; and it was written according to all that Mordecai commanded unto the Jews, and to the lieutenants, and the deputies and rulers of the provinces which are from India unto Ethiopia, an hundred twenty and seven provinces, unto every province according to the writing thereof, and unto every people after their language, and to the Jews according to their writing, and according to their language.

α.8.10 Kah wussukhum ut 8wesuonganit ketass8t Ahasuerus, kah wussealhamun nashpe ketass8t uppethennitchab kah negonshhuaog lettersash nashpe kanupshoncheg, horses uppusquanit, kah na8mukqutcheg mulesoh, camélsoh, kah wusku dromidariesoh.
E.8.10 And he wrote in the king Ahasuerus' name, and sealed it with the king's ring, and sent letters by posts on horseback, and riders on mules, camels, and young dromedaries:

α.8.11 Uttoh adt ketass8t anumauoncheh Jewsoh, neg nish$noh otanat, nag ummiaenaont, kah neepauunat wutch uppomontam8ongan8, paguahkonat, nushonat, kah paguanuwaheonaoont, wame ummenuhkesuongan8 missinninnuog, kah wutohtimoneash, neg kodnushoncheg, mukkiesog kah mittamwussissog, kah wussequttahwhouh wutch sequttahham8onk.
E.8.11 Wherein the king granted the Jews which were in every city to gather themselves together, and to stand for their life, to destroy, to slay and to cause to perish, all the power of the people and province that would assault them, both little ones and women, and to take the spoil of them for a prey,

α.8.12 Pasuk kesukodt, ut wame wutohtimoneadt ketass8t Ahasuerus, nabo nashequinhog nabo nashuit nepauz, noh Adare nepauz.
E.8.12 Upon one day in all the provinces of king Ahasuerus, namely, upon the thirteenth day of the twelfth month, which is the month Adar.

α.8.13 Nompsukhum8e wussukwhonk, ann8team8onk magunat en nish$noh wutohtimoin wahteauwahuoneau en wame missinninnuut kah Jewsog woh nanashweog ut na kesukok, wutann8tauonshonaoont ut ummatwom8óuh.
E.8.13 The copy of the writing for a commandment to be given in every province was published unto all people, and that the Jews should be ready against that day to avenge themselves on their enemies.

α.8.14 Kônupshoncheg neg na8mukqutcheg muelsoh camelsoh, sohhamwog, konupshahit, kah chekeushahit nashpe ketass8t wutann8team8onk, kah naumatuonk aninnumoadtin ut Shushane mishikkomukqut.
E.8.14 So the posts that rode upon mules and camels went out, being hastened and pressed on by the king's commandment. And the decree was given at Shushan the palace.

α.8.15 Kah Mordecai sohham wutch anaquabit ketass8t, 8nôiyeue kah wompiyeue ketass8tamoe hogk8, kah nashpe mishe Gold chetuhquab, kah nashpe wunnehashabpagunne kah purple hogk8, kah Shushane keitotan wekontamwog kah muskouanatamwog.
E.8.15 And Mordecai went out from the presence of the king in royal apparel of blue and white, and with a great crown of gold, and with a garment of fine linen and purple: and the city of Shushan rejoiced and was glad.

α.8.16 Jewsog 8wequaiyeum8og, 8wekontam8onganuog, ummuskouantam8onganuog, kah ukquehtianummuonganuog.
E.8.16 The Jews had light, and gladness, and joy, and honour.

α.8.17 Kah ut nishnoh wutohtimoinneat, kah ut nishnoh otanat, uttoh paom8uk ketass8t wutañ8team8onk kah wuttinnaumatuonk, Jewsog 8wekontam8onganuog kah ummuskouantam8onganuog, mishadtup8onk, kah wunne kesukod, kah monaog missinninnuog ne ut ohkeit Jewsu8g, newutche qushaonk Jewsog nuhkuhkongquog.
E.8.17 And in every province, and in every city, whithersoever the king's commandment and his decree came, the Jews had joy and gladness, a feast and a good day. And many of the people of the land became Jews; for the fear of the Jews fell upon them.

α.9.1
E.9.1 Now in the twelfth month, that is, the month Adar, on the thirteenth day of the same, when the king's commandment and his decree drew near to be put in execution, in the day that the enemies of the Jews hoped to have power over them, (though it was turned to the contrary, that the Jews had rule over them that hated them;)

α.9.2
E.9.2 The Jews gathered themselves together in their cities throughout all the provinces of the king Ahasuerus, to lay hand on such as sought their hurt: and no man could withstand them; for the fear of them fell upon all people.

α.9.3
E.9.3 And all the rulers of the provinces, and the lieutenants, and the deputies, and officers of the king, helped the Jews; because the fear of Mordecai fell upon them.

α.9.4
E.9.4 For Mordecai was great in the king's house, and his fame went out throughout all the provinces: for this man Mordecai waxed greater and greater.

α.9.5
E.9.5 Thus the Jews smote all their enemies with the stroke of the sword, and slaughter, and destruction, and did what they would unto those that hated them.

α.9.6
E.9.6 And in Shushan the palace the Jews slew and destroyed five hundred men.

α.9.7
E.9.7 And Parshandatha, and Dalphon, and Aspatha,

α.9.8
E.9.8 And Poratha, and Adalia, and Aridatha,

α.9.9
E.9.9 And Parmashta, and Arisai, and Aridai, and Vajezatha,

α.9.10
E.9.10 The ten sons of Haman the son of Hammedatha, the enemy of the Jews, slew they; but on the spoil laid they not their hand.

α.9.11
E.9.11 On that day the number of those that were slain in Shushan the palace was brought before the king.

α.9.12
E.9.12 And the king said unto Esther the queen, The Jews have slain and destroyed five hundred men in Shushan the palace, and the ten sons of Haman; what have they done in the rest of the king's provinces? now what is thy petition? and it shall be granted thee: or what is thy request further? and it shall be done.

α.9.13
E.9.13 Then said Esther, If it please the king, let it be granted to the Jews which are in Shushan to do to morrow also according unto this day's decree, and let Haman's ten sons be hanged upon the gallows.

α.9.14
E.9.14 And the king commanded it so to be done: and the decree was given at Shushan; and they hanged Haman's ten sons.

α.9.15
E.9.15 For the Jews that were in Shushan gathered themselves together on the fourteenth day also of the month Adar, and slew three hundred men at Shushan; but on the prey they laid not their hand.

α.9.16
E.9.16 But the other Jews that were in the king's provinces gathered themselves together, and stood for their lives, and had rest from their enemies, and slew of their foes seventy and five thousand, but they laid not their hands on the prey,

α.9.17
E.9.17 On the thirteenth day of the month Adar; and on the fourteenth day of the same rested they, and made it a day of feasting and gladness.

α.9.18
E.9.18 But the Jews that were at Shushan assembled together on the thirteenth day thereof, and on the fourteenth thereof; and on the fifteenth day of the same they rested, and made it a day of feasting and gladness.

α.9.19
E.9.19 Therefore the Jews of the villages, that dwelt in the unwalled towns, made the fourteenth day of the month Adar a day of gladness and feasting, and a good day, and of sending portions one to another.

α.9.20
E.9.20 And Mordecai wrote these things, and sent letters unto all the Jews that were in all the provinces of the king Ahasuerus, both nigh and far,

α.9.21
E.9.21 To stablish this among them, that they should keep the fourteenth day of the month Adar, and the fifteenth day of the same, yearly,

α.9.22
E.9.22 As the days wherein the Jews rested from their enemies, and the month which was turned unto them from sorrow to joy, and from mourning into a good day: that they should make them days of feasting and joy, and of sending portions one to another, and gifts to the poor.

α.9.23
E.9.23 And the Jews undertook to do as they had begun, and as Mordecai had written unto them;

α.9.24
E.9.24 Because Haman the son of Hammedatha, the Agagite, the enemy of all the Jews, had devised against the Jews to destroy them, and had cast Pur, that is, the lot, to consume them, and to destroy them;

α.9.25
E.9.25 But when Esther came before the king, he commanded by letters that his wicked device, which he devised against the Jews, should return upon his own head, and that he and his sons should be hanged on the gallows.

α.9.26
E.9.26 Wherefore they called these days Purim after the name of Pur. Therefore for all the words of this letter, and of that which they had seen concerning this matter, and which had come unto them,

α.9.27
E.9.27 The Jews ordained, and took upon them, and upon their seed, and upon all such as joined themselves unto them, so as it should not fail, that they would keep these two days according to their writing, and according to their appointed time every year;

α.9.28
E.9.28 And that these days should be remembered and kept throughout every generation, every family, every province, and every city; and that these days of Purim should not fail from among the Jews, nor the memorial of them perish from their seed.

α.9.29
E.9.29 Then Esther the queen, the daughter of Abihail, and Mordecai the Jew, wrote with all authority, to confirm this second letter of Purim.

α.9.30
E.9.30 And he sent the letters unto all the Jews, to the hundred twenty and seven provinces of the kingdom of Ahasuerus, with words of peace and truth,

α.9.31
E.9.31 To confirm these days of Purim in their times appointed, according as Mordecai the Jew and Esther the queen had enjoined them, and as they had decreed for themselves and for their seed, the matters of the fastings and their cry.

α.9.32
E.9.32 And the decree of Esther confirmed these matters of Purim; and it was written in the book.

α.10.1
E.10.1 And the king Ahasuerus laid a tribute upon the land, and upon the isles of the sea.

α.10.2
E.10.2 And all the acts of his power and of his might, and the declaration of the greatness of Mordecai, whereunto the king advanced him, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Media and Persia?

α.10.3
E.10.3 For Mordecai the Jew was next unto king Ahasuerus, and great among the Jews, and accepted of the multitude of his brethren, seeking the wealth of his people, and speaking peace to all his seed.