
α.Eze.1.1 KAh n$niyeup ut nishwinchage kodtum8ut, yau88it nepauz, napanna adtahshikqunohhog, (kônukushóon missinóog ut kishke Chebare sepuut) kesukquash woshwem8ash, kah nunnaumup mónomansuónaongash Manit.
E.Eze.1.1: Now it came to pass in the thirtieth year, in the fourth month, in the fifth day of the month, as I was among the captives by the river of Chebar, that the heavens were opened, and I saw visions of God.

α.Eze.1.2 Napanna adtahshikquinuhhog, (ne na napanna adtahshe kodtum8k Jehojakim masináit,)
E.Eze.1.2: In the fifth day of the month, which was the fifth year of king Jehoiachin's captivity,

α.Eze.1.3 Wuttinn8waonk Jehovah pahke peyauhóneau Ezekieloh sephausuaénúh, wunnaumonuh Buzi ut wutohtuóut Caldeansog, ut kishke Chebare sepuut, kah wunnutcheg Jehovah na wuttit nuhkuhkauon.
E.Eze.1.3: The word of the LORD came expressly unto Ezekiel the priest, the son of Buzi, in the land of the Chaldeans by the river Chebar; and the hand of the LORD was there upon him.

α.Eze.1.4 Kah nunnautaompip kah kusseh, pemsquoh 8m nanummiyeu, mishe matokqs, kah n8tau tohtohqunitteúm8, kah wôsôhqutteau waeenu, kah wutch nôeu, onatuh Ambere unniyeuit, wutch nashaue n8taut.
E.Eze.1.4: And I looked, and, behold, a whirlwind came out of the north, a great cloud, and a fire infolding itself, and a brightness was about it, and out of the midst thereof as the colour of amber, out of the midst of the fire.

α.Eze.1.5 Kah wonk wutch nashauwe ogqueneunkquodt yauog pomantamwae oásinnit: kah yeu wuttinnussuongan8, nag ogqueneunkqussuog wosketompaut.
E.Eze.1.5: Also out of the midst thereof came the likeness of four living creatures. And this was their appearance; they had the likeness of a man.

α.Eze.1.6 Kah nishnoh pasuk yauunash wushkodtukquash, kah nishnoh pasuk yauinnepúhwhunau.
E.Eze.1.6: And every one had four faces, and every one had four wings.

α.Eze.1.7 Kah wusseet8wóash s[ô]sogkiyeuash, kah wutagwusseet8 ogqueneunkquodt Calfe wusseetut, kah ogque wôsissuog wôôsipp[á]num8k brasse.
E.Eze.1.7: And their feet were straight feet; and the sole of their feet was like the sole of a calf's foot: and they sparkled like the colour of burnished brass.

α.Eze.1.8 Kah wosketompae unnutchâog ut agwe wunnuppuhwhun8óut, weyaue sussippoiyeum8óut, kah nag yau8og wuskesuk8og, kah wunnuppewunnuog.
E.Eze.1.8: And they had the hands of a man under their wings on their four sides; and they four had their faces and their wings.

α.Eze.1.9 Wunnuppuhwhun8uh sasogkinnittuoh, nag mat quinnuppeog ne aáhettit, nag nishnoh pasuk kutchittôôsheau.
E.Eze.1.9: Their wings were joined one to another; they turned not when they went; they went every one straight forward.

α.Eze.1.10 Kah ne ogqueneunkquot wuskesuk88ash, nag yauwe ogqushkesukquâog wosketompaut, kah qunnon8ut, ut wuttinuhko uneyeu, kah nag yauwe ogqushkésukquâog oxinut ummenadcheinniyeuóut, nag wonk yauog wompissukikquáuskésukquáog.
E.Eze.1.10: As for the likeness of their faces, they four had the face of a man, and the face of a lion, on the right side: and they four had the face of an ox on the left side; they four also had the face of an eagle.

α.Eze.1.11 Yeu n$nih wuskesuk88ash, kah wunnuppuhwhun8uh ushpe sepágunáus8oh, neese nuppuhwhunau nishnoh pasuk sogkinittuoh, kah neesuoh wuthogquneuh.
E.Eze.1.11: Thus were their faces: and their wings were stretched upward; two wings of every one were joined one to another, and two covered their bodies.

α.Eze.1.12 Kah nishnoh pasuk kutchittôsheau: uttoh kodauont nashauonk, ne wutôneau, kah nag mat quinnuppeog ne aáhettit.
E.Eze.1.12: And they went every one straight forward: whither the spirit was to go, they went; and they turned not when they went.

α.Eze.1.13 Kah wuttinnussuongan8 pomantamwae owaásinit, nag wuttinnussuongan8 onatuh n8táe mokossáut, kah onatuh lampsut: papaumshóm8 kenugke pomantamwae oaásinit, kah n8tau wôsittau, kah wutch n8taut sohham8m8 ukkutshaumun.
E.Eze.1.13: As for the likeness of the living creatures, their appearance was like burning coals of fire, and like the appearance of lamps: it went up and down among the living creatures; and the fire was bright, and out of the fire went forth lightning.

α.Eze.1.14 Kah pomantamwáe oásineg quogqueog, kah qushkeog onatuh neaunak wequanasháe,
E.Eze.1.14: And the living creatures ran and returned as the appearance of a flash of lightning.

α.Eze.1.15 Kah moninneaúog pomantamwae oaásineg, kusseh, pasuk wheel ut ohkeit ut kishke pomantamwae oaásinit, nashpe weyaue wuskesuk88ash.
E.Eze.1.15: Now as I beheld the living creatures, behold one wheel upon the earth by the living creatures, with his four faces.

α.Eze.1.16 Neaunak wheelash, kah neanteaúsik ogqueneunkquodtash B[é]ryl: kah nag yaue unnôadtuog, kah wuttinnussuongan8, kah neanteaúsik, onatuh wheelut ut nôeu wheelut.
E.Eze.1.16: The appearance of the wheels and their work was like unto the colour of a beryl: and they four had one likeness: and their appearance and their work was as it were a wheel in the middle of a wheel.

α.Eze.1.17 Paumwusháhettit, nag yaue sussippoiyeue moncheog: kah nag matta qushkéog uttoh aáhettit.
E.Eze.1.17: When they went, they went upon their four sides: and they turned not when they went.

α.Eze.1.18 Kah 8wóweeaúsuongan8oash qunnuhquodtash newaj unkqueneunkquok, kah 8woweeausuongan88ash numwohtau wuskesuk88ash, nag yaue waéenu.
E.Eze.1.18: As for their rings, they were so high that they were dreadful; and their rings were full of eyes round about them four.

α.Eze.1.19 Kah paumusháhettit pomantamwae oaásineg, wheelsash kishkuhkongquog, kah pomantamwae oaásineg tahshinit wutch ohkeit, wheelsash waapémoash.
E.Eze.1.19: And when the living creatures went, the wheels went by them: and when the living creatures were lifted up from the earth, the wheels were lifted up.

α.Eze.1.20 Uttoh kodónt nashauanit, ne wutóneau, ne kodón wunnashauanitt8m8uh, kah wheelash tahshin[â]usuash ut piuhsuke nagumau, newutche wunnashauaongan8 pomantamwae oaásineg ohteau wheelsut.
E.Eze.1.20: Whithersoever the spirit was to go, they went, thither was their spirit to go; and the wheels were lifted up over against them: for the spirit of the living creature was in the wheels.

α.Eze.1.21 Nag monchehettit, yeug moncheog, kah nag neepauwehettit, yeug neepoog, kah nag tahshinuk wutch ohkeit, weelsash tahshinausuash piuhsuke nag; newutche wunnashauongan8 pomantamwae oasineg, ohteau wheelsut.
E.Eze.1.21: When those went, these went; and when those stood, these stood; and when those were lifted up from the earth, the wheels were lifted up over against them: for the spirit of the living creature was in the wheels.

α.Eze.1.22 Kah wuttinnussuongan8 sepakehtamoonk ut uppuhkuk8out pomantamwae oasinek ogqueneunkquot unkqueneunkquodte Crystal, sepagenausu út waabe uppuhkuk8out.
E.Eze.1.22: And the likeness of the firmament upon the heads of the living creature was as the colour of the terrible crystal, stretched forth over their heads above.

α.Eze.1.23 Kah ut agwe sepagkehtam8onganit, wunnuppuhwhunn8oh summages8oh, papapiussuhku, nish$noh pasuk neesohteau ne yeu nogque waj unkwhôsum8uk, kah nish$noh pasuk neesohteau ne onkwhosum8uk wuhhogkauh na nogque wutchu.
E.Eze.1.23: And under the firmament were their wings straight, the one toward the other: every one had two, which covered on this side, and every one had two, which covered on that side, their bodies.

α.Eze.1.24 Kah monchehettit, nunn8tamup wunnuppawhunne wadtauatonkqussuongan8, onatuh ogquont8waash; onatuh ummishont8waonk wame masugkenuk, kutt8e unnont8waonk, onatuh kenauwamee wadtauatonkquodt, nag chepekompauwehettit, neeshinaog wunnuppohwhunn8oh.
E.Eze.1.24: And when they went, I heard the noise of their wings, like the noise of great waters, as the voice of the Almighty, the voice of speech, as the noise of an host: when they stood, they let down their wings.

α.Eze.1.25 Kah wadtauatonkqussuonk 8m88 sepagkehtam8onganit, ne piuhsuke uppuhkukk88ut, chepekompauwehettit, kah n8kenahettit wunnuppuhwhunuh.
E.Eze.1.25: And there was a voice from the firmament that was over their heads, when they stood, and had let down their wings.

α.Eze.1.26 Kah waabu sepakehtam8onganit ne piuhsuke uppuhkuk8out, ogqueneunkquodt tahs8tamwe appuonganit, neaunak Saphire qussuk, kah ut ne agqueneunkquok Throne, ogqueneunkquodt wosketompaut ut woskeche.
E.Eze.1.26: And above the firmament that was over their heads was the likeness of a throne, as the appearance of a sapphire stone: and upon the likeness of the throne was the likeness as the appearance of a man above upon it.

α.Eze.1.27 Kah nunnauomp neaunag Amber ogqueneunkquodt n8taut: waeenu anomut: wutch neaunak wusseganit, kah wohkummiyeu, kah wutch neaunak wusseganit, kah womiyeu, nunnaum neaunak n8tau, kah sohsum8m8 waeenu.
E.Eze.1.27: And I saw as the colour of amber, as the appearance of fire round about within it, from the appearance of his loins even upward, and from the appearance of his loins even downward, I saw as it were the appearance of fire, and it had brightness round about.

α.Eze.1.28 Kah neahennussit ahtomp ut mahtokqsit matohquokish, ne nniyeup, neaunak wôsittag waeenu: yeu ogqueneunkquodtup nogquodte wussohsumoonk Jehovah: kah naumon, nuppenushaadtamup nuskesuk, kah n8tamup wadtauatonkquodt pasuk kôadt8hkont.
E.Eze.1.28: As the appearance of the bow that is in the cloud in the day of rain, so was the appearance of the brightness round about. This was the appearance of the likeness of the glory of the LORD. And when I saw it, I fell upon my face, and I heard a voice of one that spake.

α.Eze.2.1 KAh nuttinuk, wosketompae wunnaumoniin, neepaush kah kukkinn8nsh.
E.Eze.2.1: And he said unto me, Son of man, stand upon thy feet, and I will speak unto thee.

α.Eze.2.2 Kah nashauanit nuppetutteaónuk kon8sit, kah n8washketahshik nusseetut, kah nunn8tauomp kô kon8sit.
E.Eze.2.2: And the spirit entered into me when he spake unto me, and set me upon my feet, that I heard him that spake unto me.

α.Eze.2.3 Kah nuttinuk, wosketompae wunnaumoniin, kutann8nsh en wunnaumonat Israel, chekeamwe wutohtimoin; noh cheketiit, nag kah 8sh8oh nuppannesetunkquog pajeh yeu kesukok.
E.Eze.2.3: And he said unto me, Son of man, I send thee to the children of Israel, to a rebellious nation that hath rebelled against me: they and their fathers have transgressed against me, even unto this very day.

α.Eze.2.4 Newutche nag pittuánumweunkqussuog wunneechaninneunk, kah chetauwutteaháog: nen kutann8nsh nag [im], kah pish kuttinóog, yeu wussin Lord Jehovah.
E.Eze.2.4: For they are impudent children and stiffhearted. I do send thee unto them; and thou shalt say unto them, Thus saith the Lord GOD.

α.Eze.2.5 Kah nag, uttoh wuttin n8tamuneau, asuh woh wuttin kehchithôneau, (newutche nag cheketamukkomuk88og) qut onch pish wahteauog quoshodtumwaenin ukkenukkushonáuh.
E.Eze.2.5: And they, whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear, (for they are a rebellious house,) yet shall know that there hath been a prophet among them.

α.Eze.2.6 Kah ken wosketompae wunnaumoniin, nag wab[é]suonúhk[o]n, kah quehtam8hkon ukkutt8wongan8oash, tôhkonogque k[ô]ussog weetomadt, kah kukkenukkisham Scorpionsog: quehtam8hkon ukkutt8wonganooash, kah chepshaóntamùhkon wuttinnussuongan8, tohkônogque wutcheketamukkomuk8uneau.
E.Eze.2.6: And thou, son of man, be not afraid of them, neither be afraid of their words, though briers and thorns be with thee, and thou dost dwell among scorpions: be not afraid of their words, nor be dismayed at their looks, though they be a rebellious house.

α.Eze.2.7 Kah pish nag kuttinóog nukkutt8wongash, uttoh wuttin n8tamunea[u], asuh uttoh wuttin kehchithôneau, newutche nag ahche cheketamwaenù8og.
E.Eze.2.7: And thou shalt speak my words unto them, whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear: for they are most rebellious.

α.Eze.2.8 Qut ken, wosketompae wunnaumoniin, n8tash tôh ánun, chéketogkon, tatuppe na cheketamwekomuk: wohshinush kutt8n kah meech ne [à]numauun.
E.Eze.2.8: But thou, son of man, hear what I say unto thee; Be not thou rebellious like that rebellious house: open thy mouth, and eat that I give thee.

α.Eze.2.9 Kah natauwompeon, kusseh, menutcheg nuhhogkat aum8, kah kusseh, tuttuppéquian[à]usue b8k ne ohteau
E.Eze.2.9: And when I looked, behold, an hand was sent unto me; and, lo, a roll of a book was therein;

α.Eze.2.10 Kah wussepagenumun ut anaquabeh, kah wussukwhôsu ut anomut kah woskeche, kah na$ut wussukwhosu, maumuttam8ongash, kah mauongash, kah onkapunnaongash.
E.Eze.2.10: And he spread it before me; and it was written within and without: and there was written therein lamentations, and mourning, and woe.

α.Eze.3.1 NAno nuttinuk, wosketompae wunnaumoniin, meechish ne namteauan, meech yeu tatuppequianausuk, kah monchish ken8s week Israel.
E.Eze.3.1: Moreover he said unto me, Son of man, eat that thou findest; eat this roll, and go speak unto the house of Israel.

α.Eze.3.2 Neit n8wôhshinum nutt8n, kah nummeechuwahik tatuppequianausik.
E.Eze.3.2: So I opened my mouth, and he caused me to eat that roll.

α.Eze.3.3 Kah nuttinuk wosketompae wunnaumoniin, meetsuah kenogkus, kah wamepwehteauush kenogkus yeu tatuppequianausik ne anunnumauun, neit nummeechinah, kah ut nutt8nut ogque wekon honyut.
E.Eze.3.3: And he said unto me, Son of man, cause thy belly to eat, and fill thy bowels with this roll that I give thee. Then did I eat it; and it was in my mouth as honey for sweetness.

α.Eze.3.4 Kah noh nuttinuk, wosketompae wunnaumoniin, monchish, aush wekit Israel, kah nag us nukkutt8wongash.
E.Eze.3.4: And he said unto me, Son of man, go, get thee unto the house of Israel, and speak with my words unto them.

α.Eze.3.5 Newutche matta kutann8nitteoh en penuwont8wae missinninnuut, kah siogkont8wàonganit, qut wekit Israel.
E.Eze.3.5: For thou art not sent to a people of a strange speech and of an hard language, but to the house of Israel;

α.Eze.3.6 Matta en m8nae ut penuwont8wae kah siogkont8wae, missinninnuut, neg ukkutt8wongan8oash woh mo wohtam8an, wunnamuhkut ann8nunon nag en, nag woh ken8tunkquog.
E.Eze.3.6: Not to many people of a strange speech and of an hard language, whose words thou canst not understand. Surely, had I sent thee to them, they would have hearkened unto thee.

α.Eze.3.7 Qut yeu Israelle wek matta kukkeitunk8og; newutche wame week Israel pittuanumweenunkqussuog, kah menuhketeahaog.
E.Eze.3.7: But the house of Israel will not hearken unto thee; for they will not hearken unto me: for all the house of Israel are impudent and hardhearted.

α.Eze.3.8 Kusseh nummenuhkehteo kuskesuk ayeuhkone nag wuskesuk8oash, kah menuhki kuskodtuk, áyeuhkone wuskodtuk8oash.
E.Eze.3.8: Behold, I have made thy face strong against their faces, and thy forehead strong against their foreheads.

α.Eze.3.9 Onatuh Adamant anue menuhki onk ne|flint k8skodtukkukkauush, qushuhkon ásuh chepshaontam8hkon wuttinnussuongan8, tohkônogque wutcheketamwekomukk8uneau.
E.Eze.3.9: As an adamant harder than flint have I made thy forehead: fear them not, neither be dismayed at their looks, though they be a rebellious house.

α.Eze.3.10 Nano nuttinuk, wosketompae wunnaumoniin, wame nukkutt8wongash nish pish anononish attumunush ut kuttahhut, kah nish n8tash nashpe kehtauogash.
E.Eze.3.10: Moreover he said unto me, Son of man, all my words that I shall speak unto thee receive in thine heart, and hear with thine ears.

α.Eze.3.11 Kah monchish aush missinahtu, en kummissinninneumut, kah nag keket8hkau, kah us, yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, uttoh wuttin n8tamuneau, asuh uttoh wuttin kehchithoneau.
E.Eze.3.11: And go, get thee to them of the captivity, unto the children of thy people, and speak unto them, and tell them, Thus saith the Lord GOD; whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear.

α.Eze.3.12 Neit nashauanit n8waapinuk, kah nuñ8tam ut nuppusquanet, mishe tequemu, n8wau, wunanittamunach wussohsumoonk Jehovah wutch wutayeuonganit.
E.Eze.3.12: Then the spirit took me up, and I heard behind me a voice of a great rushing, saying, Blessed be the glory of the LORD from his place.

α.Eze.3.13 Kah wonk nuñ8tau pomantamwae oaas wunnuppuhwhunne mummussuhk[ó]adtue wuttauatonkqussuonk, kah wheele wadtauatonkqussu[ò]nk piuhsu[k]e nagoh, kah mishe tequenum8e wuttauatonkquot.
E.Eze.3.13: I heard also the noise of the wings of the living creatures that touched one another, and the noise of the wheels over against them, and a noise of a great rushing.

α.Eze.3.14 Neit nashauanit n8waabinuk, kah nummonchanuk, kah n8weesogke monchem kah k[ô]sabpissit nunnashauonk, qut wunnutcheg Jehovah nummenuhkappehtunk.
E.Eze.3.14: So the spirit lifted me up, and took me away, and I went in bitterness, in the heat of my spirit; but the hand of the LORD was strong upon me.

α.Eze.3.15 Neit nag nuppeyaunoog masinaitcheg, ut Telabin, neg wadohkitcheg kishke chebare sépuut, kah nutap ne aphettit, káh na nutchepshae appin ut kenugke nagoh nesausuk tahshikquinne.
E.Eze.3.15: Then I came to them of the captivity at Telabib, that dwelt by the river of Chebar, and I sat where they sat, and remained there astonished among them seven days.

α.Eze.3.16 Kah nniyeup mahtshunk nesausuk tahshikquinogkod, wuttinn8waonk Jehovah nuppeyaonuk n8wau,
E.Eze.3.16: And it came to pass at the end of seven days, that the word of the LORD came unto me, saying,

α.Eze.3.17 Wosketompae wunnaumoniin kutaskwhosuenuwahush ut wekit Israel, newutche n8tash wuttinn8waonk ut nutt8nut kah nag ammom wutch nuhhogkat.
E.Eze.3.17: Son of man, I have made thee a watchman unto the house of Israel: therefore hear the word at my mouth, and give them warning from me.

α.Eze.3.18 Anog matchetou, pish wunnamuhkut kenup, kah matta kutammómoh, kah matta kukken8nóh ammomónat matchetou, wutch ummatche mayut, uppohquohwhuttauunat uppomantam8onk: yeuoh nan matchetou, pish nup ut ummatcheseonganit, qut 8sqheonk k8chimunun ut kenutcheganit.
E.Eze.3.18: When I say unto the wicked, Thou shalt surely die; and thou givest him not warning, nor speakest to warn the wicked from his wicked way, to save his life; the same wicked man shall die in his iniquity; but his blood will I require at thine hand.

α.Eze.3.19 Qut ammomadt matcheetou, kah matta qushkek wutch ummatcheseonganit, asuh ummatche mayut, pish nup ut ummatcheseonganit, qut kuppohquohwhun kukketeahogkou.
E.Eze.3.19: Yet if thou warn the wicked, and he turn not from his wickedness, nor from his wicked way, he shall die in his iniquity; but thou hast delivered thy soul.

α.Eze.3.20 Wonk sampweusseaenin quinnuppeit wutch wussampweseonganit kah matcheseit, kah ponaman anaquabit togkussittassumoonk, noh pish nup: newutche matta kutammómoh pish nup ut ummatcheseonganit, kah ne wussampweusseonk ne mahche usseit matta pish mequontam8un: qut 8sqheonk k8chimunun.
E.Eze.3.20: Again, When a righteous man doth turn from his righteousness, and commit iniquity, and I lay a stumbling-block before him, he shall die: because thou hast not given him warning, he shall die in his sin, and his righteousness which he hath done shall not be remembered; but his blood will I require at thine hand.

α.Eze.3.21 Qut amomadt sampweusseaénin, sampweusseaen matta matchesek, k[a]h matta matchesek: pish wunnamuhkut pomantam, newutche noh ammómou: ken wonk kuppohquohwhun kukketeahogkou.
E.Eze.3.21: Nevertheless if thou warn the righteous man, that the righteous sin not, and he doth not sin, he shall surely live, because he is warned; also thou hast delivered thy soul.

α.Eze.3.22 Kah wunnutcheg Jehovah na nuttit nuhkuhkongqun, kah nuttinuk, omohkish, sohhash en mukoshquttáut, kah naut kuttit keket8kauunun.
E.Eze.3.22: And the hand of the LORD was there upon me; and he said unto me, Arise, go forth into the plain, and I will there talk with thee.

α.Eze.3.23 Neit nutohmohkep, kah nussohammup en mukoshquttáut, kah kusseh, wussohsumóonk Jehovah na neepatteau, onatuh sohsumóonk, ne naumomp kishke Chebare sepuut, kah nuppenushadtam nuskesuk.
E.Eze.3.23: Then I arose, and went forth into the plain: and, behold, the glory of the LORD stood there, as the glory which I saw by the river of Chebar: and I fell on my face.

α.Eze.3.24 Neit nashauonk nuppetutteaónuk, kah neepauwéhik, kah nukkéket8konk, kah nuttinuk, kuppoh kuhhog ut keekit.
E.Eze.3.24: Then the spirit entered into me, and set me upon my feet, and spake with me, and said unto me, Go, shut thyself within thine house.

α.Eze.3.25 Qut ken, woi wosketompae wunnaumoniin, kusseh, nag pish kupponamunkquog kishpissuongash, kah nish nashpe pish kukkenépunukqunnáoash, kah matta pish kussohham8 en kenugke nagoh.
E.Eze.3.25: But thou, O son of man, behold, they shall put bands upon thee, and shall bind thee with them, and thou shalt not go out among them:

α.Eze.3.26 Kah kuppissogquénannuóhukquog, kah pish kukkuppitt8n, kah matta pish ken nag kutáushkomóog: newutche nag cheketamukkomukquog.
E.Eze.3.26: And I will make thy tongue cleave to the roof of thy mouth, that thou shalt be dumb, and shalt not be to them a reprover: for they are a rebellious house.

α.Eze.3.27 Qut ken8nunon pish nuppohquânum kutt8n, kah nag pish kuttinóog, yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, noh n8tog n8taj, kah noh kohchittóhhadt kutchithaj: newutche nag cheketamukkomukquog.
E.Eze.3.27: But when I speak with thee, I will open thy mouth, and thou shalt say unto them, Thus saith the Lord GOD; He that heareth, let him hear; and he that forbeareth, let him forbear: for they are a rebellious house.

α.Eze.4.1 KEn wonk wosketompae wunnaumoniin, neemunuṣh tile, kah ponsh anaquabean, kah ne ut wussukwhush keitotan ne Jerusalem.
E.Eze.4.1: Thou also, son of man, take thee a tile, and lay it before thee, and pourtray upon it the city, even Jerusalem:

α.Eze.4.2 Kah ayeuuhkonittue wéenuhkush, kah ayeuuhkonittue wonkon8sinuhkontash, kah ayeuhkonittue wadchúhkontash: kah ayeuhkonittue wonk tuppuksinn8wóntash, kah ayeuhkonittue pon mugquompaog, waéenu.
E.Eze.4.2: And lay siege against it, and build a fort against it, and cast a mount against it; set the camp also against it, and set battering rams against it round about.

α.Eze.4.3 Nano, neemunush moóhshogque pan, kah ponsh wutch moóhshogqueneutunk nashauwe ken kah keitotan, kah kuskesuk, ayeuhkonittue ponsh: kah pish weenuhkomun, kah pish k8wéenuhkomun, yeu pish kuhkinneasuonganu8 ut wekit Israel.
E.Eze.4.3: Moreover take thou unto thee an iron pan, and set it for a wall of iron between thee and the city: and set thy face against it, and it shall be besieged, and thou shalt lay siege against it. This shall be a sign to the house of Israel.

α.Eze.4.4 Ken wonk sepsish kummenadcheanit, kah ne woskeche ponsh ummatcheseonk wek Israel: neadtahshogkétamuk kesukodtash ne woh ópsinnan, pish kukkénunum nag ummatcheseonganooash.
E.Eze.4.4: Lie thou also upon thy left side, and lay the iniquity of the house of Israel upon it: according to the number of the days that thou shalt lie upon it thou shalt bear their iniquity.

α.Eze.4.5 Newutche kupponamaush ummatcheseongane kodtum8m8oash, ne adtahshik kesukodtash, nishwudt pasuk88ash, kah pasuk8gun tahshinchag kesukodtash: ne pish kuttinne kenunumun ummatcheseongan8 wek Israel.
E.Eze.4.5: For I have laid upon thee the years of their iniquity, according to the number of the days, three hundred and ninety days: so shalt thou bear the iniquity of the house of Israel.

α.Eze.4.6 Kah nish pakojteauan, wonk óhpisish kuttinnunkou, kah pish kukkénunum ummatcheseongan8 wek Judah yauunchadtequinne: kukkúhquttumoush pasuk kesuk nequtte kodtum88ut.
E.Eze.4.6: And when thou hast accomplished them, lie again on thy right side, and thou shalt bear the iniquity of the house of Judah forty days: I have appointed thee each day for a year.

α.Eze.4.7 Newaj woh ponaman keksesuk en nogque Jerusalemme wéenuhkom8wonganit, kah kuhpit pish póhshkohteau, kah pish kutayeuuhkonittue quoshae missohhamun.
E.Eze.4.7: Therefore thou shalt set thy face toward the siege of Jerusalem, and thine arm shall be uncovered, and thou shalt prophesy against it.

α.Eze.4.8 Kah kusseh, nupponum keneepsuongash ut kuhhogkat, kah pish matta kutósue quinnuppu, nô pajeh kukkezteauunat weenuhkomwe kesukodtash.
E.Eze.4.8: And, behold, I will lay bands upon thee, and thou shalt not turn thee from one side to another, till thou hast ended the days of thy siege.

α.Eze.4.9 Kah wonk neemunnumush, wheatash, kah barlyash, kah beansash, kah lentilsash, kah milletsash, kah fitchesash, kah nish ponsh pasukquinnu wishquodt, kah ayimau kuhhog petukqunnunk, ne adtahshogkétamuk kesukodtash, nish pish adt appissinan kussissippóiyeum, nishwudt pasuk8e kah pask8gun kesukodtash na pish kuttit meetsin.
E.Eze.4.9: Take thou also unto thee wheat, and barley, and beans, and lentiles, and millet, and fitches, and put them in one vessel, and make thee bread thereof, according to the number of the days that thou shalt lie upon thy side, three hundred and ninety days shalt thou eat thereof.

α.Eze.4.10 Kah meechum ne woh meechuan, ne pish quttuhwhosu, neesnechagkodtash shekelsash pasuk kesukod, hohtôéu pish kummeechin.
E.Eze.4.10: And thy meat which thou shalt eat shall be by weight, twenty shekels a day: from time to time shalt thou eat it.

α.Eze.4.11 Kah pish wonk quthumoe k8tattam, nequtta tahshe hinné chepai: hohtóeu pish k8tattam.
E.Eze.4.11: Thou shalt drink also water by measure, the sixth part of an hin: from time to time shalt thou drink.

α.Eze.4.12 Kah pish kummeechin, onatuh Barly petukqunnegash, kah pish kutappón nashpe m8ee ne sohham8m8uk wutch wosketompaut, ut anaquabhettit.
E.Eze.4.12: And thou shalt eat it as barley cakes, and thou shalt bake it with dung that cometh out of man, in their sight.

α.Eze.4.13 Kah Jehovah n8wau, yeu wuttin wunnaumonuh Israel pish meechineau wunnishkéteaue petukqunnegan8 ut kenugke penuwohteaut uttoh ann8hkauog.
E.Eze.4.13: And the LORD said, Even thus shall the children of Israel eat their defiled bread among the Gentiles, whither I will drive them.

α.Eze.4.14 Neit nussip woi Lord Jehovah, kusseh, nukketeahogkou asquam nishkeheau: newutche wutch n8skenuuneat, yeu pajeh, matta nummameech8p né nehenwonche nupp8m8uk, asuh nehnegikkausik, kah nishkeneunkque weyaus matta pey8mun8 nutt8nut.
E.Eze.4.14: Then said I, Ah Lord GOD! behold, my soul hath not been polluted: for from my youth up even till now have I not eaten of that which dieth of itself, or is torn in pieces; neither came there abominable flesh into my mouth.

α.Eze.4.15 Neit nuttinuk, kusseh, kuttinninumoush cowashinitchog wutche wosketompaitchog, kah pish kukquagwashweehtam kuppetukqunnunk ne nashpe.
E.Eze.4.15: Then he said unto me, Lo, I have given thee cow's dung for man's dung, and thou shalt prepare thy bread therewith.

α.Eze.4.16 Nano nuttinuk, wosketompae wunnaumoniin, kusseh, nuppohqunnum anwohhoue petukqunnunk ut Jerusalem, kah nag pish quttuhhamoe meechwog petukqunneg, kah wohquanumwe, pish quttuhhamoe wuttattamwog nippe, kah chepshae.
E.Eze.4.16: Moreover he said unto me, Son of man, behold, I will break the staff of bread in Jerusalem: and they shall eat bread by weight, and with care; and they shall drink water by measure, and with astonishment:

α.Eze.4.17 Onk woh nag quenahukquog petukqunneg, kah nippe, kah woh chepshaonittuog, kah woh mohtuppaeog wutch ummatcheseongan8.
E.Eze.4.17: That they may want bread and water, and be astonied one with another, and consume away for their iniquity.

α.Eze.5.1 KAh ken wosketompae wunnaumoniin, nemunumush kenehquog, nemunumush chekquodtweyohhou: kah pamwushahtoush kuppuhkukqut kah k8weshitt8unit neit nemunush qutompagh8dtegash, qutompaghumunat kah chachaubenumunat meesunk.
E.Eze.5.1: And thou, son of man, take thee a sharp knife, take thee a barber's razor, and cause it to pass upon thine head and upon thy beard: then take thee balances to weigh, and divide the hair.

α.Eze.5.2 Nashwe chippag pish kutchikossumun ut n8taut, ut nashau8tani, weenuhkoadtue kesukodtash mahche nnag, káh pish keneemunum nashwe chippag, kah kuttattogkodtamun chohquog, kah nashwe chippag pish kusseahhamun wabanit, kah pish nish nutasuhkaue kodtunumwontamun togkodteg.
E.Eze.5.2: Thou shalt burn with fire a third part in the midst of the city, when the days of the siege are fulfilled: and thou shalt take a third part, and smite about it with a knife: and a third part thou shalt scatter in the wind; and I will draw out a sword after them.

α.Eze.5.3 Kah pish wonk ogguhsese nuhk8tch neemunnumunash kah asseepináuh kussissippoe hogk8unit.
E.Eze.5.3: Thou shalt also take thereof a few in number, and bind them in thy skirts.

α.Eze.5.4 Kah nish wonk nawhuch neemunush, kah unnohteash noeu n8taut: kah nish chikohsish ut n8taut: newutche na wutch pish n8tau sohham8m8 en wame weekit Israel.
E.Eze.5.4: Then take of them again, and cast them into the midst of the fire, and burn them in the fire; for thereof shall a fire come forth into all the house of Israel.

α.Eze.5.5 Yeu wussin Lord God, yeu Jerusalem, nummahche ponamun nash[à]ue wutohtimoneat, kah ohkeash waeenu.
E.Eze.5.5: Thus saith the Lord GOD; This is Jerusalem: I have set it in the midst of the nations and countries that are round about her.

α.Eze.5.6 Kah noh ós8wunnum n8sittum8ongash en matchetowongit, anue onk nish wutohtimoneash, kah nukkuhk8waongash, anue onk nish wutohtimóinneash nish wéenuhku[n]kqutcheh: newutche nag sekeneamwog n8sittum8ongash, kah nukkuhk8waongash, nag matta uppomushaántamm8unáoash.
E.Eze.5.6: And she hath changed my judgments into wickedness more than the nations, and my statutes more than the countries that are round about her: for they have refused my judgments and my statutes, they have not walked in them.

α.Eze.5.7 Newaj yeu n8wadt Lord Jehovah, newutche kummishteomw8 ánue onk wutohtimóneash wéenuhkongqueógish, kah matta kuppomushaóntam8m8 nukkuhk8waongash, kah matta kenanawehteauomw8 n8sittum8ongash, kah kutussemw8 neaunak wutohtimoinne wussittum8ongash nish weenuhkongqueogish.
E.Eze.5.7: Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Because ye multiplied more than the nations that are round about you, and have not walked in my statutes, neither have kept my judgments, neither have done according to the judgments of the nations that are round about you;

α.Eze.5.8 Newaj yeu n8wadt Lord Jehovah, kusseh, nen nen kutayeuuhkonsh, kah nutussen wussittumoonkash ut kenashomut, ut anaquabhettit wutohtimoinneunk.
E.Eze.5.8: Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I, even I, am against thee, and will execute judgments in the midst of thee in the sight of the nations.

α.Eze.5.9 Kah pish nutussen ut kuhhogkat, ne asquam aseu, kah neaunag[,] matta pish wonk nunompe ussen, newutche wame kenishkeneunkquodt8mash.
E.Eze.5.9: And I will do in thee that which I have not done, and whereunto I will not do any more the like, because of all thine abominations.

α.Eze.5.10 Newaj pish wut8shimoog m8hwhahettit wunnaumonauh ut kenashomut, kah wunnaumoniinneunk pish m8whoog 8shóoh, kah pish nutussem wussittum8ongash, ut kenashomut, kah wame askqshoncheg ut kuhhogkat nusseahwhoog en wame wabanehtu.
E.Eze.5.10: Therefore the fathers shall eat the sons in the midst of thee, and the sons shall eat their fathers; and I will execute judgments in thee, and the whole remnant of thee will I scatter into all the winds.

α.Eze.5.11 Newaj, pomantamon, wussin Lord Jehovah, wunnamuhkut, newutche kenishketeóh nus-sanctuarium, nashpe wame jishanumukquokish, kah nashpe wame kenishkeneunkquodt8mash, ne waj wonk kutogguhshesh, kah matta pish nuskesuk kushpasu, kah matta nukkitteamonteanitteoh.
E.Eze.5.11: Wherefore, as I live, saith the Lord GOD; Surely, because thou hast defiled my sanctuary with all thy detestable things, and with all thine abominations, therefore will I also diminish thee; neither shall mine eye spare, neither will I have any pity.

α.Eze.5.12 Kenishwe chippissuonk pish nupwog nashpe enninneaonk, kah nashpe mahshagquodt nag pish ut mahchim8og ut kenashomut: kah nashwe chippissit pish penusheau wutch togkoteg k8wéeniyeumut, kah nusseah nashwe chippissit, en wame wabanéhtu kah nag nutásuhkaue sohwhunnumauóog togkodteg.
E.Eze.5.12: A third part of thee shall die with the pestilence, and with famine shall they be consumed in the midst of thee: and a third part shall fall by the sword round about thee; and I will scatter a third part into all the winds, and I will draw out a sword after them.

α.Eze.5.13 Yeu pish in, nummusquanittam8onk, kah nutchenauausuonk nussepohtauwahtauun ut wuhhogkaóut, kah pish nuttapántam: kah nag pish wahteauog nen J[a]hovah nussin ut nus-zealumut, mahche usseon nummusquantamoonk ut wuhhogkaóut.
E.Eze.5.13: Thus shall mine anger be accomplished, and I will cause my fury to rest upon them, and I will be comforted: and they shall know that I the LORD have spoken it in my zeal, when I have accomplished my fury in them.

α.Eze.5.14 Nano, kummahchumwáhesh, kah kutáyimoush kukkekomitteaonk ut kenugke wutohtimóneat neg wéenuhkongqueaneg, ut anaquabhettit wame neg paumwushacheg.
E.Eze.5.14: Moreover I will make thee waste, and a reproach among the nations that are round about thee, in the sight of all that pass by.

α.Eze.5.15 Ne pish ne kekontuonganú8, kah ahanehtam8onganú8, kah kuhk8tomwehteaonganu8, kah pish kutchepshaonuk wutohtimoinash neg weenuhkongqueaneg, usseon wussittum8ongash ut kuhhogkat, musquantamwe, kah chenauausue, kah mishauskonittue, nen Jehovah nussin.
E.Eze.5.15: So it shall be a reproach and a taunt, an instruction and an astonishment unto the nations that are round about thee, when I shall execute judgments in thee in anger and in fury and in furious rebukes. I the LORD have spoken it.

α.Eze.5.16 Ann8tam matche mahshagquodte kouhquodt en kuhhogkaouh, ne pish wutch uppagwanuongan8, ne pish ann8tam kuppagwanukqunnaout: kah nano nummisheh mahshagquodt ut kuhhogkaout, kah nuppohquenum kuppetukqunnegane anwohhou.
E.Eze.5.16: When I shall send upon them the evil arrows of famine, which shall be for their destruction, and which I will send to destroy you: and I will increase the famine upon you, and will break your staff of bread:

α.Eze.5.17 Ne pish nuttinne ann8non mahshagquodt en kuhhogkaout kah matche puppinashimwog, kah nag pish kukkomm8tumukquog kah enninneaonk, kah wusqueheonk pish pannupshaum8 kuhhogkat, kah kenuhkenumoush togkodteg, nen Jehovah nussin.
E.Eze.5.17: So will I send upon you famine and evil beasts, and they shall bereave thee: and pestilence and blood shall pass through thee; and I will bring the sword upon thee. I the LORD have spoken it.

α.Eze.6.1 KAh wuttinn8waonk Jehovah nuppeyaonuk n8wau.
E.Eze.6.1: And the word of the LORD came unto me, saying,

α.Eze.6.2 Wusketompae wunnaumoniin, nogqunush kuskesuk Israelle wadchutu, kah nish ayeuuhkonittue quoshae missohhamontash.
E.Eze.6.2: Son of man, set thy face toward the mountains of Israel, and prophesy against them,

α.Eze.6.3 Kah n8wash, ken[á]au Israelle wadchuog n8tam8k wuttinn8waonk Lord Jehovah, yeuh Lord Jehovah wuttittamun, wadchuash kah wadchuemesah, kah sepuash, 8naauhtuash, kusseh, nen, kenuhkinnumauunumw8 togkodteg, kah
E.Eze.6.3: And say, Ye mountains of Israel, hear the word of the Lord GOD; Thus saith the Lord GOD to the mountains, and to the hills, to the rivers, and to the valleys; Behold, I, even I, will bring a sword upon you, and I will destroy your high places.

α.Eze.6.4 Kah kut-Altarum8ash pish touishineash, kah kittinneukontunkanoog pish pohkshaog: kah pish nuttinnohteam nohtauununkqueg ut anaquabhettit kuttinnúkontunkanoog.
E.Eze.6.4: And your altars shall be desolate, and your images shall be broken: and I will cast down your slain men before your idols.

α.Eze.6.5 Kah nuppon nupp8e wuhhogkauh wunnaumonuh Israel anaquabinit wuttinnukontunkanouh, kah nusseahham kuskon8nash weene, kut-Altarum8out.
E.Eze.6.5: And I will lay the dead carcases of the children of Israel before their idols; and I will scatter your bones round about your altars.

α.Eze.6.6 Ut wame kutayeuonganuout keitotanash pish mahchum8ash, kah qunuhqui ayeuongash pish touishinneash, onk woh kut-Altarsum8ash mahchim8ash, kah touishinneash, kah kuttinnukontunkan8oog woh pohkshaog kah ahquappuog, kah kuttinnukontunkanóoog woh tummehtahwhoog, kah kutanakausuwonganooash woh machteauunash.
E.Eze.6.6: In all your dwellingplaces the cities shall be laid waste, and the high places shall be desolate; that your altars may be laid waste and made desolate, and your idols may be broken and cease, and your images may be cut down, and your works may be abolished.

α.Eze.6.7 Kah nashitcheg pish penushaog ut kenashom8out, kah pish k8wahteomw8 nen Jehovah.
E.Eze.6.7: And the slain shall fall in the midst of you, and ye shall know that I am the LORD.

α.Eze.6.8 Qut nussequn askqshoncheg, onk woh nawhutch pohquohhamwog wutch togkodteganit ut kenugke wutohtimoneat, séahwhitteaog papashpe wutohtimoinneat.
E.Eze.6.8: Yet will I leave a remnant, that ye may have some that shall escape the sword among the nations, when ye shall be scattered through the countries.

α.Eze.6.9 Kah neg pohquohhogeg, pish kummequanumimw8 ut wutohtimoinneat, uttoh pish ain missinohteamuk, newutche nuppoksham nashpe wunnanwun8dsquaausue metah, ne nogkonnukqueh: kah nashpe wuskesuk88ash, nish nanwunn8dsquaausue asuhkauonitcheh wuttinneukontunkanouh: kah nag pish neehchanumaog wuhhogkauh wutche machukish nish [a]sehetticheh[,] ut wame wunnishkeneunkquodt[8]m8out.
E.Eze.6.9: And they that escape of you shall remember me among the nations whither they shall be carried captives, because I am broken with their whorish heart, which hath departed from me, and with their eyes, which go a whoring after their idols: and they shall lothe themselves for the evils which they have committed in all their abominations.

α.Eze.6.10 Kah nag pish wahteauog nen Jehovah, kah matta tahn8che n8wop yeu machuk nag nuttinheoneag.
E.Eze.6.10: And they shall know that I am the LORD, and that I have not said in vain that I would do this evil unto them.

α.Eze.6.11 Yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, ponkinnutchahush kah téqussitasush, kah n8wash, kuttummunk, wame nishkeneunkquokish ut wekit Israel, newutche nag pish penusháog nashpe togkodteg, kah nashpe mahshagquodt kah nashpe enninneaonk.
E.Eze.6.11: Thus saith the Lord GOD; Smite with thine hand, and stamp with thy foot, and say, Alas for all the evil abominations of the house of Israel! for they shall fall by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence.

α.Eze.6.12 Noh nôappit pish enninneae nupp8, kah noh paswopit pish penushau nashpe togkodteg, kah noh ashqshont, kah wéenuhkauit, pish nupp8 nashpe mahshagquodt: yeu nuttinne pakojteauun nummusquantamoonk ut wuhhogkaout.
E.Eze.6.12: He that is far off shall die of the pestilence; and he that is near shall fall by the sword; and he that remaineth and is besieged shall die by the famine: thus will I accomplish my fury upon them.

α.Eze.6.13 Neit pish k8wahteomw8 nen Jehovah, neg nashitcheg kenukshahettit wuttinnukontunkanóuh wéenu wut-altarum8óut, ut nishnoh kussohkôi, ut wame wanasquodtinne8gish, kah ut agwe nishnoh askunkquomut, kah ut agwe nishnoh kuppunkquodte n8timisset, ayeuongash n[e] adt sephauṣhetteup weetemungquok en wame wuttinneukontunkan8oout.
E.Eze.6.13: Then shall ye know that I am the LORD, when their slain men shall be among their idols round about their altars, upon every high hill, in all the tops of the mountains, and under every green tree, and under every thick oak, the place where they did offer sweet savour to all their idols.

α.Eze.6.14 Ne nuttinne summagunnumauóneau nuhpit, kah nuttouushitteoh ohke, nux m8cheke touushin onk ne touohkomuk en nogque Diblah, ut wame wutáyeuongan8óut, kah nag pish wahteauog, nen Jehovah.
E.Eze.6.14: So will I stretch out my hand upon them, and make the land desolate, yea, more desolate than the wilderness toward Diblath, in all their habitations: and they shall know that I am the LORD.

α.Eze.7.1 NAno wuttinn8waonk Lord nuppeyaónuk n8wau,
E.Eze.7.1: Moreover the word of the LORD came unto me, saying,

α.Eze.7.2 Wonk wosketompae wunnaumoniin, Lord Jehovah yeu wuttittamun Israelle ohke, wohkukquoshin, wohkukquoshin nuhkuhkom yauut nashik ohke.
E.Eze.7.2: Also, thou son of man, thus saith the Lord GOD unto the land of Israel; An end, the end is come upon the four corners of the land.

α.Eze.7.3 Eyeu wohkukquoshin kenuhkuhkunk, kah nutann8n nummusquantam8onk en kuhhogkat, kah kuttinne wussumush neaunak kummayash, kah kutonkquatoush wame kenishkeneunkquodtomash.
E.Eze.7.3: Now is the end come upon thee, and I will send mine anger upon thee, and will judge thee according to thy ways, and will recompense upon thee all thine abominations.

α.Eze.7.4 Kah nuskesuk matta pish kukkishpáosuónuk8, kah matta nukkitteamonteanitteoh qut kutonkquatoush wutch kummayash, kah kenishkeneunkquodt8mash pish ohtaash kenashomut, kah pish k8wahteomw8 nen Jehovah.
E.Eze.7.4: And mine eye shall not spare thee, neither will I have pity: but I will recompense thy ways upon thee, and thine abominations shall be in the midst of thee: and ye shall know that I am the LORD.

α.Eze.7.5 Yeu wussin Jehovah, machuk, webe machuk, kusseh, peyaum8.
E.Eze.7.5: Thus saith the Lord GOD; An evil, an only evil, behold, is come.

α.Eze.7.6 Wohkukquoshim peyaum8, wohkukquoshin peyaum8, kutaskqhukqun, kusseh, peyaum8.
E.Eze.7.6: An end is come, the end is come: it watcheth for thee; behold, it is come.

α.Eze.7.7 Mohtompan kuppeyok, woi ken wadohkean ohkeit, ahquompi peyaum8, wuttaméhpunáe kesukodt paswohteau, kah matta kéket8e wadchuash.
E.Eze.7.7: The morning is come unto thee, O thou that dwellest in the land: the time is come, the day of trouble is near, and not the sounding again of the mountains.

α.Eze.7.8 Eyeu teanuk kussokenumoush nummusquantam8onk, kah kuppákodchehtoush nummusquantam8onk: kah kuttinne wussumush neaunak kummayash, kutonkquatoush wutch wame kenishkeneunkquodt8mash.
E.Eze.7.8: Now will I shortly pour out my fury upon thee, and accomplish mine anger upon thee: and I will judge thee according to thy ways, and will recompense thee for all thine abominations.

α.Eze.7.9 Kah nuskesuk matta pish kushpásu, kah matta nukkitteamonteanitteoh: kuttinonkquadtoush neaunak kummayash, kah keniṣhkeneunkquodt8mash nish ohtagish kenashomut: kah pish k8wahteomw8 nen Lord noh togkodtog.
E.Eze.7.9: And mine eye shall not spare, neither will I have pity: I will recompense thee according to thy ways and thine abominations that are in the midst of thee; and ye shall know that I am the LORD that smiteth.

α.Eze.7.10 Kusseh kesukod, kusseh, peyaum8, mohtompan sohham8m8, pogkomunk uppeshauonú8, pitchu[á]numoonk sontim[ó]hsheau.
E.Eze.7.10: Behold the day, behold, it is come: the morning is gone forth; the rod hath blossomed, pride hath budded.

α.Eze.7.11 Chekéeyeu8k sonkin en pogkomongane matcheetouonganit: matta howan nag pish sekqshoou: matta howan mataánukeg, kah matta howan wadchiit, kah matta pish maumuttam8onoog.
E.Eze.7.11: Violence is risen up into a rod of wickedness: none of them shall remain, nor of their multitude, nor of any of their's: neither shall there be wailing for them.

α.Eze.7.12 Ahquompi peyaum8, kesukod pad8tsh[ó]m8, nôh adtôad weekontam8hkitch, kah noh kodtauompasit maauúhkitch: newutche musquantam8onk nuhkuhkauau wame mataanutcheh.
E.Eze.7.12: The time is come, the day draweth near: let not the buyer rejoice, nor the seller mourn: for wrath is upon all the multitude thereof.

α.Eze.7.13 Qut kodtauompasuen matta pish qushkinnum8 ne kodtauompasit, tohkonogque ash uppomantamuneau: newutche monomansuonk papaume wame mataanukeg, neg matta pish quashkegig: kah matta pish howan menehkhe[ó]ou wuhhogkuh ut uppomantamóe matcheseonganit.
E.Eze.7.13: For the seller shall not return to that which is sold, although they were yet alive: for the vision is touching the whole multitude thereof, which shall not return; neither shall any strengthen himself in the iniquity of his life.

α.Eze.7.14 Nag p8tantamwog monopuhpeg, wame nanashwenat, qut matta howan ayeuhteóou: newutche nummusquantam8onk appehtunkquog wame mataánukeg.
E.Eze.7.14: They have blown the trumpet, even to make all ready; but none goeth to the battle: for my wrath is upon all the multitude thereof.

α.Eze.7.15 Togkodteg poquodchit ohteau, kah enninneaonk kah mahshagquodt anomut: noh apit ohteuhkonit pish nup nashpe togkodteg, kah noh apit anómotanat enninneaonk kah mahshagquodt pish wunnushau.
E.Eze.7.15: The sword is without, and the pestilence and the famine within: he that is in the field shall die with the sword; and he that is in the city, famine and pestilence shall devour him.

α.Eze.7.16 Qut nag pohquohhogeg, pish pohquohhamwog, kah appuog wadchuuhkontu tatuppeyeu8og 8náuhkóie wuskuhwhunanáut wame mauog, nishnoh pasuk wutch ummatcheseonk.
E.Eze.7.16: But they that escape of them shall escape, and shall be on the mountains like doves of the valleys, all of them mourning, every one for his iniquity.

α.Eze.7.17 Wame menutchegash pish n8chumwiyeuash, kah wame mukkuttukquog pish ogque n8chumwesuog nippeut.
E.Eze.7.17: All hands shall be feeble, and all knees shall be weak as water.

α.Eze.7.18 Nag pish wonk puttukquobpissuwontamwog man8tiónak, kah akodchuonk ohteau wame muskesukquéhtu, kah m8sontupáonk ut wame uppuhkukk8óut.
E.Eze.7.18: They shall also gird themselves with sackcloth, and horror shall cover them; and shame shall be upon all faces, and baldness upon all their heads.

α.Eze.7.19 Nag pish unnóhteaog wussilverum8 toumaogquéhtu, kah uk-goldum8 pish ontohteau; wussilverum8, kah uk-goldum8 matta pish tápenum8mun8 uppohquohwhunukqunnaóont, ut ummusquanteáeu kesukodtut Jehovah, matta pish tapheau8og ukketeahogkón8oh, asuh wamepwuhteau8og wunnogkusséoash, newutche ne ummatcheseongane togkussittassunn8ongan8.
E.Eze.7.19: They shall cast their silver in the streets, and their gold shall be removed: their silver and their gold shall not be able to deliver them in the day of the wrath of the LORD: they shall not satisfy their souls, neither fill their bowels: because it is the stumblingblock of their iniquity.

α.Eze.7.20 Kah 8netue 8nowhósuonk ummamutánumwu ponamun: qut nag ayimwog wuttinnùkontunkane wunnishkeneunkquokish, kah wutjishánumukquodt8moash, na$ut: newaj nôahtaùog.
E.Eze.7.20: As for the beauty of his ornament, he set it in majesty: but they made the images of their abominations and of their detestable things therein: therefore have I set it far from them.

α.Eze.7.21 Kah nummagun en wunnutchegan8óut p[é]nuwohteaog wutche tohqunnumóonk: kah en matcheet8og ut ohkeit, wutche mukk8kinittuonk, kah nag pish wunnishketeauuneau.
E.Eze.7.21: And I will give it into the hands of the strangers for a prey, and to the wicked of the earth for a spoil; and they shall pollute it.

α.Eze.7.22 Kah wonk nutamaunumauóog nuskesuk, kah nag pish nishketeauog nukkemee ayeuonk: newutche mukk8kenuáenuog pish uppetukontamuneau, kah pish wunnishketeauuneau.
E.Eze.7.22: My face will I turn also from them, and they shall pollute my secret place: for the robbers shall enter into it, and defile it.

α.Eze.7.23 Ayim8k chaine, newutche ohkeit numwohteau musqueheongane matcheseongash, kah otanat numwohteau chekeéyeug.
E.Eze.7.23: Make a chain: for the land is full of bloody crimes, and the city is full of violence.

α.Eze.7.24 Newaj pas8og anue matchetukeg penuwohte[á]og, kah nag pish ohtoog wek8aṣ[h]: 8netuongan8 wonk manuhkésitcheg n8wohkukquoshitteauun, kah 8neetupanatamwe ayeuongan8o[à]sh pish nishketeauunash.
E.Eze.7.24: Wherefore I will bring the worst of the heathen, and they shall possess their houses: I will also make the pomp of the strong to cease; and their holy places shall be defiled.

α.Eze.7.25 Pagwanuonk peyom8, kah nag pish natinnehamwog wunohteaonk, kah matta pish ohtano.
E.Eze.7.25: Destruction cometh; and they shall seek peace, and there shall be none.

α.Eze.7.26 Woskehittuonk pish nuhkuhkom woskehittuonk, kah wogkouetongquodt pish nuhkuhkom wogkouetongquodt: neit pish n[á]tinnehamwog quoshodtumwae monomansuonk, qut naumatuonk pish wanneheau wutch sephausuenuut, kah kogáhquetuonk wutch kechis[ut.]
E.Eze.7.26: Mischief shall come upon mischief, and rumour shall be upon rumour; then shall they seek a vision of the prophet; but the law shall perish from the priest, and counsel from the ancients.

α.Eze.7.27 Ketass8t pish mau, kah sontimóog pish hogk8og touushin8onk, kah wunnutchegan8oash ohkee missinninnuog pish wuttaméhpunóm8ash: nuttinheoog neaunak ummayeu, kah neaunak wuttamhouaongan8oash pish n8sumóog, kah nag pish wahteauog, nen Jehovah.
E.Eze.7.27: The king shall mourn, and the prince shall be clothed with desolation, and the hands of the people of the land shall be troubled: I will do unto them after their way, and according to their deserts will I judge them; and they shall know that I am the LORD.

α.Eze.8.1 KAh n$nih nequtta adtahshikkodtum8g, ut nequtta adtahs8it nepauz, kah napanna adtahshikqun[ú]hhog nepauz, ápeon nekit, kah Judae Eldersog aphettit anaquabeh, wunnutcheg Lord Jehovah nanuttit nuhkuhkongqun.
E.Eze.8.1: And it came to pass in the sixth year, in the sixth month, in the fifth day of the month, as I sat in mine house, and the elders of Judah sat before me, that the hand of the Lord GOD fell there upon me.

α.Eze.8.2 Neit nunnaumup, kah kusseh, ogqueneunkquodt ne áhenag n8teau: wutch ne agqueneunkquok wusseganit[;] kah en wómiyeu, n8tau: kah wutch wusseganit, kah wohkomiyeu, ogqueneunkquok wôsippáeg, neaunak amber.
E.Eze.8.2: Then I beheld, and lo a likeness as the appearance of fire: from the appearance of his loins even downward, fire; and from his loins even upward, as the appearance of brightness, as the colour of amber.

α.Eze.8.3 Kah sohwhunum neóhhunak menutcheg, kah nuttanumuk nuppuhkukque meesonganit, kah nashauanit nuttahshinuk nashaue oh[h]eit kah kesukqut, kah nuppas8k, ut ummonomansuonganit, ut Jerus[a]lem, ut anome usquontamut nanummiyeu anaquohtag, ne ohtagkup wutappuonk m8summuáe nunneukontunk, ne m8sitteam8wáhuwom8uk
E.Eze.8.3: And he put forth the form of an hand, and took me by a lock of mine head; and the spirit lifted me up between the earth and the heaven, and brought me in the visions of God to Jerusalem, to the door of the inner gate that looketh toward the north; where was the seat of the image of jealousy, which provoketh to jealousy.

α.Eze.8.4 Kah kusseh, wussohs[u]m8onk um[$]Manitt8moh Israel na ohtop, neaunak monomansuonk ne naumup ut mukoshquttaut.
E.Eze.8.4: And, behold, the glory of the God of Israel was there, according to the vision that I saw in the plain.

α.Eze.8.5 Neit nuttinuk, wosketompáe wunnaumoniin, Ushpunush kuskesukquash en nanumme may[i]t: neit nuttahshinumup nuskesukquash en nanummiyeue mayut, kàh kusseh, nanummiyeu, ut Altare squontamut, ne m8summuw[á]e nunnukontunk ut ahhut petutteamuk.
E.Eze.8.5: Then said he unto me, Son of man, lift up thine eyes now the way toward the north. So I lifted up mine eyes the way toward the north, and behold northward at the gate of the altar this image of jealousy in the entry.

α.Eze.8.6 Nano nuttinuk, wosketompae wunnaumoniin, sun kenaum toh asémuk? mogagish nishkeneunkquokish nish wek Israel áseche yeuut, onk woh nô 8sukomunat wutch nussanctuaryumut? qut wonk qushkish, kah pish kenaum magogish nishkeneunkquokish.
E.Eze.8.6: He said furthermore unto me, Son of man, seest thou what they do? even the great abominations that the house of Israel committeth here, that I should go far off from my sanctuary? but turn thee yet again, and thou shalt see greater abominations.

α.Eze.8.7 Kah nuppas8k chippinnutunkane squontamut, kah natauwompean, kusseh, wônog ut hassunnutonganit.
E.Eze.8.7: And he brought me to the door of the court; and when I looked, behold a hole in the wall.

α.Eze.8.8 Neit nuttinuk, wosketompae wunnaumoniin, wônteash eyeu ut hassunnutonganit, kah wônteaon ut hassunnutonkanit, kusseh squont.
E.Eze.8.8: Then said he unto me, Son of man, dig now in the wall: and when I had digged in the wall, behold a door.

α.Eze.8.9 Kah nuttinuk, petitteash, kah naish matcheet8e nishkeneunkquokish nish aséhetticheh yeuut.
E.Eze.8.9: And he said unto me, Go in, and behold the wicked abominations that they do here.

α.Eze.8.10 Neit nuppetutteop, kah nunnaumup, kah kusseh, niṣhnoh wuttinnussin pamompágit, kah nishkeneunkque puppinashimwog, kah wame wuttinnukontunkan8oh Israel wek, wussukwhosuog sussippunkomuk waéenu.
E.Eze.8.10: So I went in and saw; and behold every form of creeping things, and abominable beasts, and all the idols of the house of Israel, pourtrayed upon the wall round about.

α.Eze.8.11 Kah neepouh anaquabhettit nesausuk tahshinchagkussuoh kohchisuitcheg ut wekit Israel kah ut wunnashaum8out, Jaazaniah wunnaumonuh Shaphan, nishnoh pasuk Censeruhtea[u] ut wunnutcheganit, kah pohkináeu weetemungquokque matohkqs kuhkuhquem8.
E.Eze.8.11: And there stood before them seventy men of the ancients of the house of Israel, and in the midst of them stood Jaazaniah the son of Shaphan, with every man his censer in his hand; and a thick cloud of incense went up.

α.Eze.8.12 Neit nuttinuk, wosketompae wunnaumoniin, sun kenaáumussoh kahchéeiyeúutcheg ut wekit Israel uttoh asehetti ut pohkenahtu, nish$noh pasuk, ut wuttinnukontunkane chamberumut? newutche n8waog, Jehovah matta kenógk8un, Jehovah ahquontam ohke.
E.Eze.8.12: Then said he unto me, Son of man, hast thou seen what the ancients of the house of Israel do in the dark, every man in the chambers of his imagery? for they say, the LORD seeth us not; the LORD hath forsaken the earth.

α.Eze.8.13 Wonk nuttinuk, wonk qushkish, kah pish kenaum ánue mogagish nishkeneunkquokish nish aséhetticheh.
E.Eze.8.13: He said also unto me, Turn thee yet again, and thou shalt see greater abominations that they do.

α.Eze.8.14 Neit nuppas8k ut squontamut wekit Jehovah, ne anaquohtag nanummiyeu, kusseh, na wutappineau mittamwussissog mauemaog Tamuzzoh.
E.Eze.8.14: Then he brought me to the door of the gate of the LORD's house which was toward the north; and, behold, there sat women weeping for Tammuz.

α.Eze.8.15 Neit nuttinuk, sun yeu kenaumun, wosketompae wunnaumoniin? qushkish wonk, kah pish wonk kenaum magogish nishkeneunkquokish onk yeush.
E.Eze.8.15: Then said he unto me, Hast thou seen this, O son of man? turn thee yet again, and thou shalt see greater abominations than these.

α.Eze.8.16 Kah nuppas8k en anomeu chippinnutunkanit wekit Jehovah, kah kusseh, ut kishke ushsquontam wut-templumut Jehovah, nanashaue porchut kah altarut, papaume neesneechagkodteg kah napanna tahsuog wosketompaog, uppishqua[n]nooash nogque wuttemplumut Jehovah, kah wuskesuk8óash nogque wutchepwoiyeu kah wowussumáog nepauz wutchepwoiyeu.
E.Eze.8.16: And he brought me into the inner court of the LORD's house, and, behold, at the door of the temple of the LORD, between the porch and the altar, were about five and twenty men, with their backs toward the temple of the LORD, and their faces toward the east; and they worshipped the sun toward the east.

α.Eze.8.17 Neit nuttinuk, sun yeu kenaum woi wosketompae wunnaumoniin? sun peasin ut wekit Judah ussenat nishkeneunkquokish nish aséhetticheh yeuut? newutche nag numwohtóog ohkeit chekeeyeu8k, kah quinnuppeog en numm8m8skhikqunnaóont: kah kusseh, ponamwog wuttuhqunnem wutchân8wóut.
E.Eze.8.17: Then he said unto me, Hast thou seen this, O son of man? Is it a light thing to the house of Judah that they commit the abominations which they commit here? for they have filled the land with violence, and have returned to provoke me to anger: and, lo, they put the branch to their nose.

α.Eze.8.18 Newaj wonk chenauausue usseet, nuskesuk matta pish kushpásu, kah matta nukkitteamonteanitteoh, kah tôkonogque mishont8wae mauuneau ut nehtauogkut, qut onch mat n8tauóog.
E.Eze.8.18: Therefore will I also deal in fury: mine eye shall not spare, neither will I have pity: and though they cry in mine ears with a loud voice, yet will I not hear them.

α.Eze.9.1 MIshont8wáe mishont8wau wonk ut nehtauogkut n8wau, neg meechumuhkonitcheg ut ne otanat, pas8tsháh, nish$noh wosketomp uppagwohteae auwohteáonk ut wunnutcheganit.
E.Eze.9.1: He cried also in mine ears with a loud voice, saying, Cause them that have charge over the city to draw near, even every man with his destroying weapon in his hand.

α.Eze.9.2 Kah kusseh, nequtta tahsuog wosketompaog 8mwog qunuhque squontamwe mayut, ne nanummiyeu, kah nishnoh pasuk pagwohteae auwohteaonk ut wunnutcheganit ohteau: kah pasuk wosketomp kenugke nagoh, hogk8 womponag, kah wussukwhôsuae inkhorne wôohshaoh wussissepoiyeuout: kah nag petutteaog, kah neepoog kishke brasse altarut.
E.Eze.9.2: And, behold, six men came from the way of the higher gate, which lieth toward the north, and every man a slaughter weapon in his hand; and one man among them was clothed with linen, with a writer's inkhorn by his side: and they went in, and stood beside the brasen altar.

α.Eze.9.3 Kah wussohsumoonk um-Manitt8moh Israel, kuhkuhquém8 wutch cherub ne áyeup, en ánuiskómmoe pométshinit ut wetuómut, kah wehkomau neh womponak agqunitcheh, noh ohtunk wussukwhosue inkhorne ut wussissippoiyeumut.
E.Eze.9.3: And the glory of the God of Israel was gone up from the cherub, whereupon he was, to the threshold of the house. And he called to the man clothed with linen, which had the writer's inkhorn by his side;

α.Eze.9.4 Kah Jehovah wuttinuh, pannupwushash nôe keitotanat, nôe Jerusalem, kah kuhkinneasuonk ponsh wuskodtukk8óut neg mashanómwutcheg kah maugég wutch wame nishkeneunkquokish nish asemukish na ut nash[à]uwu.
E.Eze.9.4: And the LORD said unto him, Go through the midst of the city, through the midst of Jerusalem, and set a mark upon the foreheads of the men that sigh and that cry for all the abominations that be done in the midst thereof.

α.Eze.9.5 Kah onkatogeh unnau, n8tamon, asúhkók en pannuppe otanat kah tatteagk: kishpátamoúkitch kuskesuk8ash, asuh kitteamonteánitteáteogk.
E.Eze.9.5: And to the others he said in mine hearing, Go ye after him through the city, and smite: let not your eye spare, neither have ye pity:

α.Eze.9.6 Papaquanne pagwohteagk kehchiog kah mukéiog, naneeswe nunksquaésog, kah peissisog, kah mittamwussissog: qut pas8sukauóhteógk howae wosketomp nag kâkinneasukôsitcheg, kah kutcheussek ut nussanctuariumut: neit kutcheunneheaog kutchisoh, neg apitcheg anaquohtag wetu.
E.Eze.9.6: Slay utterly old and young, both maids, and little children, and women: but come not near any man upon whom is the mark; and begin at my sanctuary. Then they began at the ancient men which were before the house.

α.Eze.9.7 Kah nah wuttinuh, nishketeá8k weetu, kah numwásh8k nashómukeg chippinnutunganéhtu; sohham8k, kah sohhamwog kah nushehteáog ut keitotanat.
E.Eze.9.7: And he said unto them, Defile the house, and fill the courts with the slain: go ye forth. And they went forth, and slew in the city.

α.Eze.9.8 Kah n$niyeup, nanasháhettit, kah n[à]hsiéan, nuppenushadtamup nuskesuk, kah nummón, kah nussip, woi Lord Jehovah, sun kuppagwan wame askqshóncheg Israel? sokanuman kummusquantamoonk ut Jerusalem.
E.Eze.9.8: And it came to pass, while they were slaying them, and I was left, that I fell upon my face, and cried, and said, Ah Lord GOD! wilt thou destroy all the residue of Israel in thy pouring out of thy fury upon Jerusalem?

α.Eze.9.9 Neit nuttinuk, ummatcheseonk wek Israel kah Judah muttà[e]kuhqun, kah ohke numwohteau wusqueheonk, kah keitotan numwohteau woonkag: newutche nag n8waog, Jehovah ahquontam ohke, kah Jehovah matta wunnaum8un.
E.Eze.9.9: Then said he unto me, The iniquity of the house of Israel and Judah is exceeding great, and the land is full of blood, and the city full of perverseness: for they say, The LORD hath forsaken the earth, and the LORD seeth not.

α.Eze.9.10 Kah nen wonk, nuskesuk matta pish kushpasu, kah matta nukkitteamonteanittéoh, qut nutonkquodtantam ummayeu ut uppuhkuk8óut.
E.Eze.9.10: And as for me also, mine eye shall not spare, neither will I have pity, but I will recompense their way upon their head.

α.Eze.9.11 Kah kusseh, wosketomp noh agquit womponagk, noh wussukwhosue inkhornoh apinit wussissippoiyeumut, quehchùwutto kutt8onk n8wau, nummahche ussen neanann8sean.
E.Eze.9.11: And, behold, the man clothed with linen, which had the inkhorn by his side, reported the matter, saying, I have done as thou hast commanded me.

α.Eze.10.1 NEit natawompip, kah kusseh, ut sepagehtam8onganit, ne ohtag waabe uppuhkukk8óut cherubimsog, naéhtunkquok ut waabe, onatuh Saphyre hassun onatuh ne agqueneunkquok throneut.
E.Eze.10.1: Then I looked, and, behold, in the firmament that was above the head of the cherubims there appeared over them as it were a sapphire stone, as the appearance of the likeness of a throne.

α.Eze.10.2 Kah ken8nau neh hashabponak agquinitcheh, kah n8wau, petutteash nashaue ut wheelsut, ut agwe charub, kah numwohtoush kenutcheganit n8tae mokossaash wutch nanasha[u]e cherubimsut, kah nish seahaṣh ut woskeche keitotanat, kah au nunnauaongan$ut.
E.Eze.10.2: And he spake unto the man clothed with linen, and said, Go in between the wheels, even under the cherub, and fill thine hand with coals of fire from between the cherubims, and scatter them over the city. And he went in in my sight.

α.Eze.10.3 Kah cherubimsog neepoog unninohkôniyeue wetuómut, wosketomp petutteadt, kah mahtokqs numwohteau anóme chippinnutunkanit.
E.Eze.10.3: Now the cherubims stood on the right side of the house, when the man went in; and the cloud filled the inner court.

α.Eze.10.4 Neit wussohsumoonk Jehovah kuhkuhquem8 wutch cherubut, kah quénikkompadteau anuuskhámuk ut weetuómut, kah wetuómut numwohteau matokqs, kah chippinnutunkanit numwohteau 8wòhsippohtâg8m Jehovah.
E.Eze.10.4: Then the glory of the LORD went up from the cherub, and stood over the threshold of the house; and the house was filled with the cloud, and the court was full of the brightness of the LORD's glory.

α.Eze.10.5 Kah ummishont8waongan8 cherubimsog umméqunóuh, n8tamunáh wéhque poquadche chippinnutonganit, onatuh 8wadtauatonkqussuonk wame mánuhkesit God, keket8hkoncheh.
E.Eze.10.5: And the sound of the cherubims' wings was heard even to the outer court, as the voice of the Almighty God when he speaketh.

α.Eze.10.6 Kah n$niyeup ann8nont wosketompuh agquinitcheh hashabpónak, an8wadt, neemunush n8tau wutch nashaue wheelsut wutch nashaue cherubimsut: neit petutteau kah neepau anaquohtag wheelsash.
E.Eze.10.6: And it came to pass, that when he had commanded the man clothed with linen, saying, Take fire from between the wheels, from between the cherubims; then he went in, and stood beside the wheels.

α.Eze.10.7 Kah pasuk cherub summágunum wunnutcheg wutch nashauwe cherubimsut en n8taut ne ohtagup nashaue cherubimsut, kah wunneemunumun, kah upponamun wunnutcheganit noh hashabpónak agquit, noh nemunuk, kah sohham.
E.Eze.10.7: And one cherub stretched forth his hand from between the cherubims unto the fire that was between the cherubims, and took thereof, and put it into the hands of him that was clothed with linen: who took it, and went out.

α.Eze.10.8 Kah naut nógquadt ut ch[e]rubimsut, neaunak wosketompae menutcheg, ut agwe wunnuppawhunn8wóut.
E.Eze.10.8: And there appeared in the cherubims the form of a man's hand under their wings.

α.Eze.10.9 Kah nadtauwompean, kusseh, yauunash wheelash ut kishke cherubimsut, pasuk wheele kishke pasuk cherub kah onkatuk wheel ut kishke onatuh cherub: kah neaunak wheelsash ogqueneunkquodt Berylle hassunut.
E.Eze.10.9: And when I looked, behold the four wheels by the cherubims, one wheel by one cherub, and another wheel by another cherub: and the appearance of the wheels was as the colour of a beryl stone.

α.Eze.10.10 Kah wuttinnussuonganooash, nag yaue unnôadtaog, onatuh wheelut nashaue wheelut ohtag.
E.Eze.10.10: And as for their appearances, they four had one likeness, as if a wheel had been in the midst of a wheel.

α.Eze.10.11 Paumusháhettit, nag yaue wussussippóiyeue pomushaog, nag matta quinnuppeog pomshah[e]ttit: qut en ayeuonganit ne muppuhkuk anaquohtag, nag wutásukomuneau, matta quinnuppeog ne a[à]hettit.
E.Eze.10.11: When they went, they went upon their four sides; they turned not as they went, but to the place whither the head looked they followed it; they turned not as they went.

α.Eze.10.12 Kah mamusse wuhhogkau, kah uppusquanooash, kah wunnutcheganooash, kah wunnuppuhwhunnouh, kah wheelash, numwohteau muskesukquash waéénu, wheelash nish ahtauehetticheh nag yaue.
E.Eze.10.12: And their whole body, and their backs, and their hands, and their wings, and the wheels, were full of eyes round about, even the wheels that they four had.

α.Eze.10.13 Kah papaume wheelash, mishont8wánumauópanneg, n8tamon, woi wheel.
E.Eze.10.13: As for the wheels, it was cried unto them in my hearing, O wheel.

α.Eze.10.14 Kah nishnoh pasuk yauunash wushkodtukquash, negonohtag muskesuk ne wuskesuk cherub, kah nahohtôeu muskesuk, wosketompae muskesuk, nashwenu8g qunnónoue muskesuk, yauwenu8g wompsikukquae muskesuk.
E.Eze.10.14: And every one had four faces: the first face was the face of a cherub, and the second face was the face of a man, and the third the face of a lion, and the fourth the face of an eagle.

α.Eze.10.15 Kah cherubimsog tahshinoog: yeuoh pomantamwae oáas noh nauog ut kishke Chebare sepuut.
E.Eze.10.15: And the cherubims were lifted up. This is the living creature that I saw by the river of Chebar.

α.Eze.10.16 Kah cherubimsog monchehettit wheelash kishuhkunkquog: kah cherubimsog ashpun[á]hettit wunnuppawhunouh, 8waábenaóut wutch ohkeit, nish nan wheelash matta quinnuppemun8ash wutch ukkishkeyeum8óont.
E.Eze.10.16: And when the cherubims went, the wheels went by them: and when the cherubims lifted up their wings to mount up from the earth, the same wheels also turned not from beside them.

α.Eze.10.17 Nag neepauwehetticheh, yeush neepom8ash, kah neg tahshehetticheh, yeush nehenwonche tahshem8ash newutche wunnashauanitt8moh pomantamwae oáas nish wutapéhtamunash.
E.Eze.10.17: When they stood, these stood; and when they were lifted up, these lifted up themselves also: for the spirit of the living creature was in them.

α.Eze.10.18 Neit wussohsumóonk Jehovah amaém8 wutch woskeche ánuushkham8onganit wetuómut, kah neepattau woskeche cherubimsut.
E.Eze.10.18: Then the glory of the LORD departed from off the threshold of the house, and stood over the cherubims.

α.Eze.10.19 Kah cherubimsog tahshin[á]og wunnuppuhwhun8oh, kah ushpeog wutch ohkeit ut nunnaumoonganit: nag sohhamwehettit, wheelash wonk kishukkongquog, kah nag neepoog ut wutchepwoiyeue squontamwe Jehovah wekit, kah wussohsumoonk um-Manitt8moh Israel waabe 8suhkunkquneau.
E.Eze.10.19: And the cherubims lifted up their wings, and mounted up from the earth in my sight: when they went out, the wheels also were beside them, and every one stood at the door of the east gate of the LORD's house; and the glory of the God of Israel was over them above.

α.Eze.10.20 Yeuoh pomantamwae oáas nauogkup ut agwe um[-]Manitt8moh Israel, kishek Ch[é]bare sepuut, kah n8waheoog neg nan cherubimsog.
E.Eze.10.20: This is the living creature that I saw under the God of Israel by the river of Chebar; and I knew that they were the cherubims.

α.Eze.10.21 Nishnoh pasuk yau wuskesukquau, kah nishnoh pasuk yáuoh wunnuppawhunoh, kah ne agqueneunkquok wosketompae menutcheganit ohteau agwe wunnuppawhunit.
E.Eze.10.21: Every one had four faces apiece, and every one four wings; and the likeness of the hands of a man was under their wings.

α.Eze.10.22 Kah ne agqueneunkquok wuskesuk8oash, nish nan muskesukquash naumompash kishke Chebare sepuut, nag neánussehettit, kah nag neheonwonche, nag nishnoh pasuk kutchit[â]usháog.
E.Eze.10.22: And the likeness of their faces was the same faces which I saw by the river of Chebar, their appearances and themselves: they went every one straight forward.

α.Eze.11.1 NAno, nashauanit nuttahshinuk kah nuppas8k en wutchepwóiyeue squontamut ut Jehovah wekit, ne wutchipwoiyeu, kah kusseh, ut squontame squontamésut neesnehchag kussuog kah napanna tahsuog wosketompaog, ut nag kenugke nunnau Jaazaniahoh wunnaumonuh Azur, kah Pelatiah wunnaumonuh Benajah, missinninnue sontimôog.
E.Eze.11.1: Moreover the spirit lifted me up, and brought me unto the east gate of the LORD's house, which looketh eastward: and behold at the door of the gate five and twenty men; among whom I saw Jaazaniah the son of Azur, and Pelatiah the son of Benaiah, princes of the people.

α.Eze.11.2 Neit nuttinuk, wosketompae wunnaumoniin, yeug wosketompaog natwontogig machuk: kah neg matche kogohquttukeg yeu keitotanat.
E.Eze.11.2: Then said he unto me, Son of man, these are the men that devise mischief, and give wicked counsel in this city:

α.Eze.11.3 Neg an8wácheg, matta paswohtano, ayimuttuh wetuómash: yeu keitotan cauldron kah nenawun weyaus.
E.Eze.11.3: Which say, It is not near; let us build houses: this city is the caldron, and we be the flesh.

α.Eze.11.4 Newutch nag ayeuhkonittue quoshodtumau, quoshodj woi wosketompae wunnaumoniin. 
E.Eze.11.4: Therefore prophesy against them, prophesy, O son of man.

α.Eze.11.5 Kah wunnashauanitt8moh Jehovah nunnuhkuhkunk, kah nuttinuk, ket8kash, y[è]u wussin Jehovah, yeu kussinneau woi Israelle wek, newutche n8wáhteoh nish masantamógish, nishnoh pasuk.
E.Eze.11.5: And the Spirit of the LORD fell upon me, and said unto me, Speak; Thus saith the LORD; Thus have ye said, O house of Israel: for I know the things that come into your mind, every one of them.

α.Eze.11.6 Kummishheómw8 nashógeg yeu ut otanat, kah kenumwohtómw8 nish toumáogwash nashitcheg.
E.Eze.11.6: Ye have multiplied your slain in this city, and ye have filled the streets thereof with the slain.

α.Eze.11.7 Newutche yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, nahtauunógig neg ponógig nashaue, neg ne weyaus8, kah yeu keitotan mishohkuk88, qut na k8ch sohh8wununeau wutch nashauwe.
E.Eze.11.7: Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Your slain whom ye have laid in the midst of it, they are the flesh, and this city is the caldron: but I will bring you forth out of the midst of it.

α.Eze.11.8 Kukquehtamumw8 togkodteg, kah kenuhkenumauunumw8 togkodteg, wussin Lord Jehovah.
E.Eze.11.8: Ye have feared the sword; and I will bring a sword upon you, saith the Lord GOD.

α.Eze.11.9 Kah na k8tch sohh8unununeau wutch nashaue, kah kupponunumw8 ut wunnutchegan8óut penuwohteaog, kah wussittum8ongash pish nutussen ut kenugke kuhhogkaóut.
E.Eze.11.9: And I will bring you out of the midst thereof, and deliver you into the hands of strangers, and will execute judgments among you.

α.Eze.11.10 Pish kuppenushomw8 nashpe togkodteg k8sumunumw8 ut Israelle sussippoiyeum, kah pish k8wahteomw8 nen Jehovah.
E.Eze.11.10: Ye shall fall by the sword; I will judge you in the border of Israel; and ye shall know that I am the LORD.

α.Eze.11.11 Yeu keitotan matta pish k8mishahkuk8uneau, kah matta pish kenaau k8weyausu8mw8 ut na nashauwe, qut k8sumunumw8 ut Israelle sussippoiyeuut.
E.Eze.11.11: This city shall not be your caldron, neither shall ye be the flesh in the midst thereof; but I will judge you in the border of Israel:

α.Eze.11.12 Kah pish k8wahteomw8 nen Jehovah; newutche matta kuppomushaontamomw8 nukkuhk8waongash, kah matta kutussumw8 n8sittum8ongash, kah ke[á]ne ussemw8 penuwohteâog neg wéenuhkunkqueógig.
E.Eze.11.12: And ye shall know that I am the LORD: for ye have not walked in my statutes, neither executed my judgments, but have done after the manners of the heathen that are round about you.

α.Eze.11.13 Kah niyeup quoshoe missohhamon, Pelatiah wunnaumonuh Benajah nupp8; neit nuppenushadtam nuskesuk, kah nummishont8wop, kah nussip, woi Lord Jehovah, sun k8wohkukquossum Israelle askqshoncheg.
E.Eze.11.13: And it came to pass, when I prophesied, that Pelatiah the son of Benaiah died. Then fell I down upon my face, and cried with a loud voice, and said, Ah Lord GOD! wilt thou make a full end of the remnant of Israel?

α.Eze.11.14 Wonk wuttinn8waonk Jehovah nupp[è]yauonuk, n8wop,
E.Eze.11.14: Again the word of the LORD came unto me, saying,

α.Eze.11.15 Wosketompae wunnaumoniin, kematog, kittinunkomóog kah wame mamusse wek Israel, nag, neh wadohkitcheg Israel ánáhetteupoh, nô8sukok Jehovah: yeu ohke nuttinnumonteanan ohtauunat.
E.Eze.11.15: Son of man, thy brethren, even thy brethren, the men of thy kindred, and all the house of Israel wholly, are they unto whom the inhabitants of Jerusalem have said, Get you far from the LORD: unto us is this land given in possession.

α.Eze.11.16 Newutche n8wash, yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, tohkônogque nag nôadtit nuttinohkóneau ut kenugke penuwohteaut, kah tôhkonogque nusseahwhóneau ut kenugke wutohtimóineat, qut onch nutattuppehtauóog sanctuariemesut en wutohtimoinneat uttoh paahettit.
E.Eze.11.16: Therefore say, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Although I have cast them far off among the heathen, and although I have scattered them among the countries, yet will I be to them as a little sanctuary in the countries where they shall come.

α.Eze.11.17 Newutche n8wash, yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, kummukinunumw8 wutch missinninnúut, kah kummi[à]nunumw8 wutch wutohtimóinneat, uttoh adt seahwhutteaóg, kah kuttinnumauunumw8 Israelle ohke.
E.Eze.11.17: Therefore say, Thus saith the Lord GOD; I will even gather you from the people, and assemble you out of the countries where ye have been scattered, and I will give you the land of Israel.

α.Eze.11.18 Kah nag pish peyoneau, kah pish amaunumwog wame wunnishkeneunkquodt8m8ash, kah wutonkquanumukquodt8m8as[h] na wutch.
E.Eze.11.18: And they shall come thither, and they shall take away all the detestable things thereof and all the abominations thereof from thence.

α.Eze.11.19 Kah nuppasukqunitteaheóog: kah kuppétauunumw8 wusku nashauanit, kah nutamaunum qussukquane metah wutch weyausu[ô]ut, kah nag nuttinnumauóog weyause metah.
E.Eze.11.19: And I will give them one heart, and I will put a new spirit within you; and I will take the stony heart out of their flesh, and will give them an heart of flesh:

α.Eze.11.20 Onk woh nag pomushaontamwog nuttinnaumatuongash kah woh nanawhetauog nukkuhk8waongash, kah woh wutussen[á]oash, kah n[a]g pish nummissinninnúmog, kah nen pish um-Manitt8m8oh.
E.Eze.11.20: That they may walk in my statutes, and keep mine ordinances, and do them: and they shall be my people, and I will be their God.

α.Eze.11.21 Qut nag wuttahhou ásuhkomunit wunnishketeahaongan8, kah wutunkqueneunkquokish, nutonkquattantam ummayyeu nehenwonche uppuhkuk8óut wussin Lord Jehovah.
E.Eze.11.21: But as for them whose heart walketh after the heart of their detestable things and their abominations, I will recompense their way upon their own heads, saith the Lord GOD.

α.Eze.11.22 Neit cherubimsog tohshináog wunnuppohwhunn8oh, kah wheelash nah ut kishk[u], kah wussohsum8onk um-Manitt8moh Israel waabe wussuhkongqunneau.
E.Eze.11.22: Then did the cherubims lift up their wings, and the wheels beside them; and the glory of the God of Israel was over them above.

α.Eze.11.23 Kah wussohsum8onk Jehovah kuhkuhquem8 wutch nashauwe keitotanat, & nepatteau wadchuut, ut wutchepwo8taniáyeu.
E.Eze.11.23: And the glory of the LORD went up from the midst of the city, and stood upon the mountain which is on the east side of the city.

α.Eze.11.24 Ompetak nashauanit nuttahshinuk, kah nuppas8k ut monomansinneat, nashpe wunnashauanitt8moh God, en Caldea en missináhtu: neit monomansuonk ne naumomp kuhkuhquee nukkonukqun.
E.Eze.11.24: Afterwards the spirit took me up, and brought me in a vision by the Spirit of God into Chaldea, to them of the captivity. So the vision that I had seen went up from me.

α.Eze.11.25 Neit nukken8naog neg masináitcheg wame nish Jehovah nahtissitcheh.
E.Eze.11.25: Then I spake unto them of the captivity all the things that the LORD had shewed me.

α.Eze.12.1 WOnk wuttinn8waonk Jehovah nuppey[a]onuk n8wau,
E.Eze.12.1: The word of the LORD also came unto me, saying,

α.Eze.12.2 Wosketompae wunnaumoniin, kutai nashaue cheketamukkomukqut, neg wuskesukqutcheg en naumuneat, qut matta naum8og; nag wehtauog8og n8tamunat, qut matta n8tam8og, newutche nag cheketamukkomukquog.
E.Eze.12.2: Son of man, thou dwellest in the midst of a rebellious house, which have eyes to see, and see not; they have ears to hear, and hear not: for they are a rebellious house.

α.Eze.12.3 Newutche ken wosketompae wunnaumoniin, onts8tae quagwashwish, kah ont8tash kesukodaeu ut anaquabhettit, kah wohkutontap wutch kutáyeuonganit en pen8e ayeuonganit ut anaquabhettit, pagwodche nag wunnatwontamwog tohkonogque wutcheketamwkomukk8uneau.
E.Eze.12.3: Therefore, thou son of man, prepare thee stuff for removing, and remove by day in their sight; and thou shalt remove from thy place to another place in their sight: it may be they will consider, though they be a rebellious house.

α.Eze.12.4 Neit pish kussohh8wuttau kummaumachiash kesukodaeu ut anaquabhettit, onatuh ontsinn8e maumachish, kah pish fussohham wunnonkquaeu ut anaquabhettit, onatuh nag sohhogig en missinnáinneat.
E.Eze.12.4: Then shalt thou bring forth thy stuff by day in their sight, as stuff for removing: and thou shalt go forth at even in their sight, as they that go forth into captivity.

α.Eze.12.5 Asónteash hassunneutunk ut anaquabhettit, kah ne wutch sohhotash,
E.Eze.12.5: Dig thou through the wall in their sight, and carry out thereby.

α.Eze.12.6 Ut anaquabhettit pish kupponamun kuthogkeit, kah kussohh8wuttauun papésuhkáeu, push kupputtagguhhum kuskesuk, onk woh mo kenaum8 ohke: newutche ken kukkéhkinne[à]sue ponsh en wekit Israel.
E.Eze.12.6: In their sight shalt thou bear it upon thy shoulders, and carry it forth in the twilight: thou shalt cover thy face, that thou see not the ground: for I have set thee for a sign unto the house of Israel.

α.Eze.12.7 Kah nuttussen neanann8sumuk: nussohh8wuttóh nummaumachish kesukodáeu, onatuh missináe maumachiit, kah wunnonkquae nupposhponteam hassu[n]nútonk nashpe nunnutchegash, nussohh8wuttauunah wôsinneunk8wae kah nupponamunah nuttugkit ut anaquabhettit.
E.Eze.12.7: And I did so as I was commanded: I brought forth my stuff by day, as stuff for captivity, and in the even I digged through the wall with mine hand; I brought it forth in the twilight, and I bare it upon my shoulder in their sight.

α.Eze.12.8 Kah nohtompog wuttinnw8aonk Jehovah nuppeyaonuk n8wau,
E.Eze.12.8: And in the morning came the word of the LORD unto me, saying,

α.Eze.12.9 Wosketompae wunnaumoniin sunnummatta Israelle wek ne cheketamwekomuk, kuttugk8 toh kutussen?
E.Eze.12.9: Son of man, hath not the house of Israel, the rebellious house, said unto thee, What doest thou?

α.Eze.12.10 Nag us, yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, yeu weanun wutchayeum8 Jerusaleme sontimóut kah wame Israelle wetu, ut kenugke nagoh.
E.Eze.12.10: Say thou unto them, Thus saith the Lord GOD; This burden concerneth the prince in Jerusalem, and all the house of Israel that are among them.

α.Eze.12.11 N8wash, nen kukkéhkinneasuonk: ne ahussee, ne pish unnehéóneau: nag pish ontseog, kah pish missino8og.
E.Eze.12.11: Say, I am your sign: like as I have done, so shall it be done unto them: they shall remove and go into captivity.

α.Eze.12.12 Kah sontim ne kônukusháhetticheh, pish ponam wuttugkeit wôsinneunk8wae, kah pish sohham: nag pish pannupponteaog hassunneutunk na ut sohwhunnegonat: pish puttogkum wuskesuk, matta wunnaum8unat ohke, nashpe wuskesukqut.
E.Eze.12.12: And the prince that is among them shall bear upon his shoulder in the twilight, and shall go forth: they shall dig through the wall to carry out thereby: he shall cover his face, that he see not the ground with his eyes.

α.Eze.12.13 Wonk nussepagkenumau nuthashaboh kah noh pish puttohham ut nuppehhanit, kah pish nuppasou Babylon, en Caldeanse ohkeit: qut matta pish wunnaum8un touhkonogque na pish wuttit nuppun.
E.Eze.12.13: My net also will I spread upon him, and he shall be taken in my snare: and I will bring him to Babylon to the land of the Chaldeans; yet shall he not see it, though he shall die there.

α.Eze.12.14 Kah nusséauh en nogque niṣhnoh wabánit[,] wame neh weechayeumukqutcheh wutaninnumunkqunat, kah wame ukkenauwameongash, kah nag nutasuhkaue kodtinnumauóog togkodteg.
E.Eze.12.14: And I will scatter toward every wind all that are about him to help him, and all his bands; and I will draw out the sword after them.

α.Eze.12.15 Kah nag pish wahteauog nen Jehovah, nag seahwh[o]g ut kenugke wutohtimóinneat kah chach[a]buhtei en wutohtimóineat.
E.Eze.12.15: And they shall know that I am the LORD, when I shall scatter them among the nations, and disperse them in the countries.

α.Eze.12.16 Qut nusséqun ogguhsuog wutche togkodteganit, wutch mahshagquodtut, kah wutch enninnaonganit, onk woh nag wahteauwahuog wame wunnishkenunkquodt8m8ash en kenugke penuwohteáut uttoh paáhettit, kah nag push wahteauog nen Jehovah.
E.Eze.12.16: But I will leave a few men of them from the sword, from the famine, and from the pestilence; that they may declare all their abominations among the heathen whither they come; and they shall know that I am the LORD.

α.Eze.12.17 Nano wuttinn8waonk Jehvoah nuppeyaonuk, n8wau,
E.Eze.12.17: Moreover the word of the LORD came to me, saying,

α.Eze.12.18 Wosketompae wunnaumoniin, nunnukshae meechish petukqununk, kah nukkep8sue kah nanauwont[á]m8e wuttattash kenippem.
E.Eze.12.18: Son of man, eat thy bread with quaking, and drink thy water with trembling and with carefulness;

α.Eze.12.19 Kah us ohkee missinninnúog, yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, papaume wadohkitcheg Jerusalem, kah ohkeit Israel, nag pish nanauwontamwe meechwog uppetukqununkan8, kah chepshae pish wuttattamwog wunnippem8 onk woh wutohke touushin wutch wame ne na ohtag, wutche wutchekéusseongan8 neg na wad[ó]hkitcheg.
E.Eze.12.19: And say unto the people of the land, Thus saith the Lord GOD of the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and of the land of Israel; They shall eat their bread with carefulness, and drink their water with astonishment, that her land may be desolate from all that is therein, because of the violence of all them that dwell therein.

α.Eze.12.20 Kah keitotanash nish wadohtimukish pish mahchimwushinneash, kah ohke pish touwushin, kah pish k8wahteomw8, nen Jehovah.
E.Eze.12.20: And the cities that are inhabited shall be laid waste, and the land shall be desolate; and ye shall know that I am the LORD.

α.Eze.12.21 Kah wuttinn8waonk Jehovah nuppeyaonuk n8wau,
E.Eze.12.21: And the word of the LORD came unto me, saying,

α.Eze.12.22 Wosketompae wunnaumoniin, teâg ne nupwoáonk ne ohteauéhettit ut Israel, n8wahettit, quohque peyom8ash kesukodtash, kah nishnoh monomansuonk pann8wóm8.
E.Eze.12.22: Son of man, what is that proverb that ye have in the land of Israel, saying, The days are prolonged, and every vision faileth?

α.Eze.12.23 Newutche nag us, yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, n8wohkukquóhtauun yeu nupwoáonk, kah nag pish matta wonk auwohtéau8og nupwoáonk ut Israel: qut nag us kesukodtash pas8cheyeu8ash, ne âdtam8m8uk nishnoh quoshoe missohham8onk.
E.Eze.12.23: Tell them therefore, Thus saith the Lord GOD; I will make this proverb to cease, and they shall no more use it as a proverb in Israel; but say unto them, The days are at hand, and the effect of every vision.

α.Eze.12.24 Newutche matta pish wonk ohtano tahn8che monomansuonk asuh pann8wae quoshae missohham8ongash ut wekit Israel.
E.Eze.12.24: For there shall be no more any vain vision nor flattering divination within the house of Israel.

α.Eze.12.25 Newutche nen Lord, pish nukkéket8kom, kah kutt8wonk ne an8wi, pish nnih: matta pish wonk quohqueu peyomun8: newutche ut kukkesukodtumut, woi cheketemukomuk, nussim kutt8onk, kah nutussen, wussin Lord Jehovah.
E.Eze.12.25: For I am the LORD: I will speak, and the word that I shall speak shall come to pass; it shall be no more prolonged: for in your days, O rebellious house, will I say the word, and will perform it, saith the Lord GOD.

α.Eze.12.26 Wonk wuttinn8waonk Jehovah nuppeyaonuk, n8wau,
E.Eze.12.26: Again the word of the LORD came to me, saying.

α.Eze.12.27 Wosketompae wunnaumoniin, kusseh, Israel wek n8wau monomansuonk ne nag*, ne pish cheke n$nih, kah noh quoshodtum nôadtit ohtagish ahquompiash.
E.Eze.12.27: Son of man, behold, they of the house of Israel say, The vision that he seeth is for many days to come, and he prophesieth of the times that are far off.

α.Eze.12.28 Newutche nag us, yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, wanne teagwe nukkutt8onk pish wonk quohque peyomun8, qut kutt8onk ne an8wi, pish n$nih, wussin Lord Jehovah.
E.Eze.12.28: Therefore say unto them, Thus saith the Lord GOD; There shall none of my words be prolonged any more, but the word which I have spoken shall be done, saith the Lord GOD.

α.Eze.13.1 KAh wuttinn8waonk Lord nuppeyaonuk, n8wau,
E.Eze.13.1: And the word of the LORD came unto me, saying,

α.Eze.13.2 Wosketompae wunnaumoniin quoshoe missohhash ayeuuhkonittue Israelle quoshodtumwaenuog neg quoshae misohhogig, kah nag us quoshodtukeg wutch nehenwonche wuttahh8wóut n8tam8k wuttinn8waonk Jehovah.
E.Eze.13.2: Son of man, prophesy against the prophets of Israel that prophesy, and say thou unto them that prophesy out of their own hearts, Hear ye the word of the LORD;

α.Eze.13.3 Yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, missi wutonkapunnaongan8 as8tue quoshodtumwaenuog neg asuhkogig nehenwonche wunnashaongan8, monteag naumohetteg.
E.Eze.13.3: Thus saith the Lord GOD; Woe unto the foolish prophets, that follow their own spirit, and have seen nothing!

α.Eze.13.4 Woi Israel, kukquoshodtumwaenumog ogqueneunkqussuog touohkomukque wonkqussissit.
E.Eze.13.4: O Israel, thy prophets are like the foxes in the deserts.

α.Eze.13.5 Matta kukkuhkuhk8mw8 adt touwag, kah matta kuppummeneutomw8 wutche wek Israel, neepauinneat ayeuwittinneat, ut ukkesukodtumut Jehovah.
E.Eze.13.5: Ye have not gone up into the gaps, neither made up the hedge for the house of Israel to stand in the battle in the day of the LORD.

α.Eze.13.6 Nag naumwog tahn8cheyeu8uk, kah pann8wae quoshodtum8onk kussimw8, Jehovah n8wau, kah Jehovah matta nah wutann8nuh: kah nag annoôsheaog onkatogeh, nag woh ummenuhkehteauunaóut kutt8onk.
E.Eze.13.6: They have seen vanity and lying divination, saying, The LORD saith: and the LORD hath not sent them: and they have made others to hope that they would confirm the word.

α.Eze.13.7 Sunnummatta kenaum8mw8 tahn8cheyeue monomansuonk, kah sun matta kussumw8 pann8wae quoshodtumoonk, an8waog, Lord wussin, matta an8wáon?
E.Eze.13.7: Have ye not seen a vain vision, and have ye not spoken a lying divination, whereas ye say, The LORD saith it; albeit I have not spoken?

α.Eze.13.8 Newutche yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, newutche kussimw8 tahn8cheyeu8uk, kah kenaumw8 pann8waongash, newutche kusseh, kutayeuuhkonunumw8 wussin Lord Jehovah.
E.Eze.13.8: Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Because ye have spoken vanity, and seen lies, therefore, behold, I am against you, saith the Lord GOD.

α.Eze.13.9 Kah nunnutcheg pish nuhkuhkongquog quoshodtumwaenuog neg nagig tahn8cheyeu8uk, kah pann8wae quoshae missohhogig: nag matta pish appeog ummoeuongan8out nummissinniñúmog, kah matta pish nag wussukwhóseog, ut ne adt wussuhkwhut wek Israel, kah matta petuttea8og Israelle ohkeit, kah pish k8wahteomw8 nen Lord Jehovah.
E.Eze.13.9: And mine hand shall be upon the prophets that see vanity, and that divine lies: they shall not be in the assembly of my people, neither shall they be written in the writing of the house of Israel, neither shall they enter into the land of Israel; and ye shall know that I am the Lord GOD.

α.Eze.13.10 Newutche, nux newutche pannes8unaog nummissinninnumoh, an8wahettit, wunahteagk, kah matta wunohteaonganinn8: kah pasuk ayim hassunnútunk, k[á]h kusseh, onkatog wussiss8numun matta ogquéhchippáeu man8nskoh.
E.Eze.13.10: Because, even because they have seduced my people, saying, Peace; and there was no peace; and one built up a wall, and, lo, others daubed it with untempered morter:

α.Eze.13.11 Nag us sas8nukeg matta ogquéhchippae man8nskoh, pish penushau, pish nehtippáe sokanon, kah kenaau woi mishe mussegon pish kuppenushaumw8, kah mishehtahshin pish wunnehnegukkomun.
E.Eze.13.11: Say unto them which daub it with untempered morter, that it shall fall: there shall be an overflowing shower; and ye, O great hailstones, shall fall; and a stormy wind shall rend it.

α.Eze.13.12 Kusseh, hassunneutunk penushunk, sun matta pish kuttitteomw8, uttiyeu sas8num8onk sas8numógkup?
E.Eze.13.12: Lo, when the wall is fallen, shall it not be said unto you, Where is the daubing wherewith ye have daubed it?

α.Eze.13.13 Newutche yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, nuss8hquekomun naṣhpe miṣhetahṣhin ut nummusquantam8onganit, kah pish onupáe sokanon, ut nummusquantam8onganit, kah mishe musségon ut nutchenauausuonganit mahtupánumunat.
E.Eze.13.13: Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; I will even rend it with a stormy wind in my fury; and there shall be an overflowing shower in mine anger, and great hailstones in my fury to consume it.

α.Eze.13.14 Neit nussohquenum hassunnutunk ne sas8num[ó]gkup matta ogquehchippaeu man8nsk, kah piṣh nunn8kinumun, newaj woh ukquenohtogk8m wahṣheau, kah pish panusheau, kah kenaau pish kummahtupaemw8 ut nashauwe, kah piṣh k8wahteomw8 nen Jehovah.
E.Eze.13.14: So will I break down the wall that ye have daubed with untempered morter, and bring it down to the ground, so that the foundation thereof shall be discovered, and it shall fall, and ye shall be consumed in the midst thereof: and ye shall know that I am the LORD.

α.Eze.13.15 Yeu nuttinne ussen nummusquantamoonk ut hassunneutonkanit, kah ut nag sas8nukeg matta tuttúhpinausue ma8nsk[,] kah piṣh kuttinonumw8, hassunnutunk matta ohtano asuh nag sas8nukkuppanneg. 
E.Eze.13.15: Thus will I accomplish my wrath upon the wall, and upon them that have daubed it with untempered morter, and will say unto you, The wall is no more, neither they that daubed it;

α.Eze.13.16 Ukquoshodtumwaeneumoh Israel, neg quoshodtukkuppanneg papaume Jerusalem, kah neg nagig wunohteae monomansuongash wutche nahon; kah matta wunohteaonganin8, n8wau Lord Jehovah.
E.Eze.13.16: To wit, the prophets of Israel which prophesy concerning Jerusalem, and which see visions of peace for her, and there is no peace, saith the Lord GOD.

α.Eze.13.17 Wonk ken wosketompae wunnaumoniin, ayueuhkonittue ponumau kuskesuk wuttaun8oh kum̃issinninnúmog, neg quoshodtukkeg wutch nehenwonche wuttahh8wóut, kah nag ayeuuhkonittue quoshoe missohhash.
E.Eze.13.17: Likewise, thou son of man, set thy face against the daughters of thy people, which prophesy out of their own heart; and prophesy thou against them,

α.Eze.13.18 Kah n8waṣh yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, missi wutonkapuñaongan8 mittamwussissog neg áyikeg ahpuhquassum8unaṣh ut agwe wame munnukquit, kah ponukeg coifṣash ut uppuhkukqut nishnoh nunnukontunk, tohqunónat keteahogkôunog: sun kutadchanámw8 ukketeahogkôun8uh nummissinninnúmog, kah sun kuppomantamwáheomw8 keteahogkôunog neg pauhónukqueógig?
E.Eze.13.18: And say, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Woe to the women that sew pillows to all armholes, and make kerchiefs upon the head of every stature to hunt souls! Will ye hunt the souls of my people, and will ye save the souls alive that come unto you?

α.Eze.13.19 Kah sun kenishkhimw8 ut kenugke nummissinninnúmut, wutch yânitchanaṣh barlyhaṣh, kah wutche petukqunnege kodchuhkiaṣh? nushonat keteahogkôunog neg woh mo nupp8gig, kah pomantamwaheonat keteahogkôunog, neg woh mo pomantam8gig, nashpe kuppann8waongan8 en nummissinninnúmut neg n8togig kuppann8waonganooaṣh?
E.Eze.13.19: And will ye pollute me among my people for handfuls of barley and for pieces of bread, to slay the souls that should not die, and to save the souls alive that should not live, by your lying to my people that hear your lies?

α.Eze.13.20 Newutche yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, kusseh, nen nutayeuuhkontam kutahpuhquohsum8un8oash, uttoh niṣh nashpe na adchauóg keteahogkôunog, nag k8semoheou[n]naóut, kah piṣh nehnegukkomunaṣh wutch kuhpittén8óut kah nupponun keteahogkôunog, keteahogkôunog neg adchauógig k8sémoheounaóont.
E.Eze.13.20: Wherefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I am against your pillows, wherewith ye there hunt the souls to make them fly, and I will tear them from your arms, and will let the souls go, even the souls that ye hunt to make them fly.

α.Eze.13.21 Kuk-koifṣash wonk nehneguhkom, kah nuppohquohwhun num̃issinninn[u]mog wutch kenutchegan8óut, kah matta piṣh wonk ut kenutchegan8óut woh adchauóog, kah piṣh k8wahteomw8 nen Jehovah.
E.Eze.13.21: Your kerchiefs also will I tear, and deliver my people out of your hand, and they shall be no more in your hand to be hunted; and ye shall know that I am the LORD.

α.Eze.13.22 Newutche nashpe kuppann8wayeuongash kummauteomw8 wuttahhou sampweussecheg, neg matta mauheógig, kah kummenuhkehteomw8 wunnutchegan8oaṣ matcheet8wog, onk woh mo qushkeinat wutch ummatchetoe mayut, quoshomóg pomantamóonk.
E.Eze.13.22: Because with lies ye have made the heart of the righteous sad, whom I have not made sad; and strengthened the hands of the wicked, that he should not return from his wicked way, by promising him life:

α.Eze.13.23 Newaj matta pish wonk naum8og tahn8cheyeu8uk, kah matta pish quoshoe kukquoshodtum8mw8, newutche nuppohquohwhun nummissinninnúmog wutch kenutcheganit, kah pish k8wahteomw8 nen Jehovah.
E.Eze.13.23: Therefore ye shall see no more vanity, nor divine divinations: for I will deliver my people out of your hand: and ye shall know that I am the LORD.

α.Eze.14.1 NEit nawhutch Israelle Eldersog nuppeya8nukquog, kah nag appuog anaquabeh.
E.Eze.14.1: Then came certain of the elders of Israel unto me, and sat before me.

α.Eze.14.2 Kah wuttinn8waonk Jehovah nuppeyaonuk, n8wau,
E.Eze.14.2: And the word of the LORD came unto me, saying,

α.Eze.14.3 Wosketompae wunnaumoniin, yeug wosketompaog ponaog wuttinnúkontunkanouh ut wuttahh8wout, kah nag ponamwog ummatcheseáe togkussittassun[ó]onk, ut anaquabenit, sun nen woh nag nuttit nt8mittean?
E.Eze.14.3: Son of man, these men have set up their idols in their heart, and put the stumblingblock of their iniquity before their face: should I be enquired of at all by them?

α.Eze.14.4 Newutche ken8s nagoh, kah nag us, yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, nishnoh wosketomp ut wekit Israel noh wánashont wuttinnúkontunkoh ut wuttahut, kah noh ponuk ummatcheseáe togkussittassu[m]8onk ut anaquabit, kah peyaónont quoshodtumwaénúh, nen Jehovah woh nunnamp8hamau, neh paónutcheh neane muttaánunit wuttinnúkontunkoh.
E.Eze.14.4: Therefore speak unto them, and say unto them, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Every man of the house of Israel that setteth up his idols in his heart, and putteth the stumblingblock of his iniquity before his face, and cometh to the prophet; I the LORD will answer him that cometh according to the multitude of his idols;

α.Eze.14.5 Onk woh nuttohqunum wek Israel ut nehenwonche wuttahhut, newutche nag wame penuwohteóog wutch nuhhogkat, nashpe wuttinnukontungan8uh.
E.Eze.14.5: That I may take the house of Israel in their own heart, because they are all estranged from me through their idols.

α.Eze.14.6 Newutche us wek Israel, yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, aiuskoiánatam8k, kah qushkek wutch kuttinnukontunkan8óut, kah qushkinnumok kuskesuk8oash wutch wame kutonkquanumukquodtóm8óut.
E.Eze.14.6: Therefore say unto the house of Israel, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Repent, and turn yourselves from your idols; and turn away your faces from all your abominations.

α.Eze.14.7 Newutche nishnoh pasuk ut wekit Israel, asuh pen8wot noh n8sausit ut Israel, noh chippéhtiit, kah ponont wuttinnukontunkoh wuttahhut, kah ponuk ummatcheseae togkussittassúnoonk ut anaquabit, kah peyont quoshodtumwaenuut, nat8tomauont papaume nen, nen Jehovah piṣh nashpe nehenwonche namp8hamau.
E.Eze.14.7: For every one of the house of Israel, or of the stranger that sojourneth in Israel, which separateth himself from me, and setteth up his idols in his heart, and putteth the stumblingblock of his iniquity before his face, and cometh to a prophet to enquire of him concerning me; I the LORD will answer him by myself:

α.Eze.14.8 Kah nutayeuhkonittue ponamau nuskesuk noh wosketomp, kah noh nukkéhkinneasuwéh, kah nopwoaonganéh, kah nuttummetáh wutch nôeu nummissinninnûmut, kah piṣh k8wahteomw8 nen Jehovah.
E.Eze.14.8: And I will set my face against that man, and will make him a sign and a proverb, and I will cut him off from the midst of my people; and ye shall know that I am the LORD.

α.Eze.14.9 Kah, quoshodtumwaenin pann8wadt ne teag missohhog, nen Jehovah nuppann8wáh noh quoshodtumwaénin, kah nunnúhkonnumaue summagunumau nunnutcheg, kah noh pish nunnush wutch nôeu nummissinninnumut Israel.
E.Eze.14.9: And if the prophet be deceived when he hath spoken a thing, I the LORD have deceived that prophet, and I will stretch out my hand upon him, and will destroy him from the midst of my people Israel.

α.Eze.14.10 Kah nag pish kenunnumwog ummatcheseongane sasamatahwhaongan8: sasamat[à]hwhoonk quoshodtumwaen pish tatuppeyeu8 sasamatahwhaonk noh nat8tomauont.
E.Eze.14.10: And they shall bear the punishment of their iniquity: the punishment of the prophet shall be even as the punishment of him that seeketh unto him;

α.Eze.14.11 Onk wek Israel matta wonk woh nanwiyeu wutch nuhhogkat, kah matta wonk woh nishkheau nashpe wame uppaneseongash, qut woh nag nummissinninnúmog, kah woh nen um-Manitt8moh wussin Lord Jehovah.
E.Eze.14.11: That the house of Israel may go no more astray from me, neither be polluted any more with all their transgressions; but that they may be my people, and I may be their God, saith the Lord GOD.

α.Eze.14.12 Wuttinn8waonk Jehovah wonk nuppeyaonuk, n8wau,
E.Eze.14.12: The word of the LORD came again to me, saying,

α.Eze.14.13 Wosketompae wunnaumoniin, ohke matchenéhhit nashpe mishe matcheseonk, neit nunnuhkenumaue summagunumwontamun nuhpit, kah nuppohquenum wutanwôhhouunne petukqunnungan8, kah nuhkinnumau mahshagquodt, kah piṣh nuttummetah wosketomp kah puppinashim.
E.Eze.14.13: Son of man, when the land sinneth against me by trespassing grievously, then will I stretch out mine hand upon it, and will break the staff of the bread thereof, and will send famine upon it, and will cut off man and beast from it:

α.Eze.14.14 Tôhkônogque yeug nash8itcheg wosketompaog Noah, Daniel, kah Job wutappi[n]neáop, nag woh pohquohwhunáog webe nehenwonche ukketeahogkôunouh, wussin Lord Jehovah.
E.Eze.14.14: Though these three men, Noah, Daniel, and Job, were in it, they should deliver but their own souls by their righteousness, saith the Lord GOD.

α.Eze.14.15 Woskehuwae puppináshimwog pannupwushâheog ohkeit, kah matchehteauáhettit, onk woh touwushin, onk woh matta howan uppannupwushaon wutche puppinashimwog.
E.Eze.14.15: If I cause noisome beasts to pass through the land, and they spoil it, so that it be desolate, that no man may pass through because of the beasts:

α.Eze.14.16 Tohkônogque yeug nishuog wosketompaog wutapineau, pomantamon wussin Lord Jehovah, matta woh pohquohwhunau[o]og wunnaumonáuh asuh wuttaun8oh: nag webe woh pohquohhamwog, qut ohke piṣh touushin.
E.Eze.14.16: Though these three men were in it, as I live, saith the Lord GOD, they shall deliver neither sons nor daughters; they only shall be delivered, but the land shall be desolate.

α.Eze.14.17 Asuh nuhkinnumon togkodteg ne ohkeit, kah n8waon, togkodteg pannupwushaaṣh ohke, newaj na wutch tummetahwog wosketomp kah puppinashim.
E.Eze.14.17: Or if I bring a sword upon that land, and say, Sword, go through the land; so that I cut off man and beast from it:

α.Eze.14.18 Tohkônogque yeug nishuog wosketompaog wutapineau, pomantamon wussin Lord Jehovah, matta woh pohquohwhunauóog wunnaumoniinuh asuh wuttauninuh, qut nag webe woh pohquohhamog.
E.Eze.14.18: Though these three men were in it, as I live, saith the Lord GOD, they shall deliver neither sons nor daughters, but they only shall be delivered themselves.

α.Eze.14.19 Asuh ann8nog enninneaonk ne ut ohkeit, kah sokanumwontamon nummusquantam8onk ut musqueheonganit, na wutch tummetahwhonat wosketomp kah puppinashim.
E.Eze.14.19: Or if I send a pestilence into that land, and pour out my fury upon it in blood, to cut off from it man and beast:

α.Eze.14.20 Tohkonogque Noah, Daniel, kah Job wutapinneaóont, pomantamon wussin Lord Jehovah, nag matta woh pohquohwhunauoog wunnaumoniinneuh, asuh wuttauninneuh: nag webe woh pohquohwhunaog nehenwonche ukketeahogkôun8uh nashpe wussampweusseongan8.
E.Eze.14.20: Though Noah, Daniel, and Job were in it, as I live, saith the Lord GOD, they shall deliver neither son nor daughter; they shall but deliver their own souls by their righteousness.

α.Eze.14.21 Newutche yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, toh woh in m8cheke ann8nog yauunash nummishe wussittum8ongash en Jerusalem, togkodteg, kah mahshagquodt, kah woskehuwae puppinashimwog, kah enninneaonk na wutch tummetahwhonat wosketomp kah puppinashim.
E.Eze.14.21: For thus saith the Lord GOD; How much more when I send my four sore judgments upon Jerusalem, the sword, and the famine, and the noisome beast, and the pestilence, to cut off from it man and beast?

α.Eze.14.22 Qut kusseh, na ut pish oguhsikeg sequn[óo]g, neg nekheoncheg, naneswe wunnaumoniinneuh, kah wuttaunineuh, kusseh nag pish sohwheog en kuhhogkaóut, & piṣh kenaumw8 ummayyeu kah wutusseongan8, kah piṣh kuttaphetteamw8 papaume machuk ne n[o]hkinum ut Jerusalem, papaume wame ne nohkinumauog.
E.Eze.14.22: Yet, behold, therein shall be left a remnant that shall be brought forth, both sons and daughters: behold, they shall come forth unto you, and ye shall see their way and their doings: and ye shall be comforted concerning the evil that I have brought upon Jerusalem, even concerning all that I have brought upon it.

α.Eze.14.23 Kah nag pish kuttaphik8óog naumóg ummayash kah wutusseongash, kah pish k8wahteomw8, matta tahn8che nutussein, wame ne ánteau wussin Lord Jehovah.
E.Eze.14.23: And they shall comfort you, when ye see their ways and their doings: and ye shall know that I have not done without cause all that I have done in it, saith the Lord GOD.

α.Eze.15.1 KAh wuttinn8waonk Jehovah nuppeyaonuk n8wau,
E.Eze.15.1: And the word of the LORD came unto me, saying,

α.Eze.15.2 Wosketompae wunnaumoniin, teagwas weenomwussippog ne aneukom8m8 niṣhnoh mehtug, asuh wuttuhk ut kenugke touohkomukque mehtugquhkontu?
E.Eze.15.2: Son of man, what is the vine tree more than any tree, or than a branch which is among the trees of the forest?

α.Eze.15.3 Sun woh ne timber neemunumun toh ussenat? asuh sun woh ne wuttinnumun wónkóntug ne wunôóhshadtauunat wisq?
E.Eze.15.3: Shall wood be taken thereof to do any work? or will men take a pin of it to hang any vessel thereon?

α.Eze.15.4 Kusseh ne unnuhkon n8taut, chikohsumunat n8teau, n8teau nashqutteau ut aeeteauwe kah nashauwu, sun ne woh toh ussen?
E.Eze.15.4: Behold, it is cast into the fire for fuel; the fire devoureth both the ends of it, and the midst of it is burned. Is it meet for any work?

α.Eze.15.5 Kusseh, máseuk, matta toh nomâmukquodtin8p: uttoh woh unne ogguhsé ompámukquodt n8teau mahchikkussik, kah mahchukkitteau.
E.Eze.15.5: Behold, when it was whole, it was meet for no work: how much less shall it be meet yet for any work, when the fire hath devoured it, and it is burned?

α.Eze.15.6 Newutche yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, onatuh weenomwussippog ut kenugke touohkomukque mehtugquash, niṣh monagiṣh chikohtaut, ne nuttinne magun wadohkitcheg Jerusalem.
E.Eze.15.6: Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; As the vine tree among the trees of the forest, which I have given to the fire for fuel, so will I give the inhabitants of Jerusalem.

α.Eze.15.7 Kah nag nutayeuuhkonittue ponamauóog nuskesuk, nag piṣh sohhamwog wutch n8taut, kah n8teau piṣh mahchukkisukquog, kah piṣh k8wahteomw8 nen Jehovah, nah ayeuuhkonittue ponamauog nuskesuk.
E.Eze.15.7: And I will set my face against them; they shall go out from one fire, and another fire shall devour them; and ye shall know that I am the LORD, when I set my face against them.

α.Eze.15.8 Kah nuttauwushitteoh ohke, newutche nag usseog panneusseonk wussin Lord Jehovah.
E.Eze.15.8: And I will make the land desolate, because they have committed a trespass, saith the Lord GOD.

α.Eze.16.1 WOnk wuttinn8waonk Jehovah nuppeyaonuk n8wau,
E.Eze.16.1: Again the word of the LORD came unto me, saying,

α.Eze.16.2 Wosketompae wunnaumoniin, wahteauwah Jerusalem wunnishkeneunkquodt8mash.
E.Eze.16.2: Son of man, cause Jerusalem to know her abominations,

α.Eze.16.3 Kah n8wash, yeu Lord Jehovah wuttittamun Jerusalem, keneetuonk kah kutontseonk ne Canaanne ohkeit, k8sh mo wut-Amorite, kah kokas mo wut-Hittite.
E.Eze.16.3: And say, Thus saith the Lord GOD unto Jerusalem; Thy birth and thy nativity is of the land of Canaan; thy father was an Amorite, and thy mother an Hittite.

α.Eze.16.4 Kah ne keneetuonk, ne kesukok neekean, keenwe matta tummussum8uneap, kah matta kutchissittau8unap ut nippeit, pahketeauunat, matta kussaltanóhwhutteop, kah matta kukkishpinnitteop.
E.Eze.16.4: And as for thy nativity, in the day thou wast born thy navel was not cut, neither wast thou washed in water to supple thee; thou wast not salted at all, nor swaddled at all.

α.Eze.16.5 Wanne muskesuk kukkitteamunkinneunk8 yeush kuttinhetteanat, qut kuppogkenit ut pohquashinne ohteuhkonit kutjishánumitteanat ne kesukok neekean.
E.Eze.16.5: None eye pitied thee, to do any of these unto thee, to have compassion upon thee; but thou wast cast out in the open field, to the lothing of thy person, in the day that thou wast born.

α.Eze.16.6 Kah paumushaónunon, kah nauunon kuttahtashkuhkont ut nehenwonche k8sqheonganit, kuttininup, k8sqheonganit, apean, nux kuttininup, apean k8sqheonganit, pomantaṣh.
E.Eze.16.6: And when I passed by thee, and saw thee polluted in thine own blood, I said unto thee when thou wast in thy blood, Live; yea, I said unto thee when thou wast in thy blood, Live.

α.Eze.16.7 Kummuttaánhesh onatuh ohteuhkòne wunneht8nuk, kah nano kummonam, kah nano kummuttaan, kah k8nasháyeu: kussogkodtunkaṣh kenauwinneunkquodtaṣh, kah kummeesunk neekin, poskisséan, kah m8sontupp8an.
E.Eze.16.7: I have caused thee to multiply as the bud of the field, and thou hast increased and waxen great, and thou art come to excellent ornaments: thy breasts are fashioned, and thine hair is grown, whereas thou wast naked and bare.

α.Eze.16.8 Kah paumuhkáuunon kah mónunneauunon kusseh, kutahquompiyeum ne womonittue ahquompi, kah kenuhkenumauunup nussissippoog, kah nupputtogk8humup kupposkissuonk: nux, kutchadchek[é]imunup, kah k8n8ohkónunup, wussin Lord Jehovah, kah ken n8tihéip.
E.Eze.16.8: Now when I passed by thee, and looked upon thee, behold, thy time was the time of love; and I spread my skirt over thee, and covered thy nakedness: yea, I sware unto thee, and entered into a covenant with thee, saith the Lord GOD, and thou becamest mine.

α.Eze.16.9 Neit kukkitchissumunup nippe: nux kuppannuppe kutchessumunup k8sqheonk, kah kussisseqununup pummee.
E.Eze.16.9: Then washed I thee with water; yea, I throughly washed away thy blood from thee, and I anointed thee with oil.

α.Eze.16.10 Kah wonk kuthogquanunup wunnequósue anakausuonk, kah kummoxinuhkauunup badgerse hohk8nunk, kah kupputtukquobpinunup wunhashabpónak, kah kupputtogguhwhunup silk.
E.Eze.16.10: I clothed thee also with broidered work, and shod thee with badgers' skin, and I girded thee about with fine linen, and I covered thee with silk.

α.Eze.16.11 Kah wonk kuthogouñumauunup wunhogk8unash, kah kehtippetenâpeash nupponumup kenutcheganit, kah hogquinnumáonk ut kussittipukanit.
E.Eze.16.11: I decked thee also with ornaments, and I put bracelets upon thy hands, and a chain on thy neck.

α.Eze.16.12 Kah nuppon nompak8 kuskodtukqut, kah soggussohhouunash ut kuhtauogut, kah wunnegenne chetuhquab ut kuppuhkukqut.
E.Eze.16.12: And I put a jewel on thy forehead, and earrings in thine ears, and a beautiful crown upon thine head.

α.Eze.16.13 Yeu kuttinne hogqunumon gold kah silver, kah kuthogk8onk wunne womponak, kah silk, kah wunnequontausue anakausuonk, kah kummeechup wunne n8khik, kah hony, kah pummee, kah kummuttae wunneet, kah k8niyeup as8tam8ong[á]nit.
E.Eze.16.13: Thus wast thou decked with gold and silver; and thy raiment was of fine linen, and silk, and broidered work; thou didst eat fine flour, and honey, and oil: and thou wast exceeding beautiful, and thou didst prosper into a kingdom.

α.Eze.16.14 Kah k8woweenomitteaonk sohham8m8 en penuwohteahtu wutche k8neetuonk, newutche pannuppeyeu8p nashpe n8neetuonk ne hogqunnuama[u]un, wussin Lord Jehovah.
E.Eze.16.14: And thy renown went forth among the heathen for thy beauty: for it was perfect through my comeliness, which I had put upon thee, saith the Lord GOD.

α.Eze.16.15 Qut kuppabuhtantamup nehenwonche k8neetuonk, kah kenanwun8dsquaus, newutche k8wowenomitteaonk, kah kussókenumup kenanwunn8dsquaôsuonk, ut niṣhnoh pasuk noh paumwushadt, wuttaiheuh.
E.Eze.16.15: But thou didst trust in thine own beauty, and playedst the harlot because of thy renown, and pouredst out thy fornications on every one that passed by; his it was.

α.Eze.16.16 Kah keneemunumup nawhutch kuthogk8unash, kah k8nteoh kukqun[ú]hqui ayeuongaṣh naṣh m8cheke nnagaṣh, kah ne kuttit nanwun8dsquaôsinneap: ne agqueneunkquokiṣh matta piṣh wonk peyaumun8ash, kah matta nnano.
E.Eze.16.16: And of thy garments thou didst take, and deckedst thy high places with divers colours, and playedst the harlot thereupon: the like things shall not come, neither shall it be so.

α.Eze.16.17 Kah wonk keneemunumup k8negane nompak8unash wutche nuk-goldum kah nus-silverum, niṣh anumauunónish, kah k8wosketompaeu nunnúkontunkanuhkauom kuhhog kah kenanwun8dsquaôsineunk.
E.Eze.16.17: Thou hast also taken thy fair jewels of my gold and of my silver, which I had given thee, and madest to thyself images of men, and didst commit whoredom with them,

α.Eze.16.18 Keneemununup k8nequósue hogk8unash kah neg kuthogquanonaopash: kah kupponam nuppummeeum k[a]h n8weetemungquott8m ut anaquabhettit.
E.Eze.16.18: And tookest thy broidered garments, and coveredst them: and thou hast set mine oil and mine incense before them.

α.Eze.16.19 Kah wonk nummeechumum ne anumauunomp, wunne n8khik, kah pummee, kah hony, ne sohkom8unomp, nag kupponamauopanneg wutche weetemungquok: kah yeu nniyeup wussin Lord Jehovah.
E.Eze.16.19: My meat also which I gave thee, fine flour, and oil, and honey, wherewith I fed thee, thou hast even set it before them for a sweet savour: and thus it was, saith the Lord GOD.

α.Eze.16.20 Nano kenemunomp kenaumonunk, kah kuttáunog neg neekitteiéaneg, kah yeuh nag kussephamauonáuh; nag mahchipwunneaoont: sun yeu peasin kummansquaosuonk?
E.Eze.16.20: Moreover thou hast taken thy sons and thy daughters, whom thou hast borne unto me, and these hast thou sacrificed unto them to be devoured. Is this of thy whoredoms a small matter,

α.Eze.16.21 Kenushonat nummukkiesumog, kah neg kummagununk pannupwushheahonat n8taut wutche nagoh?
E.Eze.16.21: That thou hast slain my children, and delivered them to cause them to pass through the fire for them?

α.Eze.16.22 Kah ut wame kenishkeneunkquott8mut, kah kenanwun8dsqua[ô]suonganit, matta kummehquontam8h k8skenue kesukodtumash, poski[n]eau, kah m8sesean, kah nishkhenumuk ut k8sqheonganit?
E.Eze.16.22: And in all thine abominations and thy whoredoms thou hast not remembered the days of thy youth, when thou wast naked and bare, and wast polluted in thy blood.

α.Eze.16.23 Kah nniyeup mahche nag** wame yeush kummatcheseongash (missi kutonkapunaonk, missi kutonkapunaonk wussin Lord Jehovah)
E.Eze.16.23: And it came to pass after all thy wickedness, (woe, woe unto thee!  saith the LORD GOD;)

α.Eze.16.24 Wonk kutáyimom nanwun8dsquaôsue ayeuonk, kah kutáyimom qunuhqui ayeuonk nishnoh toumaogquehtu.
E.Eze.16.24: That thou hast also built unto thee an eminent place, and hast made thee an high place in every street.

α.Eze.16.25 Kutayimomp kukqunuhquiayeuonk ut niṣhnoh uppuhkukk8e mayut, kah kutjishontamwáhteop k8netuonk, kah k8wohshinumau kusseet nishnoh pasuk noh paumwushadt, kah kummishteoh kenanwun8dsquaôsuongaṣh.
E.Eze.16.25: Thou hast built thy high place at every head of the way, and hast made thy beauty to be abhorred, and hast opened thy feet to every one that passed by, and multiplied thy whoredoms.

α.Eze.16.26 Kah wonk kummansquaôs Egyptiansog keetatteamunganog maghogkoncheg, kah kummishteoh kenanwun8dsquaôsuongaṣh kumm8m8sqhinneat.
E.Eze.16.26: Thou hast also committed fornication with the Egyptians thy neighbours, great of flesh; and hast increased thy whoredoms, to provoke me to anger.

α.Eze.16.27 Newutche kusseh, kenuhkenumoush nunnutcheg, kah nupwóhkitteoh kummeetsuonk, kah kupponsh wuttenantam8ongan8óut neg sekeneunkqueógig wuttaun8oh Philistiansog, neg akodchuwontogig kenishkeneunkque may.
E.Eze.16.27: Behold, therefore I have stretched out my hand over thee, and have diminished thine ordinary food, and delivered thee unto the will of them that hate thee, the daughters of the Philistines, which are ashamed of thy lewd way.

α.Eze.16.28 Kah wonk kenanwun8dsquaaus Assyriansog, newutche k8saum8s: nux nag kummansquaôsinneunk, qut asquam kuttapeneuh.
E.Eze.16.28: Thou hast played the whore also with the Assyrians, because thou wast unsatiable; yea, thou hast played the harlot with them, and yet couldest not be satisfied.

α.Eze.16.29 Nano wonk kenohnompu manishsquaus ut Canaane ohkeit wehque Caldea, qut asquam kuttapeneuh.
E.Eze.16.29: Thou hast moreover multiplied thy fornication in the land of Canaan unto Chaldea; and yet thou wast not satisfied therewith.

α.Eze.16.30 Uttoh en n8chumwi kuttah wussin Lord Jehovah wame yeush asean, wutusseonk matta kuhkenawe nanwun8dsquaôsue mittamwossis?
E.Eze.16.30: How weak is thine heart, saith the LORD GOD, seeing thou doest all these things, the work of an imperious whorish woman;

α.Eze.16.31 Newutche kutayim kenanwun8dsquaausue ayeuonk ut nish$noh uppuhkuk8e mayut, kah kutayim kukqunuhqui ayeuonk ut noh toumaogquehtu, kah matta kuttatuppeyeu8 nanwun8dsquaausuenin, newutche kutjishontam kupponomponteonat,
E.Eze.16.31: In that thou buildest thine eminent place in the head of every way, and makest thine high place in every street; and hast not been as an harlot, in that thou scornest hire;

α.Eze.16.32 Qut onatuh ummittamwussin, noh monsquaausit, noh nompe neemunont penuwohteuh wessukeh.
E.Eze.16.32: But as a wife that committeth adultery, which taketh strangers instead of her husband!

α.Eze.16.33 Nag ponampauwaog nanwun8dsquaôsinitcheh, kah wame ken kupponompau womonadcheg, kah nag kutonkquttauoog, woh nag kuppeyogqunnaoout waeenu wutche kenanwun8dsquaaus[o]onk.
E.Eze.16.33: They give gifts to all whores: but thou givest thy gifts to all thy lovers, and hirest them, that they may come unto thee on every side for thy whoredom.

α.Eze.16.34 Kah kuppen8we ussem onk wonkatogig mittamwussissog, ut kummamussinneat, matta howan asuhkonkk8unish kummamussinneat, kah newutche kupponompus, kah kupponomponteoh: newaj pen8wayeuean.
E.Eze.16.34: And the contrary is in thee from other women in thy whoredoms, whereas none followeth thee to commit whoredoms: and in that thou givest a reward, and no reward is given unto thee, therefore thou art contrary.

α.Eze.16.35 Newutche woi manisquaausuen n8tash wuttinn8waonk Jehovah.
E.Eze.16.35: Wherefore, O harlot, hear the word of the LORD:

α.Eze.16.36 Newutche yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, nenishkeneunkquodt8m sokenumun, & kupposkissuonk woshwohteau nashpe kenanwunn8dsquaausuongaṣh, weeche womonadcheg, kah nashpe wame kittinnúkontunkane nishkeneunkquodt8maṣh, kah nashpe 8sqheongan8 keneechauog, neg aninnumauadcheh.
E.Eze.16.36: Thus saith the Lord GOD; Because thy filthiness was poured out, and thy nakedness discovered through thy whoredoms with thy lovers, and with all the idols of thy abominations, and by the blood of thy children, which thou didst give unto them;

α.Eze.16.37 Newutche kusseh, nummóun wame womonadtcheg, neg weeteanumadcheg, kah wame neg womonadcheg, kah wame neg sekeneauadcheg, nag kutayeuuhkonittue móunnumauúnununk waeénu, kah nag n8woshwunnumauóog kupposkissuonk, onk woh nag naumwog wame kupposkissuonk.
E.Eze.16.37: Behold, therefore I will gather all thy lovers, with whom thou hast taken pleasure, and all them that thou hast loved, with all them that thou hast hated; I will even gather them round about against thee, and will discover thy nakedness unto them, that they may see all thy nakedness.

α.Eze.16.38 Kah kutogque wussumuṣh mittamwossissog manussquaausitchég, kah nashteacheg w[a]sumutcheg, kah kuttinnumouṣh musqueheonk, ut musquantam8onganit kah m8summuaonganit.
E.Eze.16.38: And I will judge thee, as women that break wedlock and shed blood are judged; and I will give thee blood in fury and jealousy.

α.Eze.16.39 Kah wonk nummag kuhhog wunnutchegan8óut, kah nag piṣh kepuhteaog kuhqunuhquiayeuonk, & piṣh kepuhteaog kuhqunuhquiayeuongaṣh: kah wonk nag piṣh kupposhkinukquog kuthogk8unaṣh, & piṣh amaunáog k8netue nompakouunaṣh, kah piṣh kupposkeh, kah m8seu kussequnukquog.
E.Eze.16.39: And I will also give thee into their hand, and they shall throw down thine eminent place, and shall break down thy high places: they shall strip thee also of thy clothes, and shall take thy fair jewels, and leave thee naked and bare.

α.Eze.16.40 Kah nag piṣh wonk kutayeuuhkonittue paudtunkquog m8chequshau[n], kah nag piṣh kukqussukquantahhukquog, kah piṣh kutasutt[ó]hikquog togkodtegash.
E.Eze.16.40: They shall also bring up a company against thee, and they shall stone thee with stones, and thrust thee through with their swords.

α.Eze.16.41 Kah nag piṣh chikkohsumwog keekaṣh ut n8taut, kah nag piṣh kittinhikquog wussittum8ongaṣh, ut anaquabhettit monaog mittamwossissog: kah kutahqueteauwábesh nanwun8dsquaôsuonk, kah ken matta piṣh wonk kupppónompausu,
E.Eze.16.41: And they shall burn thine houses with fire, and execute judgments upon thee in the sight of many women: and I will cause thee to cease from playing the harlot, and thou also shalt give no hire any more.

α.Eze.16.42 Neit nutanwohsinnuwáhtoh kummusquanumunóonk, kah numm8summuwaonk piṣh kenukkonuk, kah piṣh nutchequnap, kah matta wonk nummusquantam8.
E.Eze.16.42: So will I make my fury toward thee to rest, and my jealousy shall depart from thee, and I will be quiet, and will be no more angry.

α.Eze.16.43 Newutche matta kummequantam8 k8skenue kesukodtumaṣh, qut kumm8m8sqheh nashpe wame yeuṣh, newutche kusseh, nutonkquodtantam kummay ut kuppuhkukqut, wussin Lord Jehovah, kah matta piṣh kutussu ne nishkeneunkquok anue onk wame kenishkeneunkquodt8mash.
E.Eze.16.43: Because thou hast not remembered the days of thy youth, but hast fretted me in all these things; behold, therefore I also will recompense thy way upon thine head, saith the Lord GOD: and thou shalt not commit this lewdness above all thine abominations.

α.Eze.16.44 Kusseh niṣhnoh pasuk noh auwohteadt nupwoaonk, piṣh kutayeuuhkonittue auwemunukqun yeu nupwoaonk, an8wadt, neániit wutokasin ne wuttinniin wuttaunin.
E.Eze.16.44: Behold, every one that useth proverbs shall use this proverb against thee, saying, As is the mother, so is her daughter.

α.Eze.16.45 Ken kokas wuttaunoh, noh unkquánumont wessukeh, kah wunneechanoh, kah ken weetompassu keetompassuog neg onkquanumoncheg wessuk8oh, kah ummukkiésumóuh: kokas wut-Hittit, kah k8sh wut-Amorit.
E.Eze.16.45: Thou art thy mother's daughter, that lotheth her husband and her children; and thou art the sister of thy sisters, which lothed their husbands and their children: your mother was an Hittite, and your father an Amorite.

α.Eze.16.46 Mohtomegit ketompas, wus-Samaria, nagum kah wuttaunoh, neg apitcheg kummenadcheanit: kah peississit ketompas noh apit kuttinohkôunit, noh Sodom kah wuttaunoh.
E.Eze.16.46: And thine elder sister is Samaria, she and her daughters that dwell at thy left hand: and thy younger sister, that dwelleth at thy right hand, is Sodom and her daughters.

α.Eze.16.47 Qut matta kutasúhkomóh ummayeuóaṣh, asuh kutussu wunnishkeneunkquott8m8aṣh, qut onatuh ne teag peasik, ken kutánue anusséhit, onk nagoh ut wame kummayeu8out.
E.Eze.16.47: Yet hast thou not walked after their ways, nor done after their abominations: but, as if that were a very little thing, thou wast corrupted more than they in all thy ways.

α.Eze.16.48 Pomantamon wussin Lord Jehovah, Sodom ketompas, matta usseu, nagum kah wuttaunoh, ne asean, ken kah kuttaunog.
E.Eze.16.48: As I live, saith the Lord GOD, Sodom thy sister hath not done, she nor her daughters, as thou hast done, thou and thy daughters.

α.Eze.16.49 Kusseh, yeu ummatcheseonk ketompas Sodom, pittuanumóonk, wussaumepw8, kah monat sasegeneam8og, appehtunk, kah wuttaunoh, kah matta menehketeau8 matchekue kah quenauhik8e menutcheg,
E.Eze.16.49: Behold, this was the iniquity of thy sister Sodom, pride, fulness of bread, and abundance of idleness was in her and in her daughters, neither did she strengthen the hand of the poor and needy.

α.Eze.16.50 Kah pittuánumweenunkqussuog kah usseog nishkeneunkquok ut anaquabeh: newaje nag amaunog neane tapeneam.
E.Eze.16.50: And they were haughty, and committed abomination before me: therefore I took them away as I saw good.

α.Eze.16.51 Kah Samaria matta uppóhshe ussein kummatcheseongaṣh, qut nano kummishteoh kenishkeneunkquodt8maṣh onk nag, kah kussampweogquanumukqussehéoog ketompasuog ut wame kenishkeneunkquodt8mut niṣh áseaniṣh.
E.Eze.16.51: Neither hath Samaria committed half of thy sins; but thou hast multiplied thine abominations more than they, and hast justified thy sisters in all thine abominations which thou hast done.

α.Eze.16.52 Ken wonk wâsumadt ketompasuog, kenunuṣh nehenwonche kutakodchuonk, wutch kummatcheseongaṣh, niṣh aséaniṣh m8cheke, unkquene[u]nkquodtaṣh onk nag: nag ánue kussampweussúmukquog: nux chepshaṣh wonk, kah attumunuṣh kutakodchuonk, newutche kussampwe ogquanumweh keetompassuog.
E.Eze.16.52: Thou also, which hast judged thy sisters, bear thine own shame for thy sins that thou hast committed more abominable than they: they are more righteous than thou: yea, be thou confounded also, and bear thy shame, in that thou hast justified thy sisters.

α.Eze.16.53 Qushkinnumon wonk ummissinn8ongan8, ummissinnoongan8 Sodom, kah wuttaunoh, kah ummissinnoonk Samaria, kah wuttaunoh, neit piṣh wonk nukquéhchuun, ummissinnoongan8 másompánumauunumukeg ut nushaue nagoh.
E.Eze.16.53: When I shall bring again their captivity, the captivity of Sodom and her daughters, and the captivity of Samaria and her daughters, then will I bring again the captivity of thy captives in the midst of them:

α.Eze.16.54 Onk woh kutattumunumunat nehenwonche kutakodchuonk, kah woh kutchepsham ut wame ne asean, newutche ken nag kuttapheoog.
E.Eze.16.54: That thou mayest bear thine own shame, and mayest be confounded in all that thou hast done, in that thou art a comfort unto them.

α.Eze.16.55 Ketompassuog, Sodom kah wuttaunoh nag qushkehettit en negonne neaniéhetteup, kah Samaria kah wuttaunoh nag quinnuppehettit en negonne neaniéhetteup, neit ken, kah kuttaunog piṣh kukquinnuppemw8 en neaniyeup.
E.Eze.16.55: When thy sisters, Sodom and her daughters, shall return to their former estate, and Samaria and her daughters shall return to their former estate, then thou and thy daughters shall return to your former estate.

α.Eze.16.56 Newutche ketompas Sodom matta missohwhop ut kutt8nut ut kuppehtuanumwe kesukodtut.
E.Eze.16.56: For thy sister Sodom was not mentioned by thy mouth in the day of thy pride,

α.Eze.16.57 Asquam kummatcheseonk wa[h]shan8k neane ne adt ahquompag wuttaunuh Syria kekomukquean, kah wame neh weenuhkongqutcheh wuttaunoh Philistiansog, neg sekeneunkqueaneg waeénu.
E.Eze.16.57: Before thy wickedness was discovered, as at the time of thy reproach of the daughters of Syria, and all that are round about her, the daughters of the Philistines, which despise thee round about.

α.Eze.16.58 Kenunnum kenishkeneunkqussuonk, kah kutunkquanumukquodt8maṣh wussin Jehovah
E.Eze.16.58: Thou hast borne thy lewdness and thine abominations, saith the LORD.

α.Eze.16.59 Newutche yeu wussin Jehovah, kuttinheṣh, ne aséan, kutjishontam chadchekeyeuaonk, pohquenuman wunn8waonk.
E.Eze.16.59: For thus saith the Lord GOD; I will even deal with thee as thou hast done, which hast despised the oath in breaking the covenant.

α.Eze.16.60 Qut onch nummehquontam k8n8waonganun ut k8skenuuneat[:] kah kummenuhkehteouṣh machemohtag wunn8waonk.
E.Eze.16.60: Nevertheless I will remember my covenant with thee in the days of thy youth, and I will establish unto thee an everlasting covenant.

α.Eze.16.61 Neit piṣh kummequontam kummayash, kah piṣh kutakoj attumunog ketompasuog, mohtomegit kah peississit, kah nag k8taunuhkaúunununk, qut matta wutch k8n8waonk.
E.Eze.16.61: Then thou shalt remember thy ways, and be ashamed, when thou shalt receive thy sisters, thine elder and thy younger: and I will give them unto thee for daughters, but not by thy covenant.

α.Eze.16.62 Kah kummenuhkehteoush n8n8waonk, kah piṣh k8wahteoh nen Jehovah.
E.Eze.16.62: And I will establish my covenant with thee; and thou shalt know that I am the LORD:

α.Eze.16.63 Onk woh kummehquontam kah woh kutchepsham, kah matta woh wonk k8waóhshinum8 kutt8n newutche kutakodchuonk wanohteaónunon wutch wame ne asean wussin Lord Jehovah.
E.Eze.16.63: That thou mayest remember, and be confounded, and never open thy mouth any more because of thy shame, when I am pacified toward thee for all that thou hast done, saith the Lord GOD.

α.Eze.17.1 KAh wuttinn8waonk Jehovah nuppeyaonuk, n8wau,
E.Eze.17.1: And the word of the LORD came unto me, saying,

α.Eze.17.2 Wosketompae wunnaumoniin siogk8wao[n]k unn8waṣh, kah kuhkinneasuonk unn8waṣh ut wekit Israel.
E.Eze.17.2: Son of man, put forth a riddle, and speak a parable unto the house of Israel;

α.Eze.17.3 Kah n8waṣh, yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, mishe wompsikuk, mogkinnepuhwhunau, quogquonipuhwhunau, mishequnau, noh m8cheke unnussit, peyau Lebanon, kah quenappu quanunkquok wuttuhk ut chikkuput.
E.Eze.17.3: And say, Thus saith the Lord GOD; A great eagle with great wings, longwinged, full of feathers, which had divers colours, came unto Lebanon, and took the highest branch of the cedar:

α.Eze.17.4 Pohquodtam woskechée woskeantuk, kah wuttuss8wuttauun en kodtauompasuwu ohkeit, kah upponamun wutotanaout kodtauompasitcheg.
E.Eze.17.4: He cropped off the top of his young twigs, and carried it into a land of traffick; he set it in a city of merchants.

α.Eze.17.5 Kah wonk neemunum wuskannem ne ut ohkeit, kah wuttittanohteuhkon missegun ohteuhkonit, kah 8nahtauun ut kisheke mishe sep[ù]ut, kah wutogque ohteúhkonanumwussikkup.
E.Eze.17.5: He took also of the seed of the land, and planted it in a fruitful field; he placed it by great waters, and set it as a willow tree.

α.Eze.17.6 Kah nekin, kah penaékinnu weenomwussippag88, tiuhquonkquodt, wuttuhqunaṣh wayeoéguk wuhhogkaut, wadchaubukquaṣh agwe wutohtaaṣh: onk weenomwussippog88, kah wuttuhqunaṣh tannegen, kah wuttuhquenémesu8.
E.Eze.17.6: And it grew, and became a spreading vine of low stature, whose branches turned toward him, and the roots thereof were under him: so it became a vine, and brought forth branches, and shot forth sprigs.

α.Eze.17.7 Onkatog wonk mishe wompsik8k, mogkinnepuhwhunau, kah m8chekéqunau, kah kusseh yeu weenomwussippog, nôhnogquekin wutchaubukquash, kah wuttuhqunnú8 en noh nogqueu, onk woh 8tattippattauunat nash wutanaskóhhamóe passohteaquontegash.
E.Eze.17.7: There was also another great eagle with great wings and many feathers: and, behold, this vine did bend her roots toward him, and shot forth her branches toward him, that he might water it by the furrows of her plantation.

α.Eze.17.8 Ne ohteuhkausu wunne ohkeit kishke mishe nippekontu, onk woh wuttuhqunnú8, onk woh meechummú8, onk woh ne wunn8wenomsippog.
E.Eze.17.8: It was planted in a good soil by great waters, that it might bring forth branches, and that it might bear fruit, that it might be a goodly vine.

α.Eze.17.9 N8waṣh yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, sun woh wunayeum8? sunnummatta woh noh pohquohchâbukinneau, kah tummehtham8un ummeechummuongaṣh, onk woh muss8pohteau, piṣh miss8pohteau wame tannegane 8neepogwash: matta nashpe mishe menuhkesuonk, kah matta m8náe missinninnuog uppohquochabuhkinnum8uneau.
E.Eze.17.9: Say thou, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Shall it prosper? shall he not pull up the roots thereof, and cut off the fruit thereof, that it wither? it shall wither in all the leaves of her spring, even without great power or many people to pluck it up by the roots thereof.

α.Eze.17.10 Nux kússeh, ahketeamuk sun woh wunniyeum8? sun matta woh papaquanne muss8pohtán8, wutchepwosh mussuhkog? piṣh uhp8teau ut passohteaquonteganit ne adt tannegik.
E.Eze.17.10: Yea, behold, being planted, shall it prosper? shall it not utterly wither, when the east wind toucheth it? it shall wither in the furrows where it grew.

α.Eze.17.11 Nano wuttinn8waonk Jehovah nuppeyaonuk n8wau,
E.Eze.17.11: Moreover the word of the LORD came unto me, saying,

α.Eze.17.12 Us yeu cheketamukkomukqut, sun mo k8wahteauomw8 uttoh yeush ánawuttam8m8uk? nag us, kusseh, Babylone ketass8t peyau Jerusalem, kah tohqunau ketass8toh, kah sontimoog, kah weeche missinóhkonónuh en Babylon.
E.Eze.17.12: Say now to the rebellious house, Know ye not what these things mean?  tell them, Behold, the king of Babylon is come to Jerusalem, and hath taken the king thereof, and the princes thereof, and led them with him to Babylon;

α.Eze.17.13 Kah neemunon nawhutche ketahs8tamwe wuskannem, Kah nah 8n8wonáuh, kah wutchadchekéewaheuh, kah wonk tohqunnau másugkenutcheh ut ohkeit.
E.Eze.17.13: And hath taken of the king's seed, and made a covenant with him, and hath taken an oath of him: he hath also taken the mighty of the land:

α.Eze.17.14 Onk woh ass8tam8onk tiuhquonkquodt, onk woh matta nusseu waabunóou wuhhogkuh, qut nashpe nanauwehteauunat 8n8waonk, woh neepadteau.
E.Eze.17.14: That the kingdom might be base, that it might not lift itself up, but that by keeping of his covenant it might stand.

α.Eze.17.15 Qut wutcheketauoh, ann8nont wutann8naéneumoh en Egypt, onk woh nag wuttinnumauouh horsesoh, kah monaog missinninnúh: sun woh wunniyeu? sun woh pohquohhum noh ne asit? asuh sun woh pohquohwhunau pohquenuk 8n8waonk?
E.Eze.17.15: But he rebelled against him in sending his ambassadors into Egypt, that they might give him horses and much people. Shall he prosper? shall he escape that doeth such things? or shall he break the covenant, and be delivered?

α.Eze.17.16 Pomantamon wussin Lord Jehovah, wunnamuhkut, ne ayeuonk ketass8t apit, noh kohtass8tamwéheont, neh wutchadchekeyeuwaonk pohquenumauont, neh piṣh weeche wunnupp8moh, ut nashauwe Babylon.
E.Eze.17.16: As I live, saith the Lord GOD, surely in the place where the king dwelleth that made him king, whose oath he despised, and whose covenant he brake, even with him in the midst of Babylon he shall die.

α.Eze.17.17 Kah Pharaoh weeche ummishe kenauwamemoh, kah ummuttaan8moh, matta pish wutannumauouh ut ayeuwuttinneat, wadchuuhkonat, kah wonkon8sinuhkonat, tummehtahwhonat monaog missinninnúog.
E.Eze.17.17: Neither shall Pharaoh with his mighty army and great company make for him in the war, by casting up mounts, and building forts, to cut off many persons:

α.Eze.17.18 Newutche jishantam chadchekeyeuwaonk wutch pohquenum8onk wunn8waonk (kusseh maguk wunnutchég) kah asit wame yeush, matta piṣh pohquohham8.
E.Eze.17.18: Seeing he despised the oath by breaking the covenant, when, lo, he had given his hand, and hath done all these things, he shall not escape.

α.Eze.17.19 Newaj yeu n8wadt Lord Jehovah, pomantamon, wunnamúhkut mutchadhekeyeuwaonk jishantog, kah n8n8waonk ne pohquenuk, ne nutonkquattantamun ut nehenwonche uppuhkukqut.
E.Eze.17.19: Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; As I live, surely mine oath that he hath despised, and my covenant that he hath broken, even it will I recompense upon his own head.

α.Eze.17.20 Kah nussepagenumau nuthashabpoh, kah noh piṣh puttahham ut nutahpéhannit, kah piṣh nuppas8 Babylon, kah na piṣh nuttit keket8kau, wutche uppaneseonk ne pannesehtiit.
E.Eze.17.20: And I will spread my net upon him, and he shall be taken in my snare, and I will bring him to Babylon, and will plead with him there for his trespass that he hath trespassed against me.

α.Eze.17.21 Kah wame ukquonsúmoh, k[a]h wame ukkenauwameongash piṣh penushaog nashp togkodteg, kah neg ashqshoncheg piṣh seahwhoog en wame wabanéhtu: kah piṣh k8wahteomw8 nen Jehovah nussin.
E.Eze.17.21: And all his fugitives with all his bands shall fall by the sword, and they that remain shall be scattered toward all winds: and ye shall know that I the LORD have spoken it.

α.Eze.17.22 Yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, wonk nen nunneemun wanasqunkquamu utchikkuppe wuttuhk, kah nutohteuhkon; nuppohquenum wutch wanashqunkwame n8chumwe wuttuhk, kah nuttittanohteuhkon, ut qunuhqui wadchuut, kah anue qunuhquok.
E.Eze.17.22: Thus saith the Lord GOD; I will also take of the highest branch of the high cedar, and will set it; I will crop off from the top of his young twigs a tender one, and will plant it upon an high mountain and eminent:

α.Eze.17.23 Ut wadchuut ut quanuhkôag ut Israel, nuttittanohteuhkon: kah piṣh wuttuhqunnu8, kah piṣh meechummu8, kah ne piṣh wunne chikkuppeyeu8, kah ut agwu piṣh 8tohkineau wame puppinushaog wam[é]qunnutcheg, ut wuttuhqunne onkauohtaut piṣh ayeuog.
E.Eze.17.23: In the mountain of the height of Israel will I plant it: and it shall bring forth boughs, and bear fruit, and be a goodly cedar: and under it shall dwell all fowl of every wing; in the shadow of the branches thereof shall they dwell.

α.Eze.17.24 Kah wame ohteuhkone mehtugquash pish wahteauog, nen Lord n8kenum ne qunuhqui mehtug, nummishteoh tiuhquonkqueu mehtug, nunnunnassum askunkq, kah muss8onk nunnekitteauun; nen Lord nukkekét8kam, kah nutussen.
E.Eze.17.24: And all the trees of the field shall know that I the LORD have brought down the high tree, have exalted the low tree, have dried up the green tree, and have made the dry tree to flourish: I the LORD have spoken and have done it.

α.Eze.18.1 KAh wuttinn8waonk Jehovah nuppeyaonuk, n8wau,
E.Eze.18.1: The word of the LORD came unto me again, saying,

α.Eze.18.2 Toh kittinnauwuttamumw8 waj yeu auwahteaog yeu siogk8waonk papaume Israelle ohke, n8waog, wut8shinneunk meechwog seane weenominneash, kah mukkiesog wepittuoash wushkeyauash?
E.Eze.18.2: What mean ye, that ye use this proverb concerning the land of Israel, saying, The fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the children's teeth are set on edge?

α.Eze.18.3 Pomantamon wussin Lord JEhovah, matta pish wonk kutauwohteauneau yeu siogk8waonk ut Israel.
E.Eze.18.3: As I live, saith the Lord GOD, ye shall not have occasion any more to use this proverb in Israel.

α.Eze.18.4 Kusseh, wame keteahogkounog nuttaiheog, neane ukketeahogkounoh wunnaumoniin nuttaihein: keteaogkou noh matcheseit, pish nup.
E.Eze.18.4: Behold, all souls are mine; as the soul of the father, so also the soul of the son is mine: the soul that sinneth, it shall die.

α.Eze.18.5 Qut wosketomp sampwesit, kah usseit ne wanegik kah sampwag
E.Eze.18.5: But if a man be just, and do that which is lawful and right,

α.Eze.18.6 Matta meetsegk ut wadchuuhkontu, kah matta tohshinum8k wuskesukquaṣh ut wuttinnukontunkanumoh wek Israel, kah matta nishkheau weetatteamungoh ummittamwussoh, kah matta pas8sukauoh qushinausuoh.
E.Eze.18.6: And hath not eaten upon the mountains, neither hath lifted up his eyes to the idols of the house of Israel, neither hath defiled his neighbour's wife, neither hath come near to a menstruous woman,

α.Eze.18.7 Kah matta howane sunukkuhchahwhonk, kah aninnumauau ukkinohtausuonk n8namontuhquohwoncheh, kah matta chekee mukk8kinnuwóou, assamau petukqununk kodtupwunutcheh, kah puttagwhau poskissinitcheh hogk8onk.
E.Eze.18.7: And hath not oppressed any, but hath restored to the debtor his pledge, hath spoiled none by violence, hath given his bread to the hungry, and hath covered the naked with a garment;

α.Eze.18.8 Kah matta mag8 wutche ontsampadtam8onk, kah matta nemunnum8 ontsegin, qushkinnum wunnutcheg wutch matcheseonganit; sampwe wussittumoonk usseu ut naṣhauwe wosketompahtu.
E.Eze.18.8: He that hath not given forth upon usury, neither hath taken any increase, that hath withdrawn his hand from iniquity, hath executed true judgment between man and man,

α.Eze.18.9 Pomushau nukkuhk8waonganit, kah nanawehteau n8sittum8ongaṣh wunnamuhkutee ussenat: yeuoh sampweussu, piṣh wunnamuhkut pomantam wussin Lord Jehovah.
E.Eze.18.9: Hath walked in my statutes, and hath kept my judgments, to deal truly; he is just, he shall surely live, saith the Lord GOD.

α.Eze.18.10 Noh wunnaumoniit, noh mukk8kinnuwaenuunit nushehteaenuunit, kah noh asit yeush yeu ônagiṣh.
E.Eze.18.10: If he beget a son that is a robber, a shedder of blood, and that doeth the like to any one of these things,

α.Eze.18.11 Kah noh matta assek yeush wunneseongaṣh, qut meetsu ut wadchuuhkontu, kah nishkheau weetatteamunguh ummittamwussoh.
E.Eze.18.11: And that doeth not any of those duties, but even hath eaten upon the mountains, and defiled his neighbour's wife,

α.Eze.18.12 Sunukkutchahwau matchekuoh kah quenauhikqunutcheh, chekee mukk8kinnuau, matta ompinum8 kenohtoadtuonk, kah tahshinum wuskesukquash en nunneukontunkanit, usseu niṣhkeneunkquokiṣh.
E.Eze.18.12: Hath oppressed the poor and needy, hath spoiled by violence, hath not restored the pledge, and hath lifted up his eyes to the idols, hath committed abomination,

α.Eze.18.13 Ontsohteauae magou, kah nemunum ne ontsem8uk: sun noh woh pomantam? matta piṣh pomantam8; noh usseu wame yeuṣh nishkeneunkquokiṣh, noh pish wunnamuhkut nup, 8sqheonk pish nuhkuhkunk.
E.Eze.18.13: Hath given forth upon usury, and hath taken increase: shall he then live? he shall not live: he hath done all these abominations; he shall surely die; his blood shall be upon him.

α.Eze.18.14 Kah kusseh,wunnaumoniit noh nag* 8shoh wame ummatcheseongaṣh, niṣh asecheh, kah natwontog, kah matta neane ussek.
E.Eze.18.14: Now, lo, if he beget a son, that seeth all his father's sins which he hath done, and considereth, and doeth not such like,

α.Eze.18.15 Matta meetsu ut wadchuuhkontu, kah matta spunnum8 wuskesukquaṣh en wuttinnukontunkanit wek Israel, matta nishkheau8 weetatteamunguh ummittamwussoh.
E.Eze.18.15: That hath not eaten upon the mountains, neither hath lifted up his eyes to the idols of the house of Israel, hath not defiled his neighbour's wife,

α.Eze.18.16 Kah matta howane sunnukkutchahwho8, kah matta kogkaunum8 kenohtôadtuonk, kah matta chekeeu mukk8kinnuau8, aninnumauau uppetukqununk k[â]dtupwunutcheh, kah hogquanau poskissinitcheh.
E.Eze.18.16: Neither hath oppressed any, hath not withholden the pledge, neither hath spoiled by violence, but hath given his bread to the hungry, and hath covered the naked with a garment,

α.Eze.18.17 Amaunum wunnutcheg wutch matchekuut, kmatta attumunum8 ontsauwohteaonk asuh ne ontsem8uk, usseu n8sittum8ongaṣh, pomushaontam nukkuhk8waongaṣh; matta pish nupp8 wutche 8shoh ummatcheseonk, noh piṣh wunnamuhkut pomantam.
E.Eze.18.17: That hath taken off his hand from the poor, that hath not received usury nor increase, hath executed my judgments, hath walked in my statutes; he shall not die for the iniquity of his father, he shall surely live.

α.Eze.18.18 Qut 8shoh, newutche unkque sunnukkutchahh8wau, chekee mukk8kinau wematoh, kah ussu ne matta wanegenun8g ut kenugke ummissinninnumut, kusseh, noh pish nup ut ummatcheseonganit.
E.Eze.18.18: As for his father, because he cruelly oppressed, spoiled his brother by violence, and did that which is not good among his people, lo, even he shall die in his iniquity.

α.Eze.18.19 Qut onch kussimw8, tohwutch? sunnummatta wunnaumoniin kenunnum8 8shoh ummatcheseonk? wunnaumoniin usseit ne wanegik ne sampwag kah nanawehteau wame nukkuhk8waongaṣh, káh ussenash, noh piṣh wunnamuhkut pomantam.
E.Eze.18.19: Yet say ye, Why? doth not the son bear the iniquity of the father?  When the son hath done that which is lawful and right, and hath kept all my statutes, and hath done them, he shall surely live.

α.Eze.18.20 Keteahogkou noh matcheseit piṣh nup: wunnaumoniin matta piṣh kenunum8 8ṣhoh ummatcheseonk; wussampweusseonk noh sampwe asit piṣh wunnuhkuhkongqun, kah ummatcheseonk matchetou piṣh wunnuhkuhkongqun.
E.Eze.18.20: The soul that sinneth, it shall die. The son shall not bear the iniquity of the father, neither shall the father bear the iniquity of the son: the righteousness of the righteous shall be upon him, and the wickedness of the wicked shall be upon him.

α.Eze.18.21 Qut matchetou quinnuppeit wutch wame ummatcheseongaṣh niṣh asecheh, kah nanauwehteunk wame nukkuhk8waongaṣh, kah usseit wame ne wanegik, kah sampwag, noh piṣh wunnamuhkut pomantam matta pish nupp8.
E.Eze.18.21: But if the wicked will turn from all his sins that he hath committed, and keep all my statutes, and do that which is lawful and right, he shall surely live, he shall not die.

α.Eze.18.22 Wame ummatcheseongaṣh niṣh asecheh, niṣh matta piṣh weogquttumauounaṣh; ut wussampweusseonganit ne asit piṣh pomantam.
E.Eze.18.22: All his transgressions that he hath committed, they shall not be mentioned unto him: in his righteousness that he hath done he shall live.

α.Eze.18.23 Sun n8weekontam matchetou woh wunnuppunat? wussin Lord Jehovah, kah matta woh qushkeinat wutch ummayut, kah woh pomantam?
E.Eze.18.23: Have I any pleasure at all that the wicked should die? saith the Lord GOD: and not that he should return from his ways, and live?

α.Eze.18.24 Qut sampwe usseaen quinnuppeit wutch wussampweusseonganit, kah matcheseit, kah usseit neaunak wame ummatcheseongaṣh matcheetou, sun woh pomantam? wame wussampweusseonk ne mahche usseit matta piṣh weogquttum8un: ut ummatcheseonganit ne asit, kah ut uppanneseonganit ne asit niṣh waj piṣh nukupish.
E.Eze.18.24: But when the righteous turneth away from his righteousness, and committeth iniquity, and doeth according to all the abominations that the wicked man doeth, shall he live? All his righteousness that he hath done shall not be mentioned: in his trespass that he hath trespassed, and in his sin that he hath sinned, in them shall he die.

α.Eze.18.25 Qut kussimw8, ummay Lord matta sampwan8, eyeu n8tam8k woi wek Israel, sunnummatta nummay sampwano? sun matta kummay8ash woonkan8ash?
E.Eze.18.25: Yet ye say, The way of the LORD is not equal. Hear now, O house of Israel; Is not my way equal? are not your ways unequal?

α.Eze.18.26 Sampweusseaen amayit wutch wussampweusseonganit, kah matcheseit, kah nish nupuk, newutche ummatcheseonk ne asit piṣh ne 8ch nuppun.
E.Eze.18.26: When a righteous man turneth away from his righteousness, and committeth iniquity, and dieth in them; for his iniquity that he hath done shall he die.

α.Eze.18.27 Wonk matcheetou quinnuppeit wutch ummatchetowonganit ne mahche usseit, kah usseit ne wanegik kah sampwag, noh pish keteâhau ukketeahogkôunoh.
E.Eze.18.27: Again, when the wicked man turneth away from his wickedness that he hath committed, and doeth that which is lawful and right, he shall save his soul alive.

α.Eze.18.28 Newutche natwontam, kah quinnuppu wutch wame ummatcheseonganit niṣh asecheh, noh piṣh wunnamuhkut pomantam, matta piṣh nupp8.
E.Eze.18.28: Because he considereth, and turneth away from all his transgressions that he hath committed, he shall surely live, he shall not die.

α.Eze.18.29 Qut onch wek Israel n8wau, ummay Lord matta sampwano, woi wek Israel sunnummatta nummayash sampwan8aṣh? sunnummatta kummay8oaṣh matta sampwanoash?
E.Eze.18.29: Yet saith the house of Israel, The way of the LORD is not equal. O house of Israel, are not my ways equal? are not your ways unequal?

α.Eze.18.30 Newaj wussumunog woi wek Israel, nishnoh pasuk neaunak ummayash wussin Lord Jehovah, aiuskoianatam8k, kah qushkek wutch wame kuppanneseongan8óut: neit matcheseonk matta piṣh kuppagwanukou.
E.Eze.18.30: Therefore I will judge you, O house of Israel, every one according to his ways, saith the Lord GOD. Repent, and turn yourselves from all your transgressions; so iniquity shall not be your ruin.

α.Eze.18.31 pogketam8k wame kuppanneseonganooash niṣh nashpe panneusseogish, wusketeâhaheuk kuhhogkaoog, kah wuske nashauonganuuk, newutche tohwutch nuppók woi wek Israel?
E.Eze.18.31: Cast away from you all your transgressions, whereby ye have transgressed; and make you a new heart and a new spirit: for why will ye die, O house of Israel?

α.Eze.18.32 Newutche matta n8wekontam8 wunnupp8onk noh napuk, wussin Lord Jehovah, newutche quinnuppek kah pomantamok.
E.Eze.18.32: For I have no pleasure in the death of him that dieth, saith the Lord GOD: wherefore turn yourselves, and live ye.

α.Eze.19.1 NAno, mauémwush wutch Israelle sontimóog,
E.Eze.19.1: Moreover take thou up a lamentation for the princes of Israel,

α.Eze.19.2 Kah n8wash, teag kokas? squoshimwe qunnonou, sepsin ut kenugke qunnónouut, noh n8soou qunnónouésoh ut kenugke qunnonouwemésittu.
E.Eze.19.2: And say, What is thy mother? A lioness: she lay down among lions, she nourished her whelps among young lions.

α.Eze.19.3 Kah kes[u]kkéheau pasuk8 wushkoshim8mesoh, wuske qunnonou88, kah nehtúhto tohqunnumunat tohqunnumoonk, mahchipp8 wosketompuh.
E.Eze.19.3: And she brought up one of her whelps: it became a young lion, and it learned to catch the prey; it devoured men.

α.Eze.19.4 Wutohtimoinneunk wunn8tamunáuh, noh tohqunau ut uppassahthegan8óut, kah wutchainse pas8óuh ut ohkeit Egypt.
E.Eze.19.4: The nations also heard of him; he was taken in their pit, and they brought him with chains unto the land of Egypt.

α.Eze.19.5 Kah noh nag* noh pahtussu, kah wutannoôsuonk wannéhteou, neit nemunau onkatogeh wushkoshim8mésoh, neh 8shkoshimwe qunnonouwáhkónuh.
E.Eze.19.5: Now when she saw that she had waited, and her hope was lost, then she took another of her whelps, and made him a young lion.

α.Eze.19.6 Kah papaumshadt ut kenugke qunnonouwehtu, noh qunnonou88, kah nehtuhtau tohqunonat tohqunnumoonk, mahchipwau wosketompuh.
E.Eze.19.6: And he went up and down among the lions, he became a young lion, and learned to catch the prey, and devoured men.

α.Eze.19.7 Kah wahteoh wuttauwushinne mishekomuk88aṣh, k[á]h touushin, kah ne noh nomwohtag, nashpe wadtauatonkqussue nehnehteaonk.
E.Eze.19.7: And he knew their desolate palaces, and he laid waste their cities; and the land was desolate, and the fulness thereof, by the noise of his roaring.

α.Eze.19.8 Neit wutohtimoineash ayeuhkonuk aeetaue, wutch wutohtimoineat, kah neg wussepagenumauóuh wuthashabp8uh: noh tohqunau ut passohtheagn8óut.
E.Eze.19.8: Then the nations set against him on every side from the provinces, and spread their net over him: he was taken in their pit.

α.Eze.19.9 Wuttohtogkuppináé wadchanóuh chainsut, kah nag uppas8ouh Babylone ketass8tamut, keneepsue uppas8ouh, onk woh mo 8wadtauatonkqussuonk wonk n8tam8un ut Israelle wadchuuhkontu.
E.Eze.19.9: And they put him in ward in chains, and brought him to the king of Babylon: they brought him into holds, that his voice should no more be heard upon the mountains of Israel.

α.Eze.19.10 Kokas ogqueaeunkqussu wusqueongane weenomwussippogwut, ohteuhkausu kishke nippekontu, noh mishummeechumup, kah mishittuhqunásu wutche monataṣh nippeash.
E.Eze.19.10: Thy mother is like a vine in thy blood, planted by the waters: she was fruitful and full of branches by reason of many waters.

α.Eze.19.11 Kah noh ohto menuhkiyeuaṣh pogkomungaṣh wutche nanauwuñuwáe anwohh8unaṣh, kah ne sohkunkquok qunuhquodt ut kenugke kuppúhquodte wuttuhquanit, kah nauau ut ne sohkunkqussit weeche mataãnukiṣh 8ttahqunumaṣh.
E.Eze.19.11: And she had strong rods for the sceptres of them that bare rule, and her stature was exalted among the thick branches, and she appeared in her height with the multitude of her branches.

α.Eze.19.12 Qut noh kôdtinau ut musquanittam8onganit, noh penuhkónáh en ohkeit, kah wutchepwosh nunnassum ummeechummuonk; ummenuhke pogkomongash pohkqshaash, kah uhp8taash, n8tau ummachikkuswoh.
E.Eze.19.12: But she was plucked up in fury, she was cast down to the ground, and the east wind dried up her fruit: her strong rods were broken and withered; the fire consumed them.

α.Eze.19.13 Kah eyeu ohteuhkon ut touohkomuk, ut nunnobohteaouut, kah kunkohtadtáut.
E.Eze.19.13: And now she is planted in the wilderness, in a dry and thirsty ground.

α.Eze.19.14 Kah n8tau sohham8m8 wutch 8tuhqunne pogkomonganit, noh mahchikkussuk ummeechummuonk, newaj matta wadchanum8k menuhki pogkomunk nanawunnuwae anwohh8unnú8ut: yeu maumuttam8onk, kah ne piṣh mau nuttam8onganu8.
E.Eze.19.14: And fire is gone out of a rod of her branches, which hath devoured her fruit, so that she hath no strong rod to be a sceptre to rule. This is a lamentation, and shall be for a lamentation.

α.Eze.20.1 KAh nnih énada adtahshinuuk kodtumm8, napanna adtahsuit nepauz piogque quinohhog, nawhutche Israelle Eldersog peyaog nat8tamwehteaog Jehovah, kah nag appuog anaquabeh.
E.Eze.20.1: And it came to pass in the seventh year, in the fifth month, the tenth day of the month, that certain of the elders of Israel came to enquire of the LORD, and sat before me.

α.Eze.20.2 Neit wuttinn8waonk Jehovah nuppeyaonuk, n8wau,
E.Eze.20.2: Then came the word of the LORD unto me, saying,

α.Eze.20.3 Wosketompae wunnaumoniin, us Israelle Eldersog, kah us, yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, kenonche nat8tomaiimw8? pomantamon wussin Lord Jehovah, matta nunnat8mitteóh nashpe kenaau.
E.Eze.20.3: Son of man, speak unto the elders of Israel, and say unto them, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Are ye come to enquire of me? As I live, saith the Lord GOD, I will not be enquired of by you.

α.Eze.20.4 Sun nag k8sumóog wosketompae wunnaumoniin, sun nag k8sumóog? nag wahteauwáh wunnishkeneunkquodt8m8 ash 8sh8oh.
E.Eze.20.4: Wilt thou judge them, son of man, wilt thou judge them? cause them to know the abominations of their fathers:

α.Eze.20.5 Kah nag us, yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, ne kesukok pepenauog Israel, kah tahshinnumon nunnutcheg en 8skannemunit wek Jakob, kah wahteauwáheog nuhhog ut ohkeit Egypt, tahshinnumon nunnutcheg nag en, an8waon, nen Jehovah kum-Manitt8mw8.
E.Eze.20.5: And say unto them, Thus saith the Lord GOD; In the day when I chose Israel, and lifted up mine hand unto the seed of the house of Jacob, and made myself known unto them in the land of Egypt, when I lifted up mine hand unto them, saying, I am the LORD your God;

α.Eze.20.6 Ne kesukok tahshinnumauog nunnutcheg, sohh8un[ô]nat wutch Egypt[é] ohkeit, en ohkeit ne natauwáhtauogkup, ne tômogok segkodtunk kah hony, ne wussohsum8ongan8 wame wutohtimóinneunk.
E.Eze.20.6: In the day that I lifted up mine hand unto them, to bring them forth of the land of Egypt into a land that I had espied for them, flowing with milk and honey, which is the glory of all lands:

α.Eze.20.7 Neit nag nuttinnópanneg, pogketaj nishnoh wosketomp ne nishkeneunkquok ut wuskesukqut, kah nishkheúhteogk kuhhogkaóog nashpe Egypte unnunnúkontunkanog, nen Jehovah kum-Manitt8mw8.
E.Eze.20.7: Then said I unto them, Cast ye away every man the abominations of his eyes, and defile not yourselves with the idols of Egypt: I am the LORD your God.

α.Eze.20.8 Qut nag nutcheketunkquog, kah matta nukkeiketunk8og: nag matta pogketamópanneg nishnoh ne nishkeneunkquok ut wuskesukqut, kah matta ohquanumauóog Egypte nunnúkontunkoh: neit nussip, nussokanittauóog nummusquanittam8onk, pohkodche ussenat nutayeuuhkône musquánumaongan8 ut nashauwe Egypte ohkeit.
E.Eze.20.8: But they rebelled against me, and would not hearken unto me: they did not every man cast away the abominations of their eyes, neither did they forsake the idols of Egypt: then I said, I will pour out my fury upon them, to accomplish my anger against them in the midst of the land of Egypt.

α.Eze.20.9 Qut nutanakausip wutche n8wesuonk, onk woh mo matchehteauouunat ut anaquabhettit penuwohteaog, neg kenukusháhetticheh, neg anaquabhettit nag wahteauwaheogkup sohh8wunónat wutch Egypte ohkeit.
E.Eze.20.9: But I wrought for my name's sake, that it should not be polluted before the heathen, among whom they were, in whose sight I made myself known unto them, in bringing them forth out of the land of Egypt.

α.Eze.20.10 Newaj nag sohhamwéhheog wutch Egypte ohkeit, kah nuppas8oog touohkomuk
E.Eze.20.10: Wherefore I caused them to go forth out of the land of Egypt, and brought them into the wilderness.

α.Eze.20.11 Kah nuttinnumauóog nukkuhk8waongaṣh, kah nag nahtinôog n8sittum8ongaṣh, nishnoh wosketomp usseit, nish woh nashpe pomantamunash.
E.Eze.20.11: And I gave them my statutes, and shewed them my judgments, which if a man do, he shall even live in them.

α.Eze.20.12 Nano wonk nuttinnumauopanneg nus$Sabbath8mash, kuhkinneasuonganu8ut ut nashaue nen kah nagumau, onk nag wahteauog nen Jehovah, nag waneetupanatamwaheog.
E.Eze.20.12: Moreover also I gave them my sabbaths, to be a sign between me and them, that they might know that I am the LORD that sanctify them.

α.Eze.20.13 Qut wek Israel nutcheketunk ut touohkomuk: nag matta pomushaontamoog nukkuhk8waongaṣh, kah nag sekeneamwog n8sittum8ongash, nish wosketomp usseit nish pishnashpe pomantamunaṣh: kah nus-Sabbath8mash ummishe nishketeaunnaoash: neit nussip, nag nussókanuttauóog nummusquantam8onk ut touohkomuk nummahchekuswonaóut.
E.Eze.20.13: But the house of Israel rebelled against me in the wilderness: they walked not in my statutes, and they despised my judgments, which if a man do, he shall even live in them; and my sabbaths they greatly polluted: then I said, I would pour out my fury upon them in the wilderness, to consume them.

α.Eze.20.14 Qut nutanakausip wutche n8wesuonk matta woh nishketeauouinneat ut anaquabhettit penuwohteaog, neg anaquabhettit sohh8wunogkup.
E.Eze.20.14: But I wrought for my name's sake, that it should not be polluted before the heathen, in whose sight I brought them out.

α.Eze.20.15 Qut wonk nuttahshinnumauópanneg nunnutcheg ut touohkomuk, matta nuppas8wóunnat en ohkeit ne quoshomogkup, tômogok sogkodtunk kah hony, wussohsum8ongan8 wame wutohtimóinneunk.
E.Eze.20.15: Yet also I lifted up my hand unto them in the wilderness, that I would not bring them into the land which I had given them, flowing with milk and honey, which is the glory of all lands;

α.Eze.20.16 Newutche nag sekeneamwog n8sittum8ongaṣh, kah matta pomushaontam8og nukkuhk8waongaṣh, qut nishketeauog nus-Sabbath8maṣh; newutche wuttahhou asuhkauáoh nunnúkontunkoh.
E.Eze.20.16: Because they despised my judgments, and walked not in my statutes, but polluted my sabbaths: for their heart went after their idols.

α.Eze.20.17 Qut onch nuskesuk 8wohquânumoh, matta nuppagwanonat, kah matta n8wohkukquossumópanneg ut touohkomuk.
E.Eze.20.17: Nevertheless mine eye spared them from destroying them, neither did I make an end of them in the wilderness.

α.Eze.20.18 Qut nuttinnomp wunneechan8oh ut wouohkomuk, pomush[á]hteogk ukkuhquttum8onganóut k8sh8oog, kah asuhkom[ó]hteogk 8sittum8onganooash, kah nishkheúhteogk kuhhogk[a]oog nashpe wuttinnukontunkanóuh.
E.Eze.20.18: But I said unto their children in the wilderness, Walk ye not in the statutes of your fathers, neither observe their judgments, nor defile yourselves with their idols:

α.Eze.20.19 Nen Jehovah kum-Manitt8mw8: pomushagk ut nukkuhk8waonganit, kah nanawehteo8k n8sittum8ongaṣh, kah nish ussek.
E.Eze.20.19: I am the LORD your God; walk in my statutes, and keep my judgments, and do them;

α.Eze.20.20 Kah wunnetupanatamwahtau8k nus[-]sabatt8maṣh, kah niṣh piṣh kuhkinneasuonganu8ash nashaue nen kah kenaau, onk woh k8wahteomw8 nen Jehovah kum-Manitt8mw8.
E.Eze.20.20: And hallow my sabbaths; and they shall be a sign between me and you, that ye may know that I am the LORD your God.

α.Eze.20.21 Qut onch wunneechan8uh nutcheketunkquog, matt[t]a pomushau8og nukkuhk8waonganit, kah matta nanawehteauouog n8sittum8ongash niṣh ussenat: niṣh wosketomp usseit, niṣh piṣh nashpe pomantamunash; nag nishketeoog nussabbatomash: neit nussip, nag nussokanumauoog nummusquantamoonk, pokodjteauunat nutayeuuhkkonittue nummusquanumaongan8 ut touohkomuk.
E.Eze.20.21: Notwithstanding the children rebelled against me: they walked not in my statutes, neither kept my judgments to do them, which if a man do, he shall even live in them; they polluted my sabbaths: then I said, I would pour out my fury upon them, to accomplish my anger against them in the wilderness.

α.Eze.20.22 Qut onch, nukqushkinnum nunnutcheg, kah nutanakausip wutche n8wesuonk matta woh nishketeau8uneat ut anaquabhettit adt sohh8wunogkup.
E.Eze.20.22: Nevertheless I withdrew mine hand, and wrought for my name's sake, that it should not be polluted in the sight of the heathen, in whose sight I brought them forth.

α.Eze.20.23 Nag wonk nuttahshinnumauopanneg nunnutcheg ut touohkomuk, nag woh nusseahwhonaoont ut kenugke penuwohteaut, k[a]h woh nusseahwhoog papashpe wutohtimoinneat.
E.Eze.20.23: I lifted up mine hand unto them also in the wilderness, that I would scatter them among the heathen, and disperse them through the countries;

α.Eze.20.24 Newutche matta usseog n8sittum8ongaṣh, qut sekeneamwog nukkuhk8waongaṣh, kah nishketeauog nussabbat8maṣh, kah wuskesuk88ash asuhkauaog 8sh8oh wuttinnukontunka[n]8.
E.Eze.20.24: Because they had not executed my judgments, but had despised my statutes, and had polluted my sabbaths, and their eyes were after their fathers' idols.

α.Eze.20.25 Newaj wonk aninnumauoog kuhk8waongaṣh niṣh mo wu[n]egenun8gish, kah wussittum8ongash niṣh woh mo nashpe pomantamwahettegiṣh.
E.Eze.20.25: Wherefore I gave them also statutes that were not good, and judgments whereby they should not live;

α.Eze.20.26 Kah nunnishkheóog ut nehenwonche ummag8ongan8out, newutche pannupwushaheaog (n8taut) wame neh wohshinumunutcheh ôontomuk, onk woh nag nutouushinwaheoog, onk woh wahteauog nen Jehovah.
E.Eze.20.26: And I polluted them in their own gifts, in that they caused to pass through the fire all that openeth the womb, that I might make them desolate, to the end that they might know that I am the LORD.

α.Eze.20.27 Newutche wosketompae wunnaumoniin, ken8n Israel wek, kah nag us, yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, qut yeu$ut, k8sh8woog nup-Blasphemonukquog, newutche nummatchenehikquog.
E.Eze.20.27: Therefore, son of man, speak unto the house of Israel, and say unto them, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Yet in this your fathers have blasphemed me, in that they have committed a trespass against me.

α.Eze.20.28 Newutche neg pethuunog ohkeit, waj tahshinumomp nunnutcheg nag nuttinninnumauonaóont, neit nag naumwog nish$noh kussohkoi wadchu kah wame kuppuhtugquash, kah na wuttit sephausinneau, kah na upponamuneau numm8m8sqhik8e sepha[u]suonganoash, na wonk wuttit ayimunean weetemungquok kah na wuttit sokenumuneaú 8tattamwe sephausuongan8oash.
E.Eze.20.28: For when I had brought them into the land, for the which I lifted up mine hand to give it to them, then they saw every high hill, and all the thick trees, and they offered there their sacrifices, and there they presented the provocation of their offering: there also they made their sweet savour, and poured out there their drink offerings.

α.Eze.20.29 Neit nag nuttinnopanneg, teagwe qunuhqui|ayeuonk ne ay[ê]og? kah ne as8wesik Bamah pajeh yeu kesukok.
E.Eze.20.29: Then I said unto them, What is the high place whereunto ye go? And the name whereof is called Bamah unto this day.

α.Eze.20.30 Newutche us wek Israel, yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, sun kittinne nishkhetteamw8, neane k8sh8oog? kah sun kenaau kummamussimw8 asuhkoe wunnishkeneunkquodt8m8ash.
E.Eze.20.30: Wherefore say unto the house of Israel, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Are ye polluted after the manner of your fathers? and commit ye whoredom after their abominations?

α.Eze.20.31 Newutche mag8óg kummag8onganooash, pannupwushaheóg kenaumonaoog n8taut, kenishkheomw8 kuhhogkaoog nashpe wame kittinnukontunkan8oog, pajeh yeu kesukok; kah sun nen woh nunnat8mit nashpe kenaau? woi Israel wek? pomantog wussin Lord Jehovah, matta nunnat8mittoh nashpe kuhhogkaoog.
E.Eze.20.31: For when ye offer your gifts, when ye make your sons to pass through the fire, ye pollute yourselves with all your idols, even unto this day: and shall I be enquired of by you, O house of Israel? As I live, saith the Lord GOD, I will not be enquired of by you.

α.Eze.20.32 Kah ne paom8uk kuttahh8out, matta pish nano, an8waog, piṣh nuttattuppeyeumun penuwohteaut, neane wutteateashiyeuongan8 wutohtimoinneunk, wowussittumunaoout wuttuhk, kah qussuk.
E.Eze.20.32: And that which cometh into your mind shall not be at all, that ye say, We will be as the heathen, as the families of the countries, to serve wood and stone.

α.Eze.20.33 Pamontamon, wussin Lord Jehovah wunnamuhkut nashpe mishe menutcheg, kah nashpe summagunnum8e muhpit, kah nashp[è] sokanum8[é] musquanittam8onk kenanawununumw8.
E.Eze.20.33: As I live, saith the Lord GOD, surely with a mighty hand, and with a stretched out arm, and with fury poured out, will I rule over you:

α.Eze.20.34 Kah kussohh8wununumw8 wutch missinninnutu, kah kummukinunumw8 wutch wutohtimoneahtu uttoh adt seahwutteaog, nashpe mishe menutcheg, kah nashpe summagunnumoe muhpit, kah nashpe sokanum8e musquanittam8onk.
E.Eze.20.34: And I will bring you out from the people, and will gather you out of the countries wherein ye are scattered, with a mighty hand, and with a stretched out arm, and with fury poured out.

α.Eze.20.35 Kah kupp[á]s8unumw8 touohkomukque missinninnuut, kah na kuttit keketehauununeau anaquabetôadteog.
E.Eze.20.35: And I will bring you into the wilderness of the people, and there will I plead with you face to face.

α.Eze.20.36 Nean keketahtauogkup k8sh8oog ut Egypte touohkomukqut, ne kittinne keket[e]htauununeau, wussin Lord Jehovah.
E.Eze.20.36: Like as I pleaded with your fathers in the wilderness of the land of Egypt, so will I plead with you, saith the Lord GOD.

α.Eze.20.37 Kah kutagwushahenumw8 pogkomonganit, kah kuppas8unumw8 en pohquohwhu[n]ittue wunn8waon[g]anit.
E.Eze.20.37: And I will cause you to pass under the rod, and I will bring you into the bond of the covenant:

α.Eze.20.38 Kah nuppogken wutch kenugke kuhhogkaout cheketamwenuog, kah neg pannesehtiitcheg, nag nussohh8wunoog wutch ohkeit ne adt keahteahettit, kah nag matta pish petuttea8og ohkit Israel, kah pish  k8wahteomw8 nen Jehovah.
E.Eze.20.38: And I will purge out from among you the rebels, and them that transgress against me: I will bring them forth out of the country where they sojourn, and they shall not enter into the land of Israel: and ye shall know that I am the LORD.

α.Eze.20.39 Kah woi wek Israel, yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, monchek, wosussumok nish$noh pasuk wuttinnukontunkoh, kah ompetak, matta kukkehtieog: qut ahque wonk nishketeo8k n8neetupanatamwe wesuonk nashpe kummag8ongan8oash kah nashpe kuttinnukóntunkan8oog.
E.Eze.20.39: As for you, O house of Israel, thus saith the Lord GOD; Go ye, serve ye every one his idols, and hereafter also, if ye will not hearken unto me: but pollute ye my holy name no more with your gifts, and with your idols.

α.Eze.20.40 Newutche ut n8neetupanatamwe wadchumut ut qunuhquiyeue wadchumut, Israel, wussin Lord Jehovah, naut pish wame wek Israel wame neg ut o[k]keit, pish n8wowusssumukquog: na nuttit nuttapeneauoneau, kah na nuttit ann8noneau kummag8ongan88ash, kah kakenumunne kummag8ongan8, kah wame k8neetupanatamukkom8ash.
E.Eze.20.40: For in mine holy mountain, in the mountain of the height of Israel, saith the Lord GOD, there shall all the house of Israel, all of them in the land, serve me: there will I accept them, and there will I require your offerings, and the firstfruits of your oblations, with all your holy things.

α.Eze.20.41 Kuttapeneauonumw8 nashpe k8we[è]temunkquodt8m8, kussohh8wununnaout wutch missinninnutu, kah mukkinunog wutch wutohtimoinneat, uttoh adt seahwhunog, kah n8neetupanatamwahi[o]ut kuhhogkaout anaquabhettit penuwohteaog.
E.Eze.20.41: I will accept you with your sweet savour, when I bring you out from the people, and gather you out of the countries wherein ye have been scattered; and I will be sanctified in you before the heathen.

α.Eze.20.42 Kah pish k8wahteomw8 nen Lord, pas8unog en Israelle ohkeit, en wutohtimoneat, uttoh waj tahshinumomp nunnutcheg nuttinninnumauonaout k8sh8oog.
E.Eze.20.42: And ye shall know that I am the LORD, when I shall bring you into the land of Israel, into the country for the which I lifted up mine hand to give it to your fathers.

α.Eze.20.43 Kah na pish kuttin mehquontamuneau kummayeuoash, kah wame kutusseonganooash uttoh adt nishkheog kuhhogkaoog, kah pish kutuhquanum8m8 kuhhogkaoog, ut nehenwonche anaquabeog wutche wame machuk nish aseogish.
E.Eze.20.43: And there shall ye remember your ways, and all your doings, wherein ye have been defiled; and ye shall lothe yourselves in your own sight for all your evils that ye have committed.

α.Eze.20.44 Kah piṣh k8wahteomw8 nen Jehovah, anakauseon wutche kenaau wutche n8wsuonk, matta neaunak kummatcheet8e mayeu8ash, kah matta neaunak anittue kutusseongan8oaṣh, woi kenaau wek Israel, wussin Lord Jehovah.
E.Eze.20.44: And ye shall know that I am the LORD when I have wrought with you for my name's sake, not according to your wicked ways, nor according to your corrupt doings, O ye house of Israel, saith the Lord GOD.

α.Eze.20.45 Nano wuttinn8waonk Jehovah nuppeyaonuk, n8wau,
E.Eze.20.45: Moreover the word of the LORD came unto me, saying,

α.Eze.20.46 Wosketompae wunnaumoniin, en nogquóhtauush kuskesuk sowaniyeu, kah padtippashadtoush kukkutt8onk, nogque en sowaniyeu, kah ayeuhkonittue quoshóe missohhamau sowamiyeue ohteakonue touohkomuk.
E.Eze.20.46: Son of man, set thy face toward the south, and drop thy word toward the south, and prophesy against the forest of the south field;

α.Eze.20.47 Kah us sowaniyeue touohkomuk, n8tam8k wuttinn8waonk Lord: yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, kusseh, nunnashqussum n8tau ut kuhhogkat[,] kah piṣh mahchep8m8 nish$noh ashkuhnk ut kuhhogkat, kah nishnoh miss8unk:  n8n8unáe n8n8uneau matta piṣh ontham8un, kah wame muskesukquaṣh wutch sowaniyeu en nanummiyeu piṣh na$ut chikohtaash.
E.Eze.20.47: And say to the forest of the south, Hear the word of the LORD; Thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I will kindle a fire in thee, and it shall devour every green tree in thee, and every dry tree: the flaming flame shall not be quenched, and all faces from the south to the north shall be burned therein.

α.Eze.20.48 Kah wame weeyaus pish naum nen Jehovah nunnashqunánumun: matta pish ontham8un.
E.Eze.20.48: And all flesh shall see that I the LORD have kindled it: it shall not be quenched.

α.Eze.20.49 Neitnussip, woi Jehovah, n8waog papaume nen, sunnummatta nupwoaongash n8wau?
E.Eze.20.49: Then said I, Ah Lord GOD! they say of me, Doth he not speak parables?

α.Eze.21.1 KAh wuttinn8waonk Jehovah nuppeyaonuk n8wau,
E.Eze.21.1: And the word of the LORD came unto me, saying,

α.Eze.21.2 Woskétompae wunnaumoniin, kuskesuk nogquohtoush Jerusalem, kah padtippashadtoush kukkutt8onk [e]n nogque wunneetupanatamwe ayeuonganéhtu, kah áyeuhkonittue quoshoe missohhamontash Israelle ohke.
E.Eze.21.2: Son of man, set thy face toward Jerusalem, and drop thy word toward the holy places, and prophesy against the land of Israel,

α.Eze.21.3 Kah uttash Israelle ohke, yeu wussin Jehovah, kusseh, kutayeuuhko[n]sh, kah nukkodtinum nuttogkodteg wutch pechehquogqonganit, kah kuttumehtaush wutch kuhhogkat, sampwesit kah matchétuk.
E.Eze.21.3: And say to the land of Israel, Thus saith the LORD; Behold, I am against thee, and will draw forth my sword out of his sheath, and will cut off from thee the righteous and the wicked.

α.Eze.21.4 Neit tummetahwhog wutch kuhhogkat sampwesit kah matchesit, ne$waj pish nuttogkodteg sohham8m8uk wutch pechehquogkunkanit, ayeuhkonittue wame weyaus, wutch sowaniyeu en nanummiyeu.
E.Eze.21.4: Seeing then that I will cut off from thee the righteous and the wicked, therefore shall my sword go forth out of his sheath against all flesh from the south to the north:

α.Eze.21.5 Onk woh wame weyaus wahteóh, nen Jehovah nukkotiñum nuttogkodt[e]g wutch pechehquogqonkanit: matta pish wonk qushkemun8.
E.Eze.21.5: That all flesh may know that I the LORD have drawn forth my sword out of his sheath: it shall not return any more.

α.Eze.21.6 Newutche mishanomsh ken wosketompae wunnaumoniin, ogque mishanomsh pohqushunk musseg, kah weesagkonnu, ut anaquabhettit.
E.Eze.21.6: Sigh therefore, thou son of man, with the breaking of thy loins; and with bitterness sigh before their eyes.

α.Eze.21.7 Kah pish n$nih, nag unnukque[a]n, toh waj mishonómwean? woh kenamph8ham, wutche aunchem8onk, newutche peyaum8: kah nish$noh metah pish sabohteau, kah wame menutchegash pish n8chumwiyeuash, kah nish$noh nasháonk pish chadcheeu, kah wame mukkuttukquog pish ogque n8chumwesuog nippeit, kusseh peyom8, kah pish n$noh, wussin Lord Jehovah.
E.Eze.21.7: And it shall be, when they say unto thee, Wherefore sighest thou? that thou shalt answer, For the tidings; because it cometh: and every heart shall melt, and all hands shall be feeble, and every spirit shall faint, and all knees shall be weak as water: behold, it cometh, and shall be brought to pass, saith the Lord GOD.

α.Eze.21.8 Wonk wuttinn8waonk Jehovah nuppeyaonuk n8wau.
E.Eze.21.8: Again the word of the LORD came unto me, saying,

α.Eze.21.9 Wosketompae wunnaumoniin, quoshae missohhash & n8wash, togkodteg, togkodteg kehtattauun, kah wonk wo[ó]suppahtauun.
E.Eze.21.9: Son of man, prophesy, and say, Thus saith the LORD; Say, A sword, a sword is sharpened, and also furbished:

α.Eze.21.10 Ne ketattauun mishe pagwohteaum8ut, ne woósippanausu onk woh wóhsippohtau: sun woh neit nuppóanatamumun? jishontam uppogkomunk nunnaumon,, onatuh nishnoh mehtug.
E.Eze.21.10: It is sharpened to make a sore slaughter; it is furbished that it may glitter: should we then make mirth? it contemneth the rod of my son, as every tree.

α.Eze.21.11 Kah noh ummagun woósippanumunat, onk woh auwohkon: yeu togkodteg kehtattauun, kah ne woósippanausu ummagunat en wunnutcheganit nushehteaenin.
E.Eze.21.11: And he hath given it to be furbished, that it may be handled: this sword is sharpened, and it is furbished, to give it into the hand of the slayer.

α.Eze.21.12 Maush kah 8nsh, woi wosketompae wunnaumoniin, newutche ne piṣh wunuhkunkquneau nummissinninnúmog, piṣh wunuhkuhkunkquneau wame Israelle sontimóog: quehquéna[u]anum8ongaṣh piṣh nuhkuhkongquog nummissinninnúmog wutche togkodteg: newutche punkhaṣh kéquau.
E.Eze.21.12: Cry and howl, son of man: for it shall be upon my people, it shall be upon all the princes of Israel: terrors by reason of the sword shall be upon my people: smite therefore upon thy thigh.

α.Eze.21.13 Newutche ne qutchehettuonk, kah toh woh nnih togkodteg jishantog pogkomunk? matta piṣh wonk ne nano wussin Lord Jehovah.
E.Eze.21.13: Because it is a trial, and what if the sword contemn even the rod?  it shall be no more, saith the Lord GOD.

α.Eze.21.14 Newutche ken wosketompae wunnaumoniin, quoshodtuṣh, kah ponkinitchawhuṣh, kah togkodteg pushkinnumunach nishwudt nompe, wuttogkodtegan8 nâshitcheg, wuttogkodtegan8 masugkenukeg neg nâshitcheg, ne petutteom8uk kemee chambersut.
E.Eze.21.14: Thou therefore, son of man, prophesy, and smite thine hands together. and let the sword be doubled the third time, the sword of the slain: it is the sword of the great men that are slain, which entereth into their privy chambers.

α.Eze.21.15 Nutayeuhkonittue ponam wannasque togkodteg wame 8squontam8ôut, onk woh wuttahhou chadchéém8, kah wuttouishinn8ongan8 woh monat: Woi, woósuppái, ne wishquohteau wutche pagwanittuonk.
E.Eze.21.15: I have set the point of the sword against all their gates, that their heart may faint, and their ruins be multiplied: ah! it is made bright, it is wrapped up for the slaughter.

α.Eze.21.16 Monchiṣh woh toh aush, asuh wuttinohkôunit asuh menadchéanit, uttoh kuskesuk anaquohtag.
E.Eze.21.16: Go thee one way or other, either on the right hand, or on the left, whithersoever thy face is set.

α.Eze.21.17 Nuppo[n]kenutcháh wonk, kah nutanwóhshitteoh nummusquantamóonk: nen Jehovah nussin.
E.Eze.21.17: I will also smite mine hands together, and I will cause my fury to rest: I the LORD have said it.

α.Eze.21.18 Wuttinn8waonk Jehovah wonk nuppeyaonuk, n8wau,
E.Eze.21.18: The word of the LORD came unto me again, saying,

α.Eze.21.19 Ken wonk wosketompae wunnaumoniin, kuhquttush neese maaeu, onk woh wuttogkodteg Babylone ketass8t peyom8: na neeswe piṣh sohhamwog wutch pasukquinnu ohkeit: kah pepenaṣh ay[e]uonk, pepenaṣh ut uppuhkuk8e mayit en otanat. 
E.Eze.21.19: Also, thou son of man, appoint thee two ways, that the sword of the king of Babylon may come: both twain shall come forth out of one land: and choose thou a place, choose it at the head of the way to the city.

α.Eze.21.20 Kuhquttush may onk woh togkodteg peyaum8 Ammonitse Rabbah, kah en Judah, wonkon8sinne Jerusalem.
E.Eze.21.20: Appoint a way, that the sword may come to Rabbath of the Ammonites, and to Judah in Jerusalem the defenced.

α.Eze.21.21 Newutche Babylone ketass8t neepau adt neekittomashik may, waj kutchissik neesinaṣh mayaṣh: pauwáinneat: woósuppanum kôunkquottaṣh nat8tomauau nunnúkontunkoh, monunneam wushqun.
E.Eze.21.21: For the king of Babylon stood at the parting of the way, at the head of the two ways, to use divination: he made his arrows bright, he consulted with images, he looked in the liver.

α.Eze.21.22 Ut wuttinohkounit ne wuttit pauwainneau wutche Jerusalem, kehtimonat mugquompaog, woshinumunat wutt8n pagwohteadt, mishont8wonat, wutayeuuhkontamunat squontamash, wadchuuhkonat, wonkon8sinohkonat.
E.Eze.21.22: At his right hand was the divination for Jerusalem, to appoint captains, to open the mouth in the slaughter, to lift up the voice with shouting, to appoint battering rams against the gates, to cast a mount, and to build a fort.

α.Eze.21.23 Kah pish tatuppeyeu8 ut wuhhogkaout, pann8wae pauwauonk ut anaquabhettit, nag chadchekeyeuwatcheg: qut noh pish mehquontam matcheseonk, onk woh nag tohqunoog.
E.Eze.21.23: And it shall be unto them as a false divination in their sight, to them that have sworn oaths: but he will call to remembrance the iniquity, that they may be taken.

α.Eze.21.24 Newutche yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, newutche kummequontamwahuwom8 kummatcheseongan8, newutche kuppanneseonganoash wahshaash, newutche ut wame kutusseongan8out, kummatcheseongan8oash wahsheau, newutche kummequanumitteamw8, pish kuttohqunitteam8 nashpe menutcheg.
E.Eze.21.24: Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Because ye have made your iniquity to be remembered, in that your transgressions are discovered, so that in all your doings your sins do appear; because, I say, that ye are come to remembrance, ye shall be taken with the hand.

α.Eze.21.25 Kah ken mattannittowompae, kah matchetoe Israelle sontim, noh ukkesukodtum paóm8uk, matcheseonk wohkokquoshik.
E.Eze.21.25: And thou, profane wicked prince of Israel, whose day is come, when iniquity shall have an end,

α.Eze.21.26 Yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, ontahtoush chetuhquab, amaunṣh chetuhquab, matta yeuoh, matta piṣh noh nan: qununkqhúk noh tiohquonkqsit, kah tiuhquonkqhúk noh qunnunkqsit.
E.Eze.21.26: Thus saith the Lord GOD; Remove the diadem, and take off the crown: this shall not be the same: exalt him that is low, and abase him that is high.

α.Eze.21.27 Pish n8nummuhkinnumun, n8nummuhkinnumun, n8nummuhkinnumun, kah matta piṣh wonk n$nih, nô pajeh peyonat noh wadtihéit, kah piṣh nuttinninnumauoh.
E.Eze.21.27: I will overturn, overturn, overturn, it: and it shall be no more, until he come whose right it is; and I will give it him.

α.Eze.21.28 Kah ken wosketompae wunnaumoniin, quoshodtuṣh kah n8waṣh, yue wussin Lord Jehovah papaume Ammonitsog, kah papaume kehkomaongan8, n8waṣh, togkodteg, togkodteg kodtinnumauun nushúhkónat, woósippanausu, pagwohkonat newutche woósippái.
E.Eze.21.28: And thou, son of man, prophesy and say, Thus saith the Lord GOD concerning the Ammonites, and concerning their reproach; even say thou, The sword, the sword is drawn: for the slaughter it is furbished, to consume because of the glittering:

α.Eze.21.29 Ashpámu naummonkquean tahn8cheyeu8k, ashpámu pauwau pann8wáhikquean, kuppas8qunat ut wussittippukan8óut neg nâshitcheg, matchesitcheg neg ukkesukkodtum8 paom8uk, ummatcheseongan8 wohkukquôshik.
E.Eze.21.29: Whiles they see vanity unto thee, whiles they divine a lie unto thee, to bring thee upon the necks of them that are slain, of the wicked, whose day is come, when their iniquity shall have an end.

α.Eze.21.30 Sun woh nukqushkeáhtauun en pehchequogquonkanit? k8sum8sh ut ayeuonganit ne adt kezhenumukup, ut keneetue ohkeit.
E.Eze.21.30: Shall I cause it to return into his sheath? I will judge thee in the place where thou wast created, in the land of thy nativity.

α.Eze.21.31 Kussokanittouṣh nummusquantam8onk, kutayeuuhkonittue p8tantamoush n8tae nummusquantam8onk; kah kupponsh wunnutchegan8óut puppinashimwe wosketompaog, nehtôeu pagwahteaenúog.
E.Eze.21.31: And I will pour out mine indignation upon thee, I will blow against thee in the fire of my wrath, and deliver thee into the hand of brutish men, and skilful to destroy.

α.Eze.21.32 Ken piṣh kummishu ut n8taut: k8sqheonk piṣh ohteau nashaue ohkeit, matta piṣh wonk kummehquanumitteoh: newutche nen Jehovah nukket8kontamun.
E.Eze.21.32: Thou shalt be for fuel to the fire; thy blood shall be in the midst of the land; thou shalt be no more remembered: for I the LORD have spoken it.

α.Eze.22.1 NAno wuttinn8waonk Jehovah nuppeyaonuk, n8wau,
E.Eze.22.1: Moreover the word of the LORD came unto me, saying,

α.Eze.22.2 Yeuyeu wosketompae wunnaumoniin, sun woh k8sittum, sun woh k8sittum nushehtéae keitotan? nux, piṣh kenáhtin wame wunnishkeneunkquodt8maṣh.
E.Eze.22.2: Now, thou son of man, wilt thou judge, wilt thou judge the bloody city? yea, thou shalt shew her all her abominations.

α.Eze.22.3 Neit n8waṣh, yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, keitotan seahham wusqueheonk ut nashaue, onk woh wutaquompiyeum peyom8, nunnukontunkanuhkauau ayeuuhkonittue wuhhogkuh, wunnishkheónat wuhhogkuh.
E.Eze.22.3: Then say thou, Thus saith the Lord GOD, The city sheddeth blood in the midst of it, that her time may come, and maketh idols against herself to defile herself.

α.Eze.22.4 Kukkésukkôadtam ut k8sqheonganit, ne seahhaman, kah kenishkeh kuhhog nashpe kittinnukontunkanog neg kezheadcheg, kah kuppas8cheáhtoh kukkesukkodtumash; kah k8wohkukquohkom kukkodtum8mash: newaj kukkekómuwáhen en penuwohteáut, kah kutahanehtonteanut en wame wutohtimóinneat.
E.Eze.22.4: Thou art become guilty in thy blood that thou hast shed; and hast defiled thyself in thine idols which thou hast made; and thou hast caused thy days to draw near, and art come even unto thy years: therefore have I made thee a reproach unto the heathen, and a mocking to all countries.

α.Eze.22.5 Yeug paswopitcheg, kah yeug na8sukonkqueaneg, nag piṣh kutahanehtunkquog, kummatchewésinneat, kah m8m8sqhittinat.
E.Eze.22.5: Those that be near, and those that be far from thee, shall mock thee, which art infamous and much vexed.

α.Eze.22.6 Kusseh, Israelle sontimóog, nishnoh pasuk ut kuhhogkat, nean menuhkésit, seáhhamun wusqueheunk.
E.Eze.22.6: Behold, the princes of Israel, every one were in thee to their power to shed blood.

α.Eze.22.7 Ut kuhhogkat mat tohhentupantam8og wut8shin kah wutohkasin: ut kenashomut sunukkutchahwhaog penuwohteuh, ut kuhhogkat m8mosqheaog touesoh kah sekousq.
E.Eze.22.7: In thee have they set light by father and mother: in the midst of thee have they dealt by oppression with the stranger: in thee have they vexed the fatherless and the widow.

α.Eze.22.8 Kussekeneam n8neetupanatam8mash, kenishketeoh nus-Sabbathomaṣh.
E.Eze.22.8: Thou hast despised mine holy things, and hast profaned my sabbaths.

α.Eze.22.9 Ut kuhhogkat nawhutche unaunchemoog nushúhkonat: kah ut kuhhogkat mahchip8og woskeche wadchuash: ut kenashomut nishkeneunkquok usseog.
E.Eze.22.9: In thee are men that carry tales to shed blood: and in thee they eat upon the mountains: in the midst of thee they commit lewdness.

α.Eze.22.10 Ut kuhhogkat wôshwunumwog upposkissuonk 8sh8oh: ut kuhhogkat weehpummaog sohh8tanitche.
E.Eze.22.10: In thee have they discovered their fathers' nakedness: in thee have they humbled her that was set apart for pollution.

α.Eze.22.11 Kah pasuk ussu ne nishkeneunkquok ut weetatteamungoh mittamwussit, kah onkatuk matche nishkheau naumatue wuttaunoh kah onkatuk ut kuhhogkat nishkheau weetompasu 8shoh wuttaunoh.
E.Eze.22.11: And one hath committed abomination with his neighbour's wife; and another hath lewdly defiled his daughter in law; and another in thee hath humbled his sister, his father's daughter.

α.Eze.22.12 Ut kuhhogkat onkquatunkaṣh neemunnumwog nushehteonat: keneemunum ontsauohteaonk kah k8chiin, kah kenehnehteae wutchi ketatteamung nashpe mukkinnuwaonk, kah k8wanánumeh wussin Lord Jehovah.
E.Eze.22.12: In thee have they taken gifts to shed blood; thou hast taken usury and increase, and thou hast greedily gained of thy neighbours by extortion, and hast forgotten me, saith the Lord GOD.

α.Eze.22.13 Kusseh, newaj ponkinnitchwhe wutche matta kussampwe wutayeuonk, kah musqueheonk ne nashómut.
E.Eze.22.13: Behold, therefore I have smitten mine hand at thy dishonest gain which thou hast made, and at thy blood which hath been in the midst of thee.

α.Eze.22.14 Sun woh kuttah wutt8antam88 kah sun woh kenutchegash menuhkiyeuash ne kesukok woh wéoggehhenon? nen Jehovah nussin, kah nutussen.
E.Eze.22.14: Can thine heart endure, or can thine hands be strong, in the days that I shall deal with thee? I the LORD have spoken it, and will do it.

α.Eze.22.15 Kah kusseawhush kenugke penuwohteaut, kah kenanwiyeuáhesh ut wutohtimóinneat, kah nummohtupanum kenishkeneunkquodt8m wutch kuhhogkat.
E.Eze.22.15: And I will scatter thee among the heathen, and disperse thee in the countries, and will consume thy filthiness out of thee.

α.Eze.22.16 Kah piṣh kenemunum kutohtoonk ut kuhhogkat, ut anaquabhettit penuwohteaog, kah piṣh k8wahteoh nen Jehovah.
E.Eze.22.16: And thou shalt take thine inheritance in thyself in the sight of the heathen, and thou shalt know that I am the LORD.

α.Eze.22.17 Kah wuttinn8waonk Jehovah nuppeyaonuk kah n8wau,
E.Eze.22.17: And the word of the LORD came unto me, saying,

α.Eze.22.18 Wosketompae wunnaumoniin, wek Israel sekuppaseganu8 ut nuhhogkat; nag wame, brasseu8og, kah tinnu8og, kah missehchuogk88og, kah mahmuttattag88og, ut nashaue sábasseganit: neg segkuppásum8e silvereu8og. 
E.Eze.22.18: Son of man, the house of Israel is to me become dross: all they are brass, and tin, and iron, and lead, in the midst of the furnace; they are even the dross of silver.

α.Eze.22.19 Newutche yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, newutche wame kussegkuppaségan[u]8mw8, kusseh, newutche kummukkinunumw8 nashaue Jerusalem.
E.Eze.22.19: Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Because ye are all become dross, behold, therefore I will gather you into the midst of Jerusalem.

α.Eze.22.20 Neane mukkinnumwog silver & brasse, kah missehchuog kah mâmuttattag, kah tin, ut nashaue sabassum8onganit p8tauontamunat n8teau sâbâsumunat: ne kittinn[e] mounununeau ut nummusquantam8onganit, kah ut nutchenauausuonganit, kah na kenukkonanunea[u] kah kesabaswunumw8.
E.Eze.22.20: As they gather silver, and brass, and iron, and lead, and tin, into the midst of the furnace, to blow the fire upon it, to melt it; so will I gather you in mine anger and in my fury, and I will leave you there, and melt you.

α.Eze.22.21 Nux kummàununumw8, kah kupp8tauónunumw8 ut nummusquantamwe n8taut, kah piṣh kussabásimw8 ut nashauwu.
E.Eze.22.21: Yea, I will gather you, and blow upon you in the fire of my wrath, and ye shall be melted in the midst therof.

α.Eze.22.22 Neane silver sabasumuk ut nashaue sabasum8onganit, ne piṣh kuttinne sabásinneau na$ut nashaue, kah piṣh k8wahteomw8 nen Lord, sokenittauunóg nummusquanittam8onk.
E.Eze.22.22: As silver is melted in the midst of the furnace, so shall ye be melted in the midst thereof; and ye shall know that I the LORD have poured out my fury upon you.

α.Eze.22.23 Kah wuttinn8waonk Jehovah nuppeyaonuk n8wau,
E.Eze.22.23: And the word of the LORD came unto me, saying,

α.Eze.22.24 Wosketompae wunnaumoniin, noh us, ken ohke matta pahkesean, kah matta sokanonamean musquantamwe kesukodtut.
E.Eze.22.24: Son of man, say unto her, Thou art the land that is not cleansed, nor rained upon in the day of indignation.

α.Eze.22.25 Ukquoshodtumwaénúmoh wunass8muwauh ut wunnashomut, onatuh mishont8wae qunnonuut nehnehteapwut ne tohqunuk: nag mahchippoog keteahogkôunoh: nag nemunumwog nompak8unash kah mashôadtikish, nag ayeuwaog monaoh sekousquoh ut wunnashaum8óut.
E.Eze.22.25: There is a conspiracy of her prophets in the midst thereof, like a roaring lion ravening the prey; they have devoured souls; they have taken the treasure and precious things; they have made her many widows in the midst thereof.

α.Eze.22.26 Wussephausuénúmoh chekeeu[n]éhheoog nuttinnaumatuonk, nag nishketeauog n8neetupanatameumash: matta penowehheauóog waneetupanatamunutcheh, kah matcheseinitcheh, kah matta nahtitteauoog penowomai nashaue matta pohkán8g kah pohkag, adtahtóog wuskesuk8oash wutch nussabath8mut, kah nummatchetupanatamwahit nag kenugku.
E.Eze.22.26: Her priests have violated my law, and have profaned mine holy things: they have put no difference between the holy and profane, neither have they shewed difference between the unclean and the clean, and have hid their eyes from my sabbaths, and I am profaned among them.

α.Eze.22.27 Wussontimomoh ut nanashauwu tatupeu8oh mugquoshimut nehnehteap8og ne tohqunáhettiche, nushuhkonat, pagwanónat keteahogkôunog, ahtauunat matta sampwe wutcháyeuonk.
E.Eze.22.27: Her princes in the midst thereof are like wolves ravening the prey, to shed blood, and to destroy souls, to get dishonest gain.

α.Eze.22.28 Kah ukquoshodtumwaénúmoh nah wussiss8nouh mat wuttuttipadtaus8e man8nskoh, namohettit tahn8cheyeu8uk, quoshodtumauáhettit pann8waongash, n8wahettit, y[e]u wussin Lord Manit, Lord matta ân8wog.
E.Eze.22.28: And her prophets have daubed them with untempered morter, seeing vanity, and divining lies unto them, saying, Thus saith the Lord GOD, when the LORD hath not spoken.

α.Eze.22.29 Ohke missinninnúog sunukkuhchuhh8waog, kah mukk8kinnuwaog, kah m8m8sqheaog matchekuoh, kah quenahukqunitcheh: nux sunukkutchahwâog pen8wohteuh, mat sampweusseae.
E.Eze.22.29: The people of the land have used oppression, and exercised robbery, and have vexed the poor and needy: yea, they have oppressed the stranger wrongfully.

α.Eze.22.30 Kah nunnatinneáhwhomp wosketomp ut kenugke nagoh, noh woh onchenútunk, kah neepauit touwutchashaáeu neutunkanit ut anaquabeh wutche ohke, matta woh nuppagwatau8unat: qut matta howan námheuh.
E.Eze.22.30: And I sought for a man among them, that should make up the hedge, and stand in the gap before me for the land, that I should not destroy it: but I found none.

α.Eze.22.31 Newaj sokanumauog nummusquantam8onk, nag nummahchukkuswoog nashpe n8tae nummusquantam8onk, nehenwonche ummay nutonkquatauoog ut uppuhkuk8óut, wussin Lord Jehovah.
E.Eze.22.31: Therefore have I poured out mine indignation upon them; I have consumed them with the fire of my wrath: their own way have I recompensed upon their heads, saith the Lord GOD.

α.Eze.23.1 WUttinn8waonk Lord, wonk nuppeyaonuk n8wau,
E.Eze.23.1: The word of the LORD came again unto me, saying,

α.Eze.23.2 Wosketompae wunnaumoniin, na neesuog mittamwussissog wuttaunoh pasuk wutokasin.
E.Eze.23.2: Son of man, there were two women, the daughters of one mother:

α.Eze.23.3 Kah nag manissquaósuog ut Egypt, mánisquaosuog nunksqahettit: na wohpa[n]agon88ash sunukkuhkomunash, kah na sukquhkomwog uppeenompae sogkodtunganooash.
E.Eze.23.3: And they committed whoredoms in Egypt; they committed whoredoms in their youth: there were their breasts pressed, and there they bruised the teats of their virginity.

α.Eze.23.4 Kah ne ahenit, Aholah mohtomegit, kah Aholibah weetompasu: kah nag n8tiheinneapanneg, kah wunnaumoniyeuog kah wuttaunuog: yeu wutosuwesineau: Samaria ne Aholah, kah Jerusalem Aholibah.
E.Eze.23.4: And the names of them were Aholah the elder, and Aholibah her sister: and they were mine, and they bare sons and daughters. Thus were their names; Samaria is Aholah, and Jerusalem Aholibah.

α.Eze.23.5 Kah Aholah manissquoasu wadtiheeyon kah wussaume womonau womononcheh, Assyriansoh wetatteamungan8oh:
E.Eze.23.5: And Aholah played the harlot when she was mine; and she doted on her lovers, on the Assyrians her neighbours,

α.Eze.23.6 Neg 8noashiacheg, mugquompaog, kah nananuwacheg, wame nag kohkôdtanumutcheg nunkompaog, horsmanog nayeumukqutcheg horsesoh.
E.Eze.23.6: Which were clothed with blue, captains and rulers, all of them desirable young men, horsemen riding upon horses.

α.Eze.23.7 Yeu kuttinne nag manissquaósineau, nag wame pepenauutcheg Assyria, kah wame neh womononcheh, nashpe wame wuttinnukontunkanouh nishkheau wuhhogkuh.
E.Eze.23.7: Thus she committed her whoredoms with them, with all them that were the chosen men of Assyria, and with all on whom she doted: with all their idols she defiled herself.

α.Eze.23.8 Kah matta ahqueteau8 ummanissquaôsuongash nish wadtunkupash Egypt, newutche nunksquainit 8wehpam8opuh, kah nag puppukittahhamwog uppenompae sogkodtungash, kah sokenumauouh ummanissquaôsuongan8oash.
E.Eze.23.8: Neither left she her whoredoms brought from Egypt: for in her youth they lay with her, and they bruised the breasts of her virginity, and poured their whoredom upon her.

α.Eze.23.9 N[è]waj ponog en wunnutchegan8out womononcheh, en wunnutchegan8out Assyriansog, neh wussaum8womononcheh.
E.Eze.23.9: Wherefore I have delivered her into the hand of her lovers, into the hand of the Assyrians, upon whom she doted.

α.Eze.23.10 Yeug poshkinnumwog ukkóussuonk, nag neemunaog wunnaumonauh, kah wuttaun8oh, kah nah wunnaumonauh, kah wuttaun8oh, kah nah wunnushouh nashpe togkodteg: noh woweenomau ut kenugke mittamwossissehtu, newutche wuttinheouh wussittumoonk.
E.Eze.23.10: These discovered her nakedness: they took her sons and her daughters, and slew her with the sword: and she became famous among women; for they had executed judgment upon her.

α.Eze.23.11 Kah weetompasu Aholibah yeu namunit, m8cheke nishkeneunkqussu ut wasaume womononcheh, onk nagum: kah anue manissquaosu onk neh weetompasu yean manissquaosinit.
E.Eze.23.11: And when her sister Aholibah saw this, she was more corrupt in her inordinate love than she, and in her whoredoms more than her sister in her whoredoms.

α.Eze.23.12 Wuss[a]ume womonau Assyriansoh weetatteamungoh, mugquompaog kah nananuacheg, muttae wunhogk8unau, horsmensog nayeumukqutcheg horsesoh, wame nag kohkodtanumutcheg nunkompaog.
E.Eze.23.12: She doted upon the Assyrians her neighbours, captains and rulers clothed most gorgeously, horsemen riding upon horses, all of them desirable young men.

α.Eze.23.13 Neit nunnauop neh nishkhet, nag ne wunnaneeswe usseneau.
E.Eze.23.13: Then I saw that she was defiled, that they took both one way,

α.Eze.23.14 Kah noh nano mishehteou wunnanwun8dsquaôsuonk: newutche noh nauont wosketompae nunnukontunkoh ut sussippenutunkan, Caldeanse nunnukontunkanog, musque nukontoasuog.
E.Eze.23.14: And that she increased her whoredoms: for when she saw men pourtrayed upon the wall, the images of the Chaldeans pourtrayed with vermilion,

α.Eze.23.15 Puttukquobpussuog ut musseganit, muttae wunnegane adtissosik ut uppuhkuk8out, wame sontimoog moninneauonat, ne anussehettit Babiloniansog ut Caldea, wunnetue ohkeyeu.
E.Eze.23.15: Girded with girdles upon their loins, exceeding in dyed attire upon their heads, all of them princes to look to, after the manner of the Babylonians of Chaldea, the land of their nativity:

α.Eze.23.16 Kah quenau neh nauont ut wuskesukqut, ummuttae womonuh, kah ann8nau ann8naenuh en Caldea.
E.Eze.23.16: And as soon as she saw them with her eyes, she doted upon them, and sent messengers unto them into Chaldea.

α.Eze.23.17 Kah Babyloniansog uppeyaounouh en womonittue appinneat, kah neh wunnushkheouh nashpe ummanssquaosuonganooash, kah noh nishkheop nashpe nagoh, kah wuttah wussekeneauuh.
E.Eze.23.17: And the Babylonians came to her into the bed of love, and they defiled her with their whoredom, and she was polluted with them, and her mind was alienated from them.

α.Eze.23.18 Neit wahteauwahuau ummanssquaausuongash, kah upposkissuonk: neit nuttah wussekeneauuh onatuh nuttah sekeneauomp wetompasu.
E.Eze.23.18: So she discovered her whoredoms, and discovered her nakedness: then my mind was alienated from her, like as my mind was alienated from her sister.

α.Eze.23.19 Qut onch mishehteau ummanissquaôsuongash, mehquontog wunnunksquae kesukodtash, manssquaôsit ut ohkit Egypt.
E.Eze.23.19: Yet she multiplied her whoredoms, in calling to remembrance the days of her youth, wherein she had played the harlot in the land of Egypt.

α.Eze.23.20 Newutche muttae womonau wunnanwun8dsquaenum8h, neg 8weyaus8 tatuppeyeuuk assese weyausut kah ne sohwheetunkqut tatuppeyeu8 ne sohham8m8uk wutch horsesut.
E.Eze.23.20: For she doted upon their paramours, whose flesh is as the flesh of asses, and whose issue is like the issue of horses.

α.Eze.23.21 Yeu kittinne mehquontamun k8skenue nishkeneunkquodt8m: Egyptiansog papuhkehthammohettit kussogkodtungash, wutche k8skenue sogkodtungash.
E.Eze.23.21: Thus thou calledst to remembrance the lewdness of thy youth, in bruising thy teats by the Egyptians for the paps of thy youth.

α.Eze.23.22 Newutche woi Aholibah yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, kutayeuhkonittue tahshinnumoush womonadtcheg, neg sekeneauadtcheg, k[a]h kutayeuhkonittue kuppaudtauunununk waeenu. 
E.Eze.23.22: Therefore, O Aholibah, thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I will raise up thy lovers against thee, from whom thy mind is alienated, and I will bring them against thee on every side;

α.Eze.23.23 Babyloniansog, kah wame Caldeansog Pekod kah Shoa, kah Koa, wame Assyriansog weeche nagoh, wame nag kohkodtanumitcheg nunkompaog, mugquompaog sontimoog nag wáme nayeumukqutcheg horsesoh.
E.Eze.23.23: The Babylonians, and all the Chaldeans, Pekod, and Shoa, and Koa, and all the Assyrians with them: all of them desirable young men, captains and rulers, great lords and renowned, all of them riding upon horses.

α.Eze.23.24 Kah nag pish kutayeuuhkone kuppeyaonukquog nashpe chariotsash wagonsash kah wheelash, kah weeche m8chequshacheg, neg kutayeuhkonukquog nashpe Buckler kah ogquneg kah helmet waeenu, kah nupponamauoog wussittumoonk anaquabhettit, kah nag pish kuttinne wussumukquog neaunak 8sittum8ongan8.
E.Eze.23.24: And they shall come against thee with chariots, wagons, and wheels, and with an assembly of people, which shall set against thee buckler and shield and helmet round about: and I will set judgment before them, and they shall judge thee according to their judgments.

α.Eze.23.25 Kah kutayeuhkonittue ponamoush numm8sitteam8onk, kah nag piṣh kutchenauausue unnehikquog: nag piṣh amaunumwog kutchân kah kuhtauogwash, kah kutashqshontómog piṣh penushaog nashpe togkodteg: piṣh tohqunnoog kenaumonuh kah kuttaunoh, kutashqshontomog piṣh mahchekissuog n8taut.
E.Eze.23.25: And I will set my jealousy against thee, and they shall deal furiously with thee: they shall take away thy nose and thine ears; and thy remnant shall fall by the sword: they shall take thy sons and thy daughters; and thy residue shall be devoured by the fire.

α.Eze.23.26 Nag piṣh wonk kupposhkinukquog, kah piṣh amaunaog k8ne nompakouunoh.
E.Eze.23.26: They shall also strip thee out of thy clothes, and take away thy fair jewels.

α.Eze.23.27 Yeu nuttinne wohkukquoshitteauun kenishkeneunkqussuonk, kah kenanwun8dsquaôsuongash niṣh wadtauaniṣh Egypte ohkeit: newaj piṣh matta tashinnumauóad kuskesukquash, kah matta piṣh wonk kummequontam8h Egypt.
E.Eze.23.27: Thus will I make thy lewdness to cease from thee, and thy whoredom brought from the land of Egypt: so that thou shalt not lift up thine eyes unto them, nor remember Egypt any more.

α.Eze.23.28 Newutche yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, kusseh, kupponsh wunnutchegan8out nag sekenauadcheg, ut wunnutchegan8out nag jishánumadcheg.
E.Eze.23.28: For thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I will deliver thee into the hand of them whom thou hatest, into the hand of them from whom thy mind is alienated:

α.Eze.23.29 Kah nag piṣh kussekeneunk8e unnéhukquog, kah nag piṣh amaunumwog wame kutanakausuonk, kah piṣh kupposhke nukkonukquog, kah m8sesue kah kenanwun8dsquaausue poskissuonk piṣh wahsheau, naneeswe kenishkeneunkqussuonk kah kenanwun8dsquaôsuonk.
E.Eze.23.29: And they shall deal with thee hatefully, and shall take away all thy labour, and shall leave thee naked and bare: and the nakedness of thy whoredoms shall be discovered, both thy lewdness and thy whoredoms.

α.Eze.23.30 Yeush kuttinhenash, newutche nauwun8dsquaosue kutasuhkau penuwohteaog kah newutche ken kenishkhet nashpe wuttinnukontonkan8.
E.Eze.23.30: I will do these things unto thee, because thou hast gone a whoring after the heathen, and because thou art polluted with their idols.

α.Eze.23.31 Kuppomusham ummayit keetompas, newaj 8tattamwaitch nupponam kenutcheganit,
E.Eze.23.31: Thou hast walked in the way of thy sister; therefore will I give her cup into thine hand.

α.Eze.23.32 Yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, piṣh k8tattam 8tattamwaitch ketompas monóiyeu, k[a]h mishe, piṣh múshanánumwe ôóntukonit, kah áhanehtoadt, mishummeechummu.
E.Eze.23.32: Thus saith the Lord GOD; Thou shalt drink of thy sister's cup deep and large: thou shalt be laughed to scorn and had in derision; it containeth much.

α.Eze.23.33 Piṣh kenumwabehtunk kogkeussippam8onk kah neuantamoonk, nashpe chepshae & touishe wuttattamwaitch, nashpe 8tattamwaitch Samaria ketompas.
E.Eze.23.33: Thou shalt be filled with drunkenness and sorrow, with the cup of astonishment and desolation, with the cup of thy sister Samaria.

α.Eze.23.34 Piṣh k8tattam, kah ken8nóntamun, kah piṣh kussohquanum sukquishquash, kah piṣh kuppohqunum nehenwonche kussogkatunkash: newutche nussin, wussin Lord Jehovah.
E.Eze.23.34: Thou shalt even drink it and suck it out, and thou shalt break the sherds thereof, and pluck off thine own breasts: for I have spoken it, saith the Lord GOD.

α.Eze.23.35 Newutche yeu wussin Lord Jehvoah, newutche k8wanánumeh, kah kuppisquanit kuttinóhkonéh, newutche kenunnush ken wonk kenishkeneunkqussuonk, kah kenanwun8dsquaôsuongash
E.Eze.23.35: Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Because thou hast forgotten me, and cast me behind thy back, therefore bear thou also thy lewdness and thy whoredoms.

α.Eze.23.36 Jehovah nano nuttinuk, wosketompae wunnaumoniin, sun woh k8sum Aholah kah Aholibah? nux, nag wahteauwah wunnishkeneunkquodt8m8ash.
E.Eze.23.36: The LORD said moreover unto me; Son of man, wilt thou judge Aholah and Aholibah? yea, declare unto them their abominations;

α.Eze.23.37 Nag mamuss[u]og, kah musqueheonganu8 wunnutcheganooash, wuttinnukontunkanóuh manishsquaôsuog; kah wonk wunnaumonáoh neh neekitteihetticheh, uppannupwusháhtauóuh, mahchukuswonat.
E.Eze.23.37: That they have committed adultery, and blood is in their hands, and with their idols have they committed adultery, and have also caused their sons, whom they bare unto me, to pass for them through the fire, to devour them.

α.Eze.23.38 Nano yeu nuttinhikquneau, nag nishketeauog nus-sanctuaryum, ne nan kesukok, kah nishketeauog nus-sabattomash
E.Eze.23.38: Moreover this they have done unto me: they have defiled my sanctuary in the same day, and have profaned my sabbaths.

α.Eze.23.39 Newutche nag nahtauáhettit wunneechanóuh wuttinnúkontunkanouh, neit nenan kesukok petutteaog nus-sanctuariumut, kah wunnishketeauuneau, kah kusseh, yeu wutusseneau ut nashaue nekit.
E.Eze.23.39: For when they had slain their children to their idols, then they came the same day into my sanctuary to profane it; and, lo, thus have they done in the midst of mine house.

α.Eze.23.40 Kah nano k[e]negont8wom8 wosketompaog wutch noadtut, nnoh ánann8nit ann8náen, kah kusseh, p[e]yaog, uttiyeug waj kutchessumweaneg, kuttânogkem, kah k8nhogk8unam.
E.Eze.23.40: And furthermore, that ye have sent for men to come from far, unto whom a messenger was sent; and, lo, they came: for whom thou didst wash thyself, paintedst thy eyes, and deckedst thyself with ornaments,

α.Eze.23.41 Kah kukquenap wunne appin, kah table quagwoshwunausu anaquohtag, nequenohtaúan n8weetemungquott8m kah nuppummeum.
E.Eze.23.41: And satest upon a stately bed, and a table prepared before it, whereupon thou hast set mine incense and mine oil.

α.Eze.23.42 Kah 8wadtauatonkqussuongan8 mataánukeg áanámussi[t]cheg 8weetomukquoh, kah ut kenugke ununashkétompáut pas8aog Sabeansoh wutch touohkomukqut, neg káhtippittenapissitcheg, kah wunnegane chetuhquabeash ut uppuhkuk8out.
E.Eze.23.42: And a voice of a multitude being at ease was with her: and with the men of the common sort were brought Sabeans from the wilderness, which put bracelets upon their hands, and beautiful crowns upon their heads.

α.Eze.23.43 Neit nuttinomp nukkóne manissquaausuen, sun yeuyeu nag kummanisquaónittimw8?
E.Eze.23.43: Then said I unto her that was old in adulteries, Will they now commit whoredoms with her, and she with them?

α.Eze.23.44 Qut nag uppetukauouh, wutogque petukauouh nanwun8dsquaausuénuut: ne[|]wuttinne petukauoneau Aholahoh kah Aholibahhoh neg nishkeneunkque mittamwossissog.
E.Eze.23.44: Yet they went in unto her, as they go in unto a woman that playeth the harlot: so went they in unto Aholah and unto Aholibah, the lewd women.

α.Eze.23.45 Kah sampweusseaenuog piṣh náh wuttinne wussumouh manishsquaósuenuut, kah nushehteauttumwossissut, newutche nag manissquaausuenuog, kah musqueheonganú8 ut wunnutchegan8óut.
E.Eze.23.45: And the righteous men, they shall judge them after the manner of adulteresses, and after the manner of women that shed blood; because they are adulteresses, and blood is in their hands.

α.Eze.23.46 Newutche yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, nukkuhkuhqunumau mataánutcheh, kah neg nummagununk ontashónat kah matchéheónaóut.
E.Eze.23.46: For thus saith the Lord GOD; I will bring up a company upon them, and will give them to be removed and spoiled.

α.Eze.23.47 Kah mataánutcheh piṣh ukqussukquantahwhouh, kah uppaguanuh nashpe wuttogkodteganóash: nag piṣh nushaog wunnaumonauh kah wuttaun8oh, kah chikohsumwog weetuóush ut n8taut.
E.Eze.23.47: And the company shall stone them with stones, and dispatch them with their swords; they shall slay their sons and their daughters, and burn up their houses with fire.

α.Eze.23.48 Yeu nuttinne wohkukquoshitteauun nishkeneunkqussuonk wutch ohkeit, onk woh wame mittamwussissog kuhk8tomauóog matta usseinat neaunak kenishkeneunkquodt8m.
E.Eze.23.48: Thus will I cause lewdness to cease out of the land, that all women may be taught not to do after your lewdness.

α.Eze.23.49 Kah nag piṣh kutonkquatunkquog wutch kenishkeneunkquodt8m kah kukkenunnumw8 kittinnukontunkanu matcheseonganooaṣh, kah piṣh k8wahteomw8 nen Lord Jehovah.
E.Eze.23.49: And they shall recompense your lewdness upon you, and ye shall bear the sins of your idols: and ye shall know that I am the Lord GOD.

α.Eze.24.1 WOnk pask8gun adtahshe kodtum8g, piogqussit nepauz, kah piogkukquinohhog, wuttinn8waonk Lord nuppeyaonuk, n8wau,
E.Eze.24.1: Again in the ninth year, in the tenth month, in the tenth day of the month, the word of the LORD came unto me, saying,

α.Eze.24.2 Wosketompae wunnaumoniin, wussukwhush neás8wesik nenan kesuk: Babylone ketass8t ayeuuhkontam Jerusalem ne nan kesukok.
E.Eze.24.2: Son of man, write thee the name of the day, even of this same day: the king of Babylon set himself against Jerusalem this same day.

α.Eze.24.3 Kah unn8wash kukkinneasuonk en cheketamukkomukqut, kah nag us, yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, wunash ahkuhk, wunash, kah wonk sokenipaṣh.
E.Eze.24.3: And utter a parable unto the rebellious house, and say unto them, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Set on a pot, set it on, and also pour water into it:

α.Eze.24.4 Mukkinush kokadchuhkiyeuash, nishnoh wunne kodchuhki, meehquau, kah uhpegq, numwohtoush wanegukish wushkonash.
E.Eze.24.4: Gather the pieces thereof into it, even every good piece, the thigh, and the shoulder; fill it with the choice bones.

α.Eze.24.5 Nemun wanegik ut flockut, kah wonk chikkossish wuskonash ut agwu, kah wunne wussish, kah wuttaj wuskonash naut.
E.Eze.24.5: Take the choice of the flock, and burn also the bones under it, and make it boil well, and let them seethe the bones of it therein.

α.Eze.24.6 Newaj yeu n8wadt Lord God, missi wutonkapunaonk nushéhteáe keitotan, ne áhkuk uppéhtom ne ohtag, kah uppéhtom matta sohhamunóg, kôkodchuhku sohwhunush, ut penuhshúhkitch tanohtôadtuonk.
E.Eze.24.6: Wherefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Woe to the bloody city, to the pot whose scum is therein, and whose scum is not gone out of it! bring it out piece by piece; let no lot fall upon it.

α.Eze.24.7 Newutche 8sqheonk wunnashom ut ohteau, ukquenahtauun woskechepiskq, matta wussokenumun ohkeit upputtogguhhamunat nashpe puppissi.
E.Eze.24.7: For her blood is in the midst of her; she set it upon the top of a rock; she poured it not upon the ground, to cover it with dust;

α.Eze.24.8 Onk woh kuhkuhqueáhto chenauausuonk, ann8tonat: nupponumau wusqueheonk woskeche qussukquanit, matta woh onkwhôsinóut.
E.Eze.24.8: That it might cause fury to come up to take vengeance; I have set her blood upon the top of a rock, that it should not be covered.

α.Eze.24.9 Newaj yeu n8wadt Lord Jehovah, missi wuto[n]kapunaonk nushéhteae keitotan, nummishteoh áhtoush wutche n8tau.
E.Eze.24.9: Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Woe to the bloody city! I will even make the pile for fire great.

α.Eze.24.10 Numwonkquodtau8k wuttuhqunash, pashqunánum8k n8teau, mahchekussum8k weyáus, kah wunne spiceahham8k, kah wuskonash chikohtaj.
E.Eze.24.10: Heap on wood, kindle the fire, consume the flesh, and spice it well, and let the bones be burned.

α.Eze.24.11 Neit mahchaihto8k ut mokkossáhtu, onk woh ne brasse kussopitteau, kah woh chikohteau, kah woh ne adt nishkeneunkquok sabohteau, onk woh uppéhtom woh mahtutteau.
E.Eze.24.11: Then set it empty upon the coals thereof, that the brass of it may be hot, and may burn, and that the filthiness of it may be molten in it, that the scum of it may be consumed.

α.Eze.24.12 Sauunau wuhhogkuh en pann8wonat, ummishe pehtom matta sohwehtunk8h: uppéhtom piṣh ohtano n8taut.
E.Eze.24.12: She hath wearied herself with lies, and her great scum went not forth out of her: her scum shall be in the fire.

α.Eze.24.13 Ut kenushkeneunkqussuonganit ne matcheseonk, newutche kuppa[h]kheṣh, qut mat kuppahkhenn8, matta piṣh wonk kuppahkhetteóh wutch kenishkeneunkqussuonganit, nô pajeh nummusquantamoonk appehtauwáhunon.
E.Eze.24.13: In thy filthiness is lewdness: because I have purged thee, and thou wast not purged, thou shalt not be purged from thy filthiness any more, till I have caused my fury to rest upon thee.

α.Eze.24.14 Nen Jehovah nussin, ne piṣh n$nih, kah piṣh nutussen, matta nukqushk8, kah matta n8wohquontam8h, kah matta nutaiuskoianatam8, neaunak kummayash, kah neaunak kutusseongaṣh, nag piṣh k8sumukquog wussin Lord Jehovah
E.Eze.24.14: I the LORD have spoken it: it shall come to pass, and I will do it; I will not go back, neither will I spare, neither will I repent; according to thy ways, and according to thy doings, shall they judge thee, saith the Lord GOD.

α.Eze.24.15 Wonk wuttinn8waonk Lord nuppeyaonuk, n8wau,
E.Eze.24.15: Also the word of the LORD came unto me, saying,

α.Eze.24.16 Wosketompae wunnaumoniin, kusseh, kutamaunumauṣh kuskesukque kodtantamoonk ut tatteaonganit, qut onch matta piṣh kummau8h, asuh kummaumatam8h, asuh kussippegwash piṣh pomitchuán8h.
E.Eze.24.16: Son of man, behold, I take away from thee the desire of thine eyes with a stroke: yet neither shalt thou mourn nor weep, neither shall thy tears run down.

α.Eze.24.17 Kutchithash, mauemuhkon nápukek, wuspinnoash, pehtoxinash, kah unkhom8hkon kussisset8naṣh, kah meech8hkon wosketompae petukqunneg.
E.Eze.24.17: Forbear to cry, make no mourning for the dead, bind the tire of thine head upon thee, and put on thy shoes upon thy feet, and cover not thy lips, and eat not the bread of men.

α.Eze.24.18 Neit nukkeket8hkau missinninnuog nompoaeu, kah wanonk88k nummittamwus nupp8, kah nutussep mohtompog neanann8sumuk.
E.Eze.24.18: So I spake unto the people in the morning: and at even my wife died; and I did in the morning as I was commanded.

α.Eze.24.19 Kah missinninnuog nuttinuk, sunnummatta kutussúmun toh yeush nuttinhikqunánonaṣh, ne kutussenat?
E.Eze.24.19: And the people said unto me, Wilt thou not tell us what these things are to us, that thou doest so?

α.Eze.24.20 Neit nag nunnamp8hamauoog wuttinn8waonk Jehovah nuppeyaonuk, n8wau,
E.Eze.24.20: Then I answered them, The word of the LORD came unto me, saying,

α.Eze.24.21 Ken8s wek Israel, yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, kusseh, nunnishketeouh nussanctuaryhum, k8neetue menuhkesuonk, kuskesukque kodtantamoonk, kah ne kukketeahogkou kodtummungkinneog, kah kenaumonunk kah kuttaunog neg sequnadcheg, nag piṣh penushaog nashpe togkodteg.
E.Eze.24.21: Speak unto the house of Israel, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I will profane my sanctuary, the excellency of your strength, the desire of your eyes, and that which your soul pitieth; and your sons and your daughters whom ye have left shall fall by the sword.

α.Eze.24.22 Kah piṣh kutussemw8 ne áse, matta piṣh kutunkham8mw8 kussisset8n8, kah matta kummech8w8 uppetukqunnegan8 wosketompaog.
E.Eze.24.22: And ye shall do as I have done: ye shall not cover your lips, nor eat the bread of men.

α.Eze.24.23 Kah kuppuhkukk88ash piṣh kuspissuash, kah kummoxin[ô]ash kusset8out, matta piṣh kummaumuttam8w8 asuh kummau8w8, qut piṣh kummahchumumw8 wutch kummatcheseonganóoash, kah kummauemomw8.
E.Eze.24.23: And your tires shall be upon your heads, and your shoes upon your feet: ye shall not mourn nor weep; but ye shall pine away for your iniquities, and mourn one toward another.

α.Eze.24.24 Yeu wuttin Ezekiel kukkinneasuonganúin en kuhhogkaout: neaunak wame ne ásit ne piṣh kutusseneau: kah yeu nnak piṣh k8wahteomw8 nen Lord Jehovah.
E.Eze.24.24: Thus Ezekiel is unto you a sign: according to all that he hath done shall ye do: and when this cometh, ye shall know that I am the Lord GOD.

α.Eze.24.25 Wonk wosketompae wunnaumoniin, sun woh mo nano ne kesukok amaunumauog ummenuhkesuongan8, wekontam8e wussohsumoonk, wuskesukque kodtantamoonk, kah ne ponamwéhettit wuttahhou, wunnaumonáuh kah wuttaun8oh.
E.Eze.24.25: Also, thou son of man, shall it not be in the day when I take from them their strength, the joy of their glory, the desire of their eyes, and that whereupon they set their minds, their sons and their daughters,

α.Eze.24.26 Neit noh pohquohhog ne kesukok, pish kuppeyaonuk, ken8tamwahikqunnaout ut kuhtauogut.
E.Eze.24.26: That he that escapeth in that day shall come unto thee, to cause thee to hear it with thine ears?

α.Eze.24.27 Ne kesukok kutt8n pish 8woshwunnumauun noh pohquohhumunutcheh, kah piṣh kukkeket8hkom, kah matta piṣh mat kukagkutt8, kah ken piṣh kukkinneasu ut nag wutch, kah nag pish wahteauog nen Jehovah.
E.Eze.24.27: In that day shall thy mouth be opened to him which is escaped, and thou shalt speak, and be no more dumb: and thou shalt be a sign unto them; and they shall know that I am the LORD.

α.Eze.25.1 WUttinn8waonk Jehovah nuppey[a]onuk, n8wau,
E.Eze.25.1: The word of the LORD came again unto me, saying,

α.Eze.25.2 Wosketompae wunnaumoniin, ayeuhkonittue ponamau kuskesuk Ammonitsog, kah nag ayeuhkonittue quoshoe missohhamau.
E.Eze.25.2: Son of man, set thy face against the Ammonites, and prophesy against them;

α.Eze.25.3 Kah us Ammonitsog, n8tam8k wuttinn8waonk Lord Jehovah, yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, newutche kutayeuu[h]konittue uttam nussanctuarium, ha, ha, nishketeomuk, kah ayeuhkonittue Israelle ohke tôuushik, kah ayeuhkonittue wek Judah masináhettit.
E.Eze.25.3: And say unto the Ammonites, Hear the word of the Lord GOD; Thus saith the Lord GOD; Because thou saidst, Aha, against my sanctuary, when it was profaned; and against the land of Israel, when it was desolate; and against the house of Judah, when they went into captivity;

α.Eze.25.4 Newutche kusseh, nummag kuhhog en wutchepwoiyeue wosketompahtu wutche ohtóonk, kah nag piṣh kupponamunkquog ummishe-komukquash, kah ayimwog wutayeuongan8 ut kuhhogkat: nag pish meechwog kummeechummuonk kah piṣh wuttattamwog kussogkodtunk. 
E.Eze.25.4: Behold, therefore I will deliver thee to the men of the east for a possession, and they shall set their palaces in thee, and make their dwellings in thee: they shall eat thy fruit, and they shall drink thy milk.

α.Eze.25.5 Kah nut-stablehteam Rabbah wutch camelsog, kah Ammonitsog, flockse appuonganaṣh, kah piṣh k8wahteomw8 nen Jehovah.
E.Eze.25.5: And I will make Rabbah a stable for camels, and the Ammonites a couching place for flocks: and ye shall know that I am the LORD.

α.Eze.25.6 Newutche yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, newutche kuppuhpunkinitchah, kah kuttehtéqussittassun, kah k8wekontamwutteahantamun, nashpe wame kutjishantamoonk ayeuhkonittue Israelle ohke.
E.Eze.25.6: For thus saith the Lord GOD; Because thou hast clapped thine hands, and stamped with the feet, and rejoiced in heart with all thy despite against the land of Israel;

α.Eze.25.7 Newutche kusseh, nussummagunum ut kuhhogkat nunnutcheg, kah nummag kuhhog wutche tohqunnumoonk en pen[ú]wohteaut, kah kuttummetahwhush wutch missinninnuut, kah kuppagwanehesh wutch wutohtimóinneat,: kenushish, kah piṣh k8wahteoh nen Je[k]ovah.
E.Eze.25.7: Behold, therefore I will stretch out mine hand upon thee, and will deliver thee for a spoil to the heathen; and I will cut thee off from the people, and I will cause thee to perish out of the countries: I will destroy thee; and thou shalt know that I am the LORD.

α.Eze.25.8 Yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, newutche Moab kah Seir, n8waog, kusseh, wek Judah ogqueneunkquodt wame penuwohteaut.
E.Eze.25.8: Thus saith the Lord GOD; Because that Moab and Seir do say, Behold, the house of Judah is like unto all the heathen;

α.Eze.25.9 Newutche kusseh, n8woshwunum wussissippoiyeum Moab wutch keitotanahtu, wutch wutohtanahtu ut wussissippoiyeumut, wutohtimoinnu sohsumoonk Bethjeshimoth, Baal-meon, kah Kirjathaim.
E.Eze.25.9: Therefore, behold, I will open the side of Moab from the cities, from his cities which are on his frontiers, the glory of the country, Bethjeshimoth, Baalmeon, and Kiriathaim,

α.Eze.25.10 En wutchepwoiyeue wosketompaut, weeche Ammonitsog kah nag nummagununk en ohtoonganit, onk woh Ammonitsog matta mehquanumoog ut kenugke wutohtimoinneahtu.
E.Eze.25.10: Unto the men of the east with the Ammonites, and will give them in possession, that the Ammonites may not be remembered among the nations.

α.Eze.25.11 Kah nuttinneh wussittumoongaṣh Moab, kah nag piṣh wahteauog nen Jehovah.
E.Eze.25.11: And I will execute judgments upon Moab; and they shall know that I am the LORD.

α.Eze.25.12 Yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, newutche Edom ayeuhkonittue unneheau wek Judah, ann8tauónat, kah mishe pannesu, kah nah wutann8tauoh.
E.Eze.25.12: Thus saith the Lord GOD; Because that Edom hath dealt against the house of Judah by taking vengeance, and hath greatly offended, and revenged himself upon them;

α.Eze.25.13 Newutche yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, wonk nussummagunumau nunnutcheg Edom, kah na 8ch tummetahwhon wosketomp kah puppinashim, kah nuttouwushitteauun wutch Teman, kah neg apitcheg Dedan, pish penushaog nashpe togkodteganit.
E.Eze.25.13: Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; I will also stretch out mine hand upon Edom, and will cut off man and beast from it; and I will make it desolate from Teman; and they of Dedan shall fall by the sword.

α.Eze.25.14 Kah nupponamau Edom nutann8taonk nashpe wunnutchegan8 nummissinninnúmog Israel: kah n[à]g piṣh unnehteauog Edom neaunak nummusquantam8onk, kah neaunak nutchenauausuonk, kah nag piṣh wahteauog nutann8taonk wussin Lord Jehovah.
E.Eze.25.14: And I will lay my vengeance upon Edom by the hand of my people Israel: and they shall do in Edom according to mine anger and according to my fury; and they shall know my vengeance, saith the Lord GOD.

α.Eze.25.15 Yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, newutche Philistiansog ann8tae usseog, kah sekeneáadtuwutteahaeu ann8t[á]og, p[a]gwatauunat, wutche nukkone sekeneaadtuonk.
E.Eze.25.15: Thus saith the Lord GOD; Because the Philistines have dealt by revenge, and have taken vengeance with a despiteful heart, to destroy it for the old hatred;

α.Eze.25.16 Newutche yeu wussin Jehovah, kusseh, nussummagunnumau nunnutcheg Philistiansog, kah nuttummetah cherithimsog, kah nuppaguan askqshoncheg ut kishke ketahannit.
E.Eze.25.16: Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I will stretch out mine hand upon the Philistines, and I will cut off the Cherethims, and destroy the remnant of the sea coast.

α.Eze.25.17 Kah nag nummishann8tae unnehheoog, nashpe chenau[á]usue aiuskontuongash, kah nag pish wahteauog nen Jehovah, nuhkinnumauog nutauann8taongan8
E.Eze.25.17: And I will execute great vengeance upon them with furious rebukes; and they shall know that I am the LORD, when I shall lay my vengeance upon them.

α.Eze.26.1 KAh n$nih nabonequttekodtumuk, nogquttukwunnohhog, wuttinn8waonk nuppeyaónuk n8wau.
E.Eze.26.1: And it came to pass in the eleventh year, in the first day of the month, that the word of the LORD came unto me, saying,

α.Eze.26.2 Wosketompae wunnaumoniin newutche Tyrus ayeuhkonittue uttam Jerusalem, ha ha, noh pohquetahwhâu, neh wadsquontamhettupoh, nissinninnuog noh quinnuppu en nuhhogkat, nen pish nunnumwameechum, noh táuussik.
E.Eze.26.2: Son of man, because that Tyrus hath said against Jerusalem, Aha, she is broken that was the gates of the people: she is turned unto me: I shall be replenished, now she is laid waste:

α.Eze.26.3 Newutche yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, kusseh nen kutayeuuhkonsh woi Tyrus, kah monatash wutohtimoneash kutayeuhkonittue kukkuhkuhqunumaush, nean keitoh wuttuk8moh kuhkuhqueheont.
E.Eze.26.3: Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I am against thee, O Tyrus, and will cause many nations to come up against thee, as the sea causeth his waves to come up.

α.Eze.26.4 Kah nag pish pagwodtauog Tyruse hassunnutunkash, kah pish pohquetahhamwog ukqunuhquikommukquaṣh, kah wonk nutchekhamau uppuppissiyeum, kah nutogqueh woskechepiskqut.
E.Eze.26.4: And they shall destroy the walls of Tyrus, and break down her towers: I will also scrape her dust from her, and make her like the top of a rock.

α.Eze.26.5 Ne piṣh ahhut sepaginit hashabpog: ut nashaue keitahhanit, newutche nussin n8wau Lord Jehovah, kah ne pish mukk8kinnumwonteamuneau wutohtimoinneunk.
E.Eze.26.5: It shall be a place for the spreading of nets in the midst of the sea: for I have spoken it, saith the Lord GOD: and it shall become a spoil to the nations.

α.Eze.26.6 Kah wuttauninneunk neg apitcheg ohteukkonit nag piṣh nushoog naṣhpe togkodteg, kah nag piṣh wahteauog nen Jehvoah.
E.Eze.26.6: And her daughters which are in the field shall be slain by the sword; and they shall know that I am the LORD.

α.Eze.26.7 Newutche yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, kusseh, nunnuhkenumau Tyrus, Nebuchadnezaroh Babylone ketass8t, ukketass8tam8m8uh ketass8tamwog, wutch nanummiyeu, weeche horseṣog, kah chariotsash, kah horsmanog, kah mataanukeg kah m8chequshatcheg.
E.Eze.26.7: For thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I will bring upon Tyrus Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, a king of kings, from the north, with horses, and with chariots, and with horsemen, and companies, and much people.

α.Eze.26.8 Noh piṣh nushau kuttaunoh apitcheg ohteuhkonit, nashpe togkodteg, kah noh pish kutayeuhkonittue k8wonkoh8sinuhkunk kah k8wadchuhkunk, kah pish kutayeuhkonitue tahshinumunk ogqunneg.
E.Eze.26.8: He shall slay with the sword thy daughters in the field: and he shall make a fort against thee, and cast a mount against thee, and lift up the buckler against thee.

α.Eze.26.9 Kah noh piṣh ayeuhkonittue ponamwontam kuthassuninnutunk mattompagwe auwohteaongash, kah nashpe wuttogkunkash pi[ṣ]h n8ketaham kukqunuhquikomukquash[.]
E.Eze.26.9: And he shall set engines of war against thy walls, and with his axes he shall break down thy towers.

α.Eze.26.10 Newutche muttaanutcheh wuthorsesumoh, uppuppissiyeum8 pish kupputtogguhhuk, kuthassunninnutunk pish nunnuksheau wadtauatonkqussehettit horsmanog kah wheelash, kah chariotsash, petutteadt k8squontamehtu, onatuh wosketompaog petutteahettit keitotanat, tauwutchabenehettit hassunneutunk.
E.Eze.26.10: By reason of the abundance of his horses their dust shall cover thee: thy walls shall shake at the noise of the horsemen, and of the wheels, and of the chariots, when he shall enter into thy gates, as men enter into a city wherein is made a breach.

α.Eze.26.11 Nashpe wuhkoss8oh wuthorsesumouh pish nag tahtashkuhkomwog wame kuttaumaogk8mash, noh pish nushau kummissinninnumoh nashpe togkodteg kah kummenuhkesue nôntôsuog, nag pish n8keog en ohkeit.
E.Eze.26.11: With the hoofs of his horses shall he tread down all thy streets: he shall slay thy people by the sword, and thy strong garrisons shall go down to the ground.

α.Eze.26.12 Kah nag pish mukk8kinnumwog k8wenauwetuongash kah tohqunnumwog kutanaqushae maumachiash, kah nag pish tauwutchahkomwog kuthassunninnutongash, kah pish matchehteauog kneekomukquash kah nag pish sepshitteauog kukqussukquanumash, kah kuttimberum, kah kuppuppissiyeum nashauwe nippekontu.
E.Eze.26.12: And they shall make a spoil of thy riches, and make a prey of thy merchandise: and they shall break down thy walls, and destroy thy pleasant houses: and they shall lay thy stones and thy timber and thy dust in the midst of the water.

α.Eze.26.13 Kah n8wohkukquoshitteóh kukket8hamae wadtauatonkqussuonk, kah kutharpsumwe wunnont8waongaṣh matta piṣh wonk n8tam8unaṣh.
E.Eze.26.13: And I will cause the noise of thy songs to cease; and the sound of thy harps shall be no more heard.

α.Eze.26.14 Kah kutogqhesh wanashquompsqut: ken piṣh ayeuongane adt sepaginit hashhab: matta piṣh wonk k8weekikkonitteóh, newutchen nen Jehovah nussim, wussin Lord Jehovah.
E.Eze.26.14: And I will make thee like the top of a rock: thou shalt be a place to spread nets upon; thou shalt be built no more: for I the LORD have spoken it, saith the Lord GOD.

α.Eze.26.15 Yeu wuttittamun Lord Jehovah, Tyrus, sunnummatta piṣh munnuhhanash nunnukshán8aṣh ut kuppenushonat, n8chumwehtahwhutcheg mauhettit, pagwanittuonk ohtag kenashómut.
E.Eze.26.15: Thus saith the Lord GOD to Tyrus; Shall not the isles shake at the sound of thy fall, when the wounded cry, when the slaughter is made in the midst of thee?

α.Eze.26.16 Neit wame kehtahhanne sontimóog piṣh n8keog wutch wutappuonganóut, kah piṣh amaunumwog wuttahs8tamwe hogk8wonganooaṣh, piṣh amaunumwog sussippunkquotukiṣh hogk8unit, kah nag piṣh hogquehheáog wuhhogkauh nunnukshaonk, pish appuog ohkeit, nag piṣh hahtôe nunnukshaog, kah piṣh kutchepshaónukquog.
E.Eze.26.16: Then all the princes of the sea shall come down from their thrones, and lay away their robes, and put off their broidered garments: they shall clothe themselves with trembling; they shall sit upon the ground, and shall tremble at every moment, and be astonished at thee.

α.Eze.26.17 Kah nag piṣh maumuttamwog wutche ken, kah piṣh kuttugquog, uttoh kittin pagwanittean, ken wadohkéhetteup ukkehthann8og, waeenódtumwe keitotan, ne manuhkogkup ut ketahhannit, nagum kah neg na wadohkitcheg, noh chepsháheont wame neh nâ payónutcheh.
E.Eze.26.17: And they shall take up a lamentation for thee, and say to thee, How art thou destroyed, that wast inhabited of seafaring men, the renowned city, which wast strong in the sea, she and her inhabitants, which cause their terror to be on all that haunt it!

α.Eze.26.18 Yeuyeu piṣh munnuhhanash nunnukshaaṣh, ut kukkesukkodtume penushaonganit, nux munnahhanaṣh ut keitahhanit pish wuttaméhpunóm8aṣh amaéan.
E.Eze.26.18: Now shall the isles tremble in the day of thy fall; yea, the isles that are in the sea shall be troubled at thy departure.

α.Eze.26.19 Newutche yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, tau8tánahkónunon, ogqueneunkquokish keitotanash nish matta wadohtúmukish, nuhkinnu[ma]úunon m8noagk, kah mishe nuppeash nuhkuhkongquean.
E.Eze.26.19: For thus saith the Lord GOD; When I shall make thee a desolate city, like the cities that are not inhabited; when I shall bring up the deep upon thee, and great waters shall cover thee;

α.Eze.26.20 N8kinunon, kenugke neg womussitcheg en passohtheganit, kenugke nukkône missinninnúog, kah ponumon wómuhkôagk, sepe tauushikish, kenugke neg womussitcheg en passohtheganit, onk woh matta k8tohtuónitteoh: kah wunóhtauon sohsumóonk, ut pomantam8e ohkeit.
E.Eze.26.20: When I shall bring thee down with them that descend into the pit, with the people of old time, and shall set thee in the low parts of the earth, in places desolate of old, with them that go down to the pit, that thou be not inhabited; and I shall set glory in the land of the living;

α.Eze.26.21 Kukquequenauánumwéhesh, kah matta piṣh wonk kutappéin: tohkônogque kenatinneáwhittean, qut matta piṣh wonk kenamhetteoh, wussin Lord Jehovah.
E.Eze.26.21: I will make thee a terror, and thou shalt be no more: though thou be sought for, yet shalt thou never be found again, saith the Lord GOD.

α.Eze.27.1 WUttinn8waonk Jehovah wonk nuppeyaonuk, n8wau,
E.Eze.27.1: The word of the LORD came again unto me, saying,

α.Eze.27.2 Yeuyeu ken wosketompae wunnaumoniin, maumuttam8wansh Tyrus.
E.Eze.27.2: Now, thou son of man, take up a lamentation for Tyrus;

α.Eze.27.3 Kah us Tyrus, woi ken apean ahhut petutteamuk kehtahhannit, ken missinninnue anaqushaen, wutche m8natash munnuhhanash, yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, woi Tyrus, ken kussip, neen pannuppeyeue n8neet.
E.Eze.27.3: And say unto Tyrus, O thou that art situate at the entry of the sea, which art a merchant of the people for many isles, Thus saith the Lord GOD; O Tyrus, thou hast said, I am of perfect beauty.

α.Eze.27.4 Kussissippôiyeumash ohtaash nôe kehtahhannit, k8weekitteaénuog pannuppéhteauog k8neetuonk.
E.Eze.27.4: Thy borders are in the midst of the seas, thy builders have perfected thy beauty.

α.Eze.27.5 Wame kukkuht8nogque pass8nogquash Senire k8w[á]eyeu8aṣh wuttinnaog Cedarṣoh wutch Lebanon, kussepaghunganehkuhtequhkunkk8óog.
E.Eze.27.5: They have made all thy ship boards of fir trees of Senir: they have taken cedars from Lebanon to make masts for thee.

α.Eze.27.6 Wuttúhhubkanéhteáog Bashane n8htimisseaṣh: Ashuritse chabpanukeg, nag ayimwog Ivorie kutappuongaṣh, wutch Chittimme munnahhanehtu.
E.Eze.27.6: Of the oaks of Bashan have they made thine oars; the company of the Ashurites have made thy benches of ivory, brought out of the isles of Chittim.

α.Eze.27.7 Wunhashabpónak wannikquontausik wutch Egypt, ne sepágenumop k8sepaghunkaninneat, 8nôag kah purple Elishae munnuhhanehtu, ne âgquanukquean.
E.Eze.27.7: Fine linen with broidered work from Egypt was that which thou spreadest forth to be thy sail; blue and purple from the isles of Elishah was that which covered thee.

α.Eze.27.8 Wadohkitcheg Zidon kah Arvad, neg k8ketáhhan8mog: k8waantam8mog woi Tyrus, neg ut kuhhogkat, neg sampsh[á]nukqueaneg.
E.Eze.27.8: The inhabitants of Zidon and Arvad were thy mariners: thy wise men, O Tyrus, that were in thee, were thy pilots.

α.Eze.27.9 Gebale kehchisog, kah 8waantam8moh, neg kuphogeg tônogágish, wame kehtahhanne kuht8nogquosh, kah 8ketahhan8moh, neg appuog ut kuhhogkat, auwohkonat kutanaquoshaongash.
E.Eze.27.9: The ancients of Gebal and the wise men thereof were in thee thy calkers: all the ships of the sea with their mariners were in thee to occupy thy merchandise.

α.Eze.27.10 Neg wutcháyeuog Persia, kah Lud, kah Phut, neg kutayeuteaénumog ut kukkenauwameonganit: nag wâóhshadtóog ut kuhhogkat ogqunnegash kah muhpuhkukqut ahóhtagish, nag wunnehteóog k8námpamukqussuonk.
E.Eze.27.10: They of Persia and of Lud and of Phut were in thine army, thy men of war: they hanged the shield and helmet in thee; they set forth thy comeliness.

α.Eze.27.11 Arvade wosketompaog, ut kukkenauwameonganit, appuog kuthassunnutonganit waéenu, kah Gammadimsog appuog kukqunuhquikuomukqut: nag wéenaáhshadtáog wutogqunnegan88ash ut kuthassunnútonganit, pannuppehteóog k8neetuonk.
E.Eze.27.11: The men of Arvad with thine army were upon thy walls round about, and the Gammadims were in thy towers: they hanged their shields upon thy walls round about; they have made thy beauty perfect.

α.Eze.27.12 Tarshish noh kutanaqusháenúmuneah, newutche mataáneuk weenauwetuongash: silver, misséhchuog, tin, kah máhmattattag wutánaqushoneau ut kukkodtauwompásuonganit.
E.Eze.27.12: Tarshish was thy merchant by reason of the multitude of all kind of riches; with silver, iron, tin, and lead, they traded in thy fairs.

α.Eze.27.13 Javan, Tubal, kah Meshek neg kutanaqushaénúmoh: nag anaqushaog wosketompoh, kah brasse wishquaṣh ut kukkodtauwompásuonganit.
E.Eze.27.13: Javan, Tubal, and Meshech, they were thy merchants: they traded the persons of men and vessels of brass in thy market.

α.Eze.27.14 Nag wekit Togarmah, anaqushaog ut ukkodtauwompásuonganit horsesoh, horsmenoh kah mulsoh.
E.Eze.27.14: They of the house of Togarmah traded in thy fairs with horses and horsemen and mules.

α.Eze.27.15 Dedane wosketompaog neg kutanaqushaenúmog, monatash munnohhanaṣh kenutchegane anaqushaenú8aṣh: nag kuppaudtunkquog mag8onk, Ivorie, kah Ebonie askonoh.
E.Eze.27.15: The men of Dedan were thy merchants; many isles were the merchandise of thine hand: they brought thee for a present horns of ivory and ebony.

α.Eze.27.16 Syria k8tanaqushaeneumuneuh, newutche monakiṣh kutanaqushae anakausuongaṣh, niṣh kezteauaniṣh: tâpwhaog ut kukkodtauwomásuonganit emerauldsaṣh, purple, kah wunnequontausue anakausuongaṣh, kah wunashhabponak, kah coral, kah Agate.
E.Eze.27.16: Syria was thy merchant by reason of the multitude of the wares of thy making: they occupied in thy fairs with emeralds, purple, and broidered work, and fine linen, and coral, and agate.

α.Eze.27.17 Judah, kah Israelle ohke, neg k8tanaqushaenúmuneápanneg: nag anaqushaog ut kukkodtauwompásuonganit Minnithe kah Pannage wheataṣh, kah hony, kah pummee, kah balme.
E.Eze.27.17: Judah, and the land of Israel, they were thy merchants: they traded in thy market wheat of Minnith, and Pannag, and honey, and oil, and balm.

α.Eze.27.18 Damaskus kukkodtauwompasuéneum, wutche mataának kutanaqushae maumachiaṣh niṣh kezteauaniṣh, newutche monataṣh k8weenauwetuongaṣh: wutch Heshbone wine, kah wutch wompi w8l.
E.Eze.27.18: Damascus was thy merchant in the multitude of the wares of thy making, for the multitude of all riches; in the wine of Helbon, and white wool.

α.Eze.27.19 Dan wonk kah Javan neg áhaûhsukque ahettit wutanaqushoneau ut kukkodtauwompásuonganit, wóhsippohtae missitchuog, cassia, kah calamus nish ohtopaṣh kukkodtauwompásuonganit.
E.Eze.27.19: Dan also and Javan going to and fro occupied in thy fairs: bright iron, cassia, and calamus, were in thy market.

α.Eze.27.20 Dedan k8tanaqushaenùmuneah mishôadtue chariotse hogk8unaṣh.
E.Eze.27.20: Dedan was thy merchant in precious clothes for chariots.

α.Eze.27.21 Arabia kah wame Kedare sontimóog, neg kutanaqushógquog, lambsoh, kah ramsoh, kah goatsoh: yeug k8tanaqushaenùmunneápanneg.
E.Eze.27.21: Arabia, and all the princes of Kedar, they occupied with thee in lambs, and rams, and goats: in these were they thy merchants.

α.Eze.27.22 Shebae kah Raamae anaqushaénuog, neg kutanaqushaenùmog: nag anaqushaog ut kukkodtauompásuonganit, wame wanegigiṣh spicesash, wame mishôadtue qussukquanáṣh, kah gold.
E.Eze.27.22: The merchants of Sheba and Raamah, they were thy merchants: they occupied in thy fairs with chief of all spices, and with all precious stones, and gold.

α.Eze.27.23 Haran, kah Canneh, kah Eden, Shebae anaqushaenuog, Ashur kah Chilmad, kutanaqushaénùmog.
E.Eze.27.23: Haran, and Canneh, and Eden, the merchants of Sheba, Asshur, and Chilmad, were thy merchants.

α.Eze.27.24 Yeug kutanaqushaenùmog nishnoh teag 8nôe hogk8unaṣh, kah wunnequontausue anakausuonk, numwae chestaṣh weenauweetue hogk8unaṣh, pemunneohtône kishpissuaṣh, wutchehteauunaṣh Cedarut, ut kenugke kutanaqushaonganit.
E.Eze.27.24: These were thy merchants in all sorts of things, in blue clothes, and broidered work, and in chests of rich apparel, bound with cords, and made of cedar, among thy merchandise.

α.Eze.27.25 Tarshishe kuht8nogquaṣh nashp8hamóog kuhhog, ut kukkodtauwompasuonganit, kah k8nhitteap, kah kussohsumwáhetteap ut nashaue kehtahhannit.
E.Eze.27.25: The ships of Tarshish did sing of thee in thy market: and thou wast replenished, and made very glorious in the midst of the seas.

α.Eze.27.26 Kutchemómomog kuppas8kquog mishe nippeit: wutchepwaṣh kuppohqunuk ut nashaue kehtahhannit.
E.Eze.27.26: Thy rowers have brought thee into great waters: the east wind hath broken thee in the midst of the seas.

α.Eze.27.27 K8weenauwetuongaṣh, kah kukkodtauwompasuongaṣh, kutanaqushaongash, k8ketahhan8mog, sampshanukqueaneg, kophogeg tannogágiṣh, anaqushaénuog, kah wame ayeuhteaenuog ut kuhhogkat, kah wame kutchippan8mog ut moeu kuhhogkat, nag piṣh penushaog ut noeu ketahhannit, ut kuppagwanitteae kesukkodtumut.
E.Eze.27.27: Thy riches, and thy fairs, thy merchandise, thy mariners, and thy pilots, thy calkers, and the occupiers of thy merchandise, and all thy men of war, that are in thee, and in all thy company which is in the midst of thee, shall fall into the midst of the seas in the day of thy ruin.

α.Eze.27.28 Hassunekaṣh piṣh nunnukshaaṣh maue mishont8wahettit sampshanukqueaneg.
E.Eze.27.28: The suburbs shall shake at the sound of the cry of thy pilots.

α.Eze.27.29 Kah wame nahtôe chémacheg, ukkeithanóog wame sampshahteacheg ut keitahhannit, piṣh sohhamwog wutch keit8nogqut, piṣh neepoog unnunohkomuk.
E.Eze.27.29: And all that handle the oar, the mariners, and all the pilots of the sea, shall come down from their ships, they shall stand upon the land;

α.Eze.27.30 Kah nag piṣh kutayeuhkonittue n8tamwáhuwaog wuttauatonkqussuonk, nag piṣh weesoggohpôsuog, nag piṣh unnuhteaog puppissi uppuhkukk8óut, piṣh kogkomukqueog pukquee.
E.Eze.27.30: And shall cause their voice to be heard against thee, and shall cry bitterly, and shall cast up dust upon their heads, they shall wallow themselves in the ashes:

α.Eze.27.31 Kah piṣh papaquanne m8sontippáheaog wuhhogkauh wutche ken, kah piṣh puttukquobpissuwontamwog man8tiónak, nag piṣh kummauémukquog nashpe weesogke metah, kah wesogohpôsuonk.
E.Eze.27.31: And they shall make themselves utterly bald for thee, and gird them with sackcloth, and they shall weep for thee with bitterness of heart and bitter wailing.

α.Eze.27.32 Kah mauéhettit piṣh kummauónukquog, kah kummaumuttam8ónukquog, n8wahettit, teagwe keitotan ogqueneunkquok Tyrusut, ogqueneunkquok noh pagwanit ut noeu kehtahhannit.
E.Eze.27.32: And in their wailing they shall take up a lamentation for thee, and lament over thee, saying, What city is like Tyrus, like the destroyed in the midst of the sea?

α.Eze.27.33 Kummaumachiaṣh sohham8m8uk ketahhannit, kuppashanáhtus monaog missinninnúog, kah k8weenauweekeh ohkee sontimoh, nashpe mataánukiṣh k8weenauwetuongaṣh kah anaqushaongash.
E.Eze.27.33: When thy wares went forth out of the seas, thou filledst many people; thou didst enrich the kings of the earth with the multitude of thy riches and of thy merchandise.

α.Eze.27.34 Ne aquompag pohquenunumuk ut kehtahhannit, nesóhkaskéhtukquk, kutanaqushaongaṣh, kah wame kumm8nómog ut kenashómut piṣh penushaog.
E.Eze.27.34: In the time when thou shalt be broken by the seas in the depths of the waters thy merchandise and all thy company in the midst of thee shall fall.

α.Eze.27.35 Wame wadohkitcheg munnahhannehtu piṣh kutchepshaónukquog, kah ukkeitass8tamóm8oh piṣh mishe wabesuog, piṣh wuttammehpunauskésukquaog.
E.Eze.27.35: All the inhabitants of the isles shall be astonished at thee, and their kings shall be sore afraid, they shall be troubled in their countenance.

α.Eze.27.36 Anaqushaenuog ut kenugke missinninnútu piṣh kukquekqshum8ónukquog, pish quequenauánumóonganu, kah matta piṣh wonk kutappu.
E.Eze.27.36: The merchants among the people shall hiss at thee; thou shalt be a terror, and never shalt be any more.

α.Eze.28.1 WUttinn8waonk Jehovah nuppeyaonuk, n8wau,
E.Eze.28.1: The word of the LORD came again unto me, saying,

α.Eze.28.2 Wosketompae wunnaumoniin, us Tyrusse sontim, yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, newutche kuttah tahshém8, kah kussim, nen Manit, nutap wutappuonganit God ut nashaue ketahhannehtu: qut onch ken wosketomp kah matta Manit, tôhkônogque kutogqueteáuunat kuttah Manittóut.
E.Eze.28.2: Son of man, say unto the prince of Tyrus, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Because thine heart is lifted up, and thou hast said, I am a God, I sit in the seat of God, in the midst of the seas; yet thou art a man, and not God, though thou set thine heart as the heart of God:

α.Eze.28.3 Kusseh, kutánue waantam8m Daniel: matta keméyeuuk kutádtahtunk8og.
E.Eze.28.3: Behold, thou art wiser than Daniel; there is no secret that they can hide from thee:

α.Eze.28.4 Nashpe k8waantamoonk, kah nashpe k8wo[h]wohtam8onk, k8chénauwékin, kah k8goldtum, kah k8silverum ut kenompakouunit.
E.Eze.28.4: With thy wisdom and with thine understanding thou hast gotten thee riches, and hast gotten gold and silver into thy treasures:

α.Eze.28.5 Nashpe kummishe waantamoonk, kah nashpe kutanaqushaonk, kummishteoh k8weenauweetuonk; kah kuttah tahsheem8 wutche k8weenauweetuonk.
E.Eze.28.5: By thy great wisdom and by thy traffick hast thou increased thy riches, and thine heart is lifted up because of thy riches:

α.Eze.28.6 Newutche yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, newutche kutogquodtóh, God wuttahhut.
E.Eze.28.6: Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Because thou hast set thine heart as the heart of God;

α.Eze.28.7 Kusseh, newaj nuhkinnumauun penuwohteaog, wutohtimóinne unkqueneunkqussitcheg, kah nag piṣh ayeuhkonittue kódtinnumwontamwog wuttogkodtegan8 k8neetue waantamoonk, kah nag piṣh nishketeauog k8wôsuppasuonk.
E.Eze.28.7: Behold, therefore I will bring strangers upon thee, the terrible of the nations: and they shall draw their swords against the beauty of thy wisdom, and they shall defile thy brightness.

α.Eze.28.8 Nag piṣh k8wonhúunukquog passahtheganit, kah piṣh kutogque nup neg napukeg ut nôeu ketahhannit.
E.Eze.28.8: They shall bring thee down to the pit, and thou shalt die the deaths of them that are slain in the midst of the seas.

α.Eze.28.9 Sun woh ash kuppumme unn8wam, nen Manit? qut piṣh ken k8wsoketompean kah matta Manit, ut wunnutcheganit noh nashhikquean.
E.Eze.28.9: Wilt thou yet say before him that slayeth thee, I am God? but thou shalt be a man, and no God, in the hand of him that slayeth thee.

α.Eze.28.10 Piṣh kutogque nup matta quoshqusauségig, ut wunnutchegan8óut penuwohteaog: newutche nen nussin, n8wau Lord Jehovah.
E.Eze.28.10: Thou shalt die the deaths of the uncircumcised by the hand of strangers: for I have spoken it, saith the Lord GOD.

α.Eze.28.11 Nano wuttinn8waonk Lord nuppeyaónuk, n8wau,
E.Eze.28.11: Moreover the word of the LORD came unto me, saying,

α.Eze.28.12 Wosketompae wunnaumoniin, maumuttam8us Tyrusse ketass8t, kah us, yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, mamusse kussealham, nunnumwáe waanta, kah nuppannuppéyeue wunneet.
E.Eze.28.12: Son of man, take up a lamentation upon the king of Tyrus, and say unto him, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Thou sealest up the sum, full of wisdom, and perfect in beauty.

α.Eze.28.13 Kutappúp Eden wuttittanohketeaonganit God: nishnoh mishoadtue qussuk kuthogqunneáh, ne Sardius, Topaz, kah Diamond, Beryl, Onyx, kah Jasper, Saphir; Emerauld, kah Carbuncle, kah Gold: tabretse kah puhpequonu kutussinnúonk, quagquashwéhtamunah ut kuhhogkat, ne kesukok kezhenumuk.
E.Eze.28.13: Thou hast been in Eden the garden of God; every precious stone was thy covering, the sardius, topaz, and the diamond, the beryl, the onyx, and the jasper, the sapphire, the emerald, and the carbuncle, and gold: the workmanship of thy tabrets and of thy pipes was prepared in thee in the day that thou wast created.

α.Eze.28.14 Ken sussequnnumwe cherub noh puttagwhosik: kah ne kupponumun: kutapip 8neetupanatamwe wadchómut God, kuppapaumshap ut nashaue n8tae qussukquanehtu.
E.Eze.28.14: Thou art the anointed cherub that covereth; and I have set thee so: thou wast upon the holy mountain of God; thou hast walked up and down in the midst of the stones of fire.

α.Eze.28.15 Kuppannuppeyeu8p ut kummayut wutch ne kesukok kezhenumuk, nô pajeh matcheseonk namteauunumuk.
E.Eze.28.15: Thou wast perfect in thy ways from the day that thou wast created, till iniquity was found in thee.

α.Eze.28.16 Nashpe mataaneuk kutanaqushaonk, nag kenumwohtunkquog ut kenashomut chekeeyeuuk, kah kummatcheussem: newaj ogque pogkenun nishkeneunkquok wutch 8wadchumut G[o]d kah kenushiṣh, woi puttogwhosue cherub, wutch nashaue n8tae qussukquanehtu.
E.Eze.28.16: By the multitude of thy merchandise they have filled the midst of thee with violence, and thou hast sinned: therefore I will cast thee as profane out of the mountain of God: and I will destroy thee, O covering cherub, from the midst of the stones of fire.

α.Eze.28.17 Kuttahtahshem8 wutche k8neetuonk, kutannussehteoh k8waantamoonk, nashpe k8wósepasuonk: piṣh kuttinuhkonṣh ohkeit: kupponsh ánaquabhettit ketass8tamwog, onk woh nag kenogquog.
E.Eze.28.17: Thine heart was lifted up because of thy beauty, thou hast corrupted thy wisdom by reason of thy brightness: I will cast thee to the ground, I will lay thee before kings, that they may behold thee.

α.Eze.28.18 Kenishketeoh kussanctuariash nashpe monakish kummatcheseongash, nashpe kutanaqushae matcheseonk: newaj sohh8wut[t]au n8tau wutch kenashomut, ne pish kummuhchikkussukqun: kah pish kuppehquehkonsh ut ohkeit ut anaquabhettit nag wame monunneunkqueaneg.
E.Eze.28.18: Thou hast defiled thy sanctuaries by the multitude of thine iniquities, by the iniquity of thy traffick; therefore will I bring forth a fire from the midst of thee, it shall devour thee, and I will bring thee to ashes upon the earth in the sight of all them that behold thee.

α.Eze.28.19 Wame neg wahikqueaneg ut kenugke missinninnutu, nag piṣh kutchepshaonukquog: ken piṣh quequenauanumoonk, kah matta piṣh wonk kutappein.
E.Eze.28.19: All they that know thee among the people shall be astonished at thee: thou shalt be a terror, and never shalt thou be any more.

α.Eze.28.20 Wonk wuttinn8waonk Jehovah nuppeyaonuk n8wau,
E.Eze.28.20: Again the word of the LORD came unto me, saying,

α.Eze.28.21 Wosketompae wunnaumoniin, ayeuhkonittue Zidon ponamau kuskesuk, kah ayeukonittue quoshodtumwontash.
E.Eze.28.21: Son of man, set thy face against Zidon, and prophesy against it,

α.Eze.28.22 Kah [n]8wash, yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, kusseh, nen kutayeuuhkonsh woi Zidon, kah piṣh nussohsum8onit ut kenashomut, kah nag piṣh wahteauog nen Jehovah, ussean wussittum8ongaṣh ut wunnashomut, kah wunneetupanatamwahimuk ut wuhhogkat.
E.Eze.28.22: And say, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I am against thee, O Zidon; and I will be glorified in the midst of thee: and they shall know that I am the LORD, when I shall have executed judgments in her, and shall be sanctified in her.

α.Eze.28.23 Newutche nutann8n en wuhhogkat enninneaonk, kah musqueheonk ut wuttaumaogquehtu, kah n8chumwetahwhutcheg piṣh wussumoog ut wunnashomut, nashpe aeetaue nuhkunnumauonat togkodteg, kah nag piṣh wahteauog, nen Jehovah.
E.Eze.28.23: For I will send into her pestilence, and blood into her streets; and the wounded shall be judged in the midst of her by the sword upon her on every side; and they shall know that I am the LORD.

α.Eze.28.24 Kah matta piṣh wonk mishkouwutchinn8we kôus appu wekit Israel, kah matta unkqueneunkque assunnekôaz ut kenugke nag wame waeenu apitcheg, kah nag piṣh wahteauog nen Lord Jehovah.
E.Eze.28.24: And there shall be no more a pricking brier unto the house of Israel, nor any grieving thorn of all that are round about them, that despised them; and they shall know that I am the Lord GOD.

α.Eze.28.25 Yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, mukkinog Israel wek wutch missinninnuut ne adt kenugke seahwhut, kah piṣh wunneetupanatamwahimuk ut nag ut anaquabhettit penuwohteaog, neit piṣh ayeuog wutohtuout, ne anumwauwogkup nuttinneum Jakob.
E.Eze.28.25: Thus saith the Lord GOD; When I shall have gathered the house of Israel from the people among whom they are scattered, and shall be sanctified in them in the sight of the heathen, then shall they dwell in their land that I have given to my servant Jacob.

α.Eze.28.26 Kah nag pish nanouayeuog naut, & piṣh weekitteaog, kah weenominneohketeaog, nux nag pish wutt8anatamwe ayeuog, usseon wussittumoonk, ut nag wame sekenauoncheg wussittumoonk, ut nag wame sekenauoncheg waeenu, kah nag pish wahteauog nen Lord um-Manitt8m8uh.
E.Eze.28.26: And they shall dwell safely therein, and shall build houses, and plant vineyards; yea, they shall dwell with confidence, when I have executed judgments upon all those that despise them round about them; and they shall know that I am the LORD their God.

α.Eze.29.1 PIogque kodtum8k, piogqussit nepauz nabo neesikqunhog nepauz, wuttinn8waonk Jehovah nuppeyaonuk n8wau,
E.Eze.29.1: In the tenth year, in the tenth month, in the twelfth day of the month, the word of the LORD came unto me, saying,

α.Eze.29.2 Wosketompae wunnaumoniin, ayeuhkonittue ponamau kuskesuk Pharaoh Egypte ketass8t, kah ayeuhkonittue q[ou]shodtumau, kah ayeuuhkonittue wame Egypt.
E.Eze.29.2: Son of man, set thy face against Pharaoh king of Egypt, and prophesy against him, and against all Egypt:

α.Eze.29.3 Ket8kaṣh kah n8waṣh, yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, kusseh, nen kutayeuuhkonṣh, Pharoh Egypte ketass8t, miṣhe Dragon noh sepsik nashaue sepuwehtu; noh an8wop, nussepeum nuttaihe, kah ne nukkezteonah.
E.Eze.29.3: Speak, and say, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I am against thee, Pharaoh king of Egypt, the great dragon that lieth in the midst of his rivers, which hath said, My river is mine own, and I have made it for myself.

α.Eze.29.4 Qut nupponam uhquonaṣh kutompekonit, kah kussepume namohsog nuppissogqushaheoog k8hogkat, kah kukkuhpinuṣh wutch nashaue kussepeumut, kah wame kussepue namohsog piṣh pissogqshaog k8hogkat.
E.Eze.29.4: But I will put hooks in thy jaws, and I will cause the fish of thy rivers to stick unto thy scales, and I will bring thee up out of the midst of thy rivers, and all the fish of thy rivers shall stick unto thy scales.

α.Eze.29.5 Kah kenukkonuṣh unnohkonunnon touohkomuk, ken kah wame kussepue namohsog: piṣh kuppenusham ut wosketohteahkon: matta piṣh kummianitteoh, asuh kummukkinnitteoh: nummag kuhhog en ohteuhkone puppinashimwut, wutch ummeech8wongan8, kah en kesukque puppinshausut.
E.Eze.29.5: And I will leave thee thrown into the wilderness, thee and all the fish of thy rivers: thou shalt fall upon the open fields; thou shalt not be brought together, nor gathered: I have given thee for meat to the beasts of the field and to the fowls of the heaven.

α.Eze.29.6 Kah wame wadohkitcheg Egypt piṣh wahteauog, nen Jehovah, newutche nag weekinasque anwohhou8un8og ut weekit Israel.
E.Eze.29.6: And all the inhabitants of Egypt shall know that I am the LORD, because they have been a staff of reed to the house of Israel.

α.Eze.29.7 Nag sogkinutchánukquean kuppokqshomp, kah kenehnekikom wame wuttukeh: kah nag ompatussum8ónukquean, kuppokqshomp, kah wusséganohtog8 wame kenussikkompauwéhtóh.
E.Eze.29.7: When they took hold of thee by thy hand, thou didst break, and rend all their shoulder: and when they leaned upon thee, thou brakest, and madest all their loins to be at a stand.

α.Eze.29.8 Newaj yeu n8wadt Lord Jehovah, kusseh, kenuhkenumaush togkodteg, kah nuttummetah wosketomp kah puppinashim wutch kuhhogkat.
E.Eze.29.8: Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I will bring a sword upon thee, and cut off man and beast out of thee.

α.Eze.29.9 Kah Egypte ohke piṣh touwushin, kah mahchim8, kah nag piṣh wahteauog nen Jehovah, newutche n8wau, seip nuttaihe, kah nukkezteauunah.
E.Eze.29.9: And the land of Egypt shall be desolate and waste; and they shall know that I am the LORD: because he hath said, The river is mine, and I have made it.

α.Eze.29.10 Kusseh, newaj, kutayeuuhkonsh, kah kussepeumash, kah Egypte ohke papannuppe nummahchumwehteóh, kah nuttouwushinnuwáhtauun: wutch Syene qunuhquikomukqut, pajeh Ethiopiae sussippoiyeuut.
E.Eze.29.10: Behold, therefore I am against thee, and against thy rivers, and I will make the land of Egypt utterly waste and desolate, from the tower of Syene even unto the border of Ethiopia.

α.Eze.29.11 Matta wosketompae musseet piṣh uppannupwushaan, matta puppinashimwe musseet piṣh uppannupwushaan, kah matta piṣh wutohkein yauunchage kodtumwaeu
E.Eze.29.11: No foot of man shall pass through it, nor foot of beast shall pass through it, neither shall it be inhabited forty years.

α.Eze.29.12 Kah Egypte ohke nuttauwushitteauun, ut nashauwe wutohtimoneash niṣh tauushikish, kah ukkeitotanash ut kenugke touushitteae keitotanash, piṣh yauunchage kodtumwae touushin: kah nusseahwham Egyptiansog ut kenugke wutohtimoneat, kah piṣh nusseahwhoog ut kenugke wutohtimoneat.
E.Eze.29.12: And I will make the land of Egypt desolate in the midst of the countries that are desolate, and her cities among the cities that are laid waste shall be desolate forty years: and I will scatter the Egyptians among the nations, and will disperse them through the countries.

α.Eze.29.13 Qut yeu wussin Lord Jehovah; mahtshunk yauunchage kodtum8ash, piṣh nummukkin Egyptiansog wutch missinninnúut naut seahwhut.
E.Eze.29.13: Yet thus saith the Lord GOD; At the end of forty years will I gather the Egyptians from the people whither they were scattered:

α.Eze.29.14 Kah wonk nuppaudtoh Egypte missinnoóonk, kah nukqushkeáheóog ut Pathrose ohkeit, en wutohtue ayeuongan8out: kah na piṣh wuttit tiuhqunkque wutass8tam8onganuneau.
E.Eze.29.14: And I will bring again the captivity of Egypt, and will cause them to return into the land of Pathros, into the land of their habitation; and they shall be there a base kingdom.

α.Eze.29.15 Ne pish anue taiuhquag ass8tamoonk, kah matta piṣh wonk misheheau8 wu[h]hogkuh wutohtimoineat; newutche nutogguhṣheóog, kah nag matta piṣh wonk nanawunnumoog wutohtimoneash.
E.Eze.29.15: It shall be the basest of the kingdoms; neither shall it exalt itself any more above the nations: for I will diminish them, that they shall no more rule over the nations.

α.Eze.29.16 Kah matta piṣh wonk uppabuhtanum8h Israel wek: ne mehquontamwahuwon ummatcheseonk, nah n8sauwompamáhettit: qut nag piṣh wahteauog nen Lord Jehovah.
E.Eze.29.16: And it shall be no more the confidence of the house of Israel, which bringeth their iniquity to remembrance, when they shall look after them: but they shall know that I am the Lord GOD.

α.Eze.29.17 Kah nniyeup neesnehchag kah enada adtahshe kodtum8g, negonne nepauzsaug, kah negonne kesukok wuttinn8waonk Jehovah nuppeyaonuk kah n8wau,
E.Eze.29.17: And it came to pass in the seven and twentieth year, in the first month, in the first day of the month, the word of the LORD came unto me, saying,

α.Eze.29.18 Wosketompae wunnaumoniin Nebuchad-nezar Babylone ketass8t, mishe wuttinnúmuhkausuwáheau ukkenauwameumoh ayeuuhkonittue Tyrus: nishnoh muhpuhkuh m8sontippáhuwom8, kah nishnoh muttukke pissogkinausu, qut matta wutonkquatonganu asuh ukkenauwamúmoh, wutche Tyrus, wutche wuttinnúmuhkausuonk, ne ayeuhkonittue ne aseup.
E.Eze.29.18: Son of man, Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon caused his army to serve a great service against Tyrus: every head was made bald, and every shoulder was peeled: yet had he no wages, nor his army, for Tyrus, for the service that he had served against it:

α.Eze.29.19 Newutche yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, kusseh, nummag Egypte ohke, Nebuchadnezzar Babylone ketass8t, kah noh piṣh tohqunau mataánutcheh, kah tohqunau wusséquttahhamóonk, kah piṣh tohqunat ummaumachiash, kah ne piṣh ukkenauwamee onkquatunk.
E.Eze.29.19: Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I will give the land of Egypt unto Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon; and he shall take her multitude, and take her spoil, and take her prey; and it shall be the wages for his army.

α.Eze.29.20 Nuttinninnumau Egypte ohke, wutche wutanakausuonk ne ayeuhkonittue unnehteunk, newutche nag nutanakausuowetunkquog, wussin Lord Jehovah.
E.Eze.29.20: I have given him the land of Egypt for his labour wherewith he served against it, because they wrought for me, saith the Lord GOD.

α.Eze.29.21 Ne kesukok, nussohwheke wutaskonuh Israelle wek, kah kittinninnumoush tôanneém8ut kutt8n ut wunnashaum8óut, kah nag piṣh wahteauog nen Jehovah.
E.Eze.29.21: In that day will I cause the horn of the house of Israel to bud forth, and I will give thee the opening of the mouth in the midst of them; and they shall know that I am the LORD.

α.Eze.30.1 WUttinn8waonk Jehovah wonk nuppeyaonuk n8wau,
E.Eze.30.1: The word of the LORD came again unto me, saying,

α.Eze.30.2 Wosketompae wunnaumoniin, quoshodtsh, kah n8wash, yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, 8n8k, woi ne kesukod.
E.Eze.30.2: Son of man, prophesy and say, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Howl ye, Woe worth the day!

α.Eze.30.3 Newutche pas8cheyeu8 kesukod ukkesukodtum Jehovah pas8cheyeu8, kuppohquodte kesukod, ne piṣh wutahquompiyeum8 penuwohteaog.
E.Eze.30.3: For the day is near, even the day of the LORD is near, a cloudy day; it shall be the time of the heathen.

α.Eze.30.4 Kah togkodteg piṣh nuhkuhkom Egypt, kah mishe wabesuonk piṣh ohteau ut Ethiopia, nahshitcheg penushahettit ut Egypt, kah nag piṣh amaunaog ummuttaán8moh, kah ukquenohtogk8m piṣh poksheau.
E.Eze.30.4: And the sword shall come upon Egypt, and great pain shall be in Ethiopia, when the slain shall fall in Egypt, and they shall take away her multitude, and her foundations shall be broken down.

α.Eze.30.5 Ethiopia kah Libya kah Lydia, kah wame kenukshae missinninnúog, kah Chub, kah wosketompaog ut ohkeit neg wân8wacheg, nah piṣh 8weeche penushom8uh nashpe togkodteg.
E.Eze.30.5: Ethiopia, and Libya, and Lydia, and all the mingled people, and Chub, and the men of the land that is in league, shall fall with them by the sword.

α.Eze.30.6 Yeu wussin Jehovah, nag wonk kogkôunukeg Egypt piṣh penushaog, kah uppehtuánumwe menuhkesuongan8 piṣh n8kem8: wutch Syrene qunuhquikomukqut piṣh penushaog nashpe togkodteg, wussin Lord Jehovah.
E.Eze.30.6: Thus saith the LORD; They also that uphold Egypt shall fall; and the pride of her power shall come down: from the tower of Syene shall they fall in it by the sword, saith the Lord GOD.

α.Eze.30.7 Kah nag piṣh touushinwog ut nashaue touishinne wutohtimoinneat, kah ukkeitotanash piṣh nôeu ohtaash mahchimoe otan[â]t.
E.Eze.30.7: And they shall be desolate in the midst of the countries that are desolate, and her cities shall be in the midst of the cities that are wasted.

α.Eze.30.8 Kah nag piṣh wahteauog nen Lord, chikohsumon Egypt, kah wame aninnumunkqutcheh pagwanit.
E.Eze.30.8: And they shall know that I am the LORD, when I have set a fire in Egypt, and when all her helpers shall be destroyed.

α.Eze.30.9 Ne kesukok nutann8naenuog piṣh kuht8nogquehtu 8mwog nuhhogkat, wabesuáheônat mattohhentupantam8e Egyptiansog, & mishunkquommom8onk piṣh nuhkuhkongquog, netatuppe ut ukkesukkodtumut Egypt, newutche kusseh, peyom8.
E.Eze.30.9: In that day shall messengers go forth from me in ships to make the careless Ethiopians afraid, and great pain shall come upon them, as in the day of Egypt: for, lo, it cometh.

α.Eze.30.10 Yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, n8wohkukquossim wonk mataánukeg Egyptiansog nashpe wunnutcheg Nebuchadnezzar Babylone ketass8t.
E.Eze.30.10: Thus saith the Lord GOD; I will also make the multitude of Egypt to cease by the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon.

α.Eze.30.11 Nagum kah weeche ummissinninnùmoh, uhqueneunkquokiṣh wutohtimoneaṣh piṣh pas8oog, pagwatauunat ohke: kah nag piṣh ayeuhkonittue kodtinnumwog wuttogkodtegan8 ut Egypt, kah piṣh numwohsh[à]og nashomukeh ohkeit.
E.Eze.30.11: He and his people with him, the terrible of the nations, shall be brought to destroy the land: and they shall draw their swords against Egypt, and fill the land with the slain.

α.Eze.30.12 Kah nununassum sepuaṣh, kah nummag ohke ut wunnutcheganit matchetou, kah nummahchumwushitteoh ohke, kah wame ne na|ohtag, nashpe wunnutchegan8out penuwohteaog: nen Jehovah nussim.
E.Eze.30.12: And I will make the rivers dry, and sell the land into the hand of the wicked: and I will make the land waste, and all that is therein, by the hand of strangers: I the LORD have spoken it.

α.Eze.30.13 Yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, nuppagwan wonk nunnúkontunkanog, kah n8wohkukqussim wuttinnúkontunkan8uh wutch Noph, kah na matta piṣh wonk sontimoun8 kah nupponam wabesuonk ut ohkeit Egypt.
E.Eze.30.13: Thus saith the Lord GOD; I will also destroy the idols, and I will cause their images to cease out of Noph; and there shall be no more a prince of the land of Egypt: and I will put a fear in the land of Egypt.

α.Eze.30.14 Kah Pathros nuttouushitteauun, kah nutchikkossum Zoan, kah piṣh nutussen wussittumoonk ut No*.
E.Eze.30.14: And I will make Pathros desolate, and will set fire in Zoan, and will execute judgments in No.

α.Eze.30.15 Kah nussokanum ummusquantam8onk ut Sin, ummenuhkesuonk Egypt, kah nuttummetah ummutaánuk8moh No*.
E.Eze.30.15: And I will pour my fury upon Sin, the strength of Egypt; and I will cut off the multitude of No.

α.Eze.30.16 Kah nutchikkossum Egypt, Sin piṣh mishunkquommom8uh, kah No* piṣh pohshekishau, kah Noph piṣh quequenauánum8 asekesukokiṣh.
E.Eze.30.16: And I will set fire in Egypt: Sin shall have great pain, and No shall be rent asunder, and Noph shall have distresses daily.

α.Eze.30.17 OOskéneumoh Aven kah Phibeseth piṣh penushaog nashpe togkodteg: kah yeuṣh keitotanaṣh piṣh missinó8og.
E.Eze.30.17: The young men of Aven and of Pibeseth shall fall by the sword: and these cities shall go into captivity.

α.Eze.30.18 Ut Tehaphnehes wonk kesukod piṣh pohkeni, pohquenumon na$ut weyokumoh Egypt: kah 8neetue menuhkesuonk piṣh mahchum8 ut wuhhogkat: kah noh, mahtokqs piṣh nuhkuhkunk, kah wuttaunoh piṣh missino8oh.
E.Eze.30.18: At Tehaphnehes also the day shall be darkened, when I shall break there the yokes of Egypt: and the pomp of her strength shall cease in her: as for her, a cloud shall cover her, and her daughters shall go into captivity.

α.Eze.30.19 Ne piṣh nuttinne ussen wussittum8ongaṣh ut Egypt, kah nag piṣh wahteauog nen Jehovah.
E.Eze.30.19: Thus will I execute judgments in Egypt: and they shall know that I am the LORD.

α.Eze.30.20 Kah n$nih nabo nogqutte kodtum8g, negonne nepauzsog, nahohtoe kesukok nô nepauz, wuttinn8waonk Jehovah nuppeyaonuk, n8wau,
E.Eze.30.20: And it came to pass in the eleventh year, in the first month, in the seventh day of the month, that the word of the LORD came unto me, saying,

α.Eze.30.21 Wosketompae wunnaumoniin, nuppohquenum wuhpit Pharaoh Egypte ketass8t, kah kusseh, matta piṣh assépsin8 neetskonit, tuttupappinunat, menehketeauunat kenunnumunat togkodteg.
E.Eze.30.21: Son of man, I have broken the arm of Pharaoh king of Egypt; and, lo, it shall not be bound up to be healed, to put a roller to bind it, to make it strong to hold the sword.

α.Eze.30.22 Newutche yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, kusseh, nutayeuuhkon Pharaoh Egypte ketass8t, kah piṣh nuppohquenum wuhpittenaṣh, ne manuhkag, kah ne pohquag kah nuppenusháhto togkodteg, wutch wunnutcheganit.
E.Eze.30.22: Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I am against Pharaoh king of Egypt, and will break his arms, the strong, and that which was broken; and I will cause the sword to fall out of his hand.

α.Eze.30.23 Kah nusseahham Egyptiansog ut kenugke wutohtimoinneat, kah nunnanwiéhheaog papashpe wutohtimóneash.
E.Eze.30.23: And I will scatter the Egyptians among the nations, and will disperse them through the countries.

α.Eze.30.24 Kah nummenuhkehteoh wuhpitenaṣh Babylone ketass8t, kah nupponam nuttogkodteg ut wunnutcheganit, qut nuppohquenum wuhpittenaṣh Pharaoh, kah noh piṣh hoúohhóm8 ut anaquabit, onatuh nupp8e n8chumwetahwhut ahóuohhómwit.
E.Eze.30.24: And I will strengthen the arms of the king of Babylon, and put my sword in his hand: but I will break Pharaoh's arms, and he shall groan before him with the groanings of a deadly wounded man.

α.Eze.30.25 Qut nummenuhkehteoh wuhpittenaṣh Babylone ketass8t, kah wuhpittenaṣh Pharaoh pish penushaash, kah nag piṣh wahteauog nen Jehovah, ponamon nuttogkodteg ut wunnutcheganit Babylone ketass8t, kah noh wussummaginumun ut Egypte ohkeit.
E.Eze.30.25: But I will strengthen the arms of the king of Babylon, and the arms of Pharaoh shall fall down; and they shall know that I am the LORD, when I shall put my sword into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he shall stretch it out upon the land of Egypt.

α.Eze.30.26 Kah nusséah Egyptiansog ut kenugke wutohtimóinneat, kah nunnanwièhheaog ut kenugke wutohtimoneat, kah nag piṣh wahteauog nen Jehovah.
E.Eze.30.26: And I will scatter the Egyptians among the nations, and disperse them among the countries; and they shall know that I am the LORD.

α.Eze.31.1 KAh nniyeup, nabo nequtte kodtum8k, nash8it nepauz negonne kesukodtum nepauz, wuttinn8waonk Jehovah nuppeyaonuk n8wau,
E.Eze.31.1: And it came to pass in the eleventh year, in the third month, in the first day of the month, that the word of the LORD came unto me, saying,

α.Eze.31.2 Wosketompae wunnaumoniin, ken8s Pharoh Egypte ketass8t, kah ummuttaan8moh, howan kuttapinneunkqus ut kummissugkenunat.
E.Eze.31.2: Son of man, speak unto Pharaoh king of Egypt, and to his multitude; Whom art thou like in thy greatness?

α.Eze.31.3 Kusseh, wut-Assyrian wunne Cedareu8p ut Lebanon, wunnuttukquneau, kah wunne onkouohteau, qunúhquodt, 8wanasquonk kenukohtop kupontukqu[n]htu.
E.Eze.31.3: Behold, the Assyrian was a cedar in Lebanon with fair branches, and with a shadowing shroud, and of an high stature; and his top was among the thick boughs.

α.Eze.31.4 Nippeaṣh mishehik, monoi qunnukquoṣhik, wusseppumaṣh quanupitchuog wutohketeaongaṣh, asishahtunk wussepuemesash, en wame ohteuhkone mehtugquehtu.
E.Eze.31.4: The waters made him great, the deep set him up on high with her rivers running round about his plants, and sent her little rivers unto all the trees of the field.

α.Eze.31.5 Newaj wussohkunkqussuonk anue qunuhquhteauun onk niṣh wame ohteuhkone metugquaṣh, kah 8tuhqunaṣh monataṣh, kah 8tuhqunaṣh quogquoniyeuaṣh newutche mataaneuk nippe sontipashunk.
E.Eze.31.5: Therefore his height was exalted above all the trees of the field, and his boughs were multiplied, and his branches became long because of the multitude of waters, when he shot forth.

α.Eze.31.6 Wame kesukque puppinashasog tanadshahteaog 8tuhqunit, kah ut agwe wuttuhqunit wame puppinashimwog ut ohteuhkonit neecháog, kah wame mishe wutohtimoneaṣh ayeuoh agwe wutonkauohtomut.
E.Eze.31.6: All the fowls of heaven made their nests in his boughs, and under his branches did all the beasts of the field bring forth their young, and under his shadow dwelt all great nations.

α.Eze.31.7 Yeu wuttin wunnekinneah ut ummissugkenuonganit, missohkunkquok 8tuhqunumaṣh: newutche 8wodchabuk kishkohtop mishe nippeit.
E.Eze.31.7: Thus was he fair in his greatness, in the length of his branches: for his root was by great waters.

α.Eze.31.8 Cedarsaṣh ut wuttittanohketeamut God wunn8nuh adtashonat: firrsuhtugquash matta tátupen8ash 8tuhqunit, kah wompumusseash matta tatuppén8ash 8tuhqunumut: wanne mehtug ut wuttittanohketeaonganit God ogqueneunkquss[u]muk8.
E.Eze.31.8: The cedars in the garden of God could not hide him: the fir trees were not like his boughs, and the chestnut trees were not like his branches; nor any tree in the garden of God was like unto him in his beauty.

α.Eze.31.9 N8nehheop nashpe mataanukiṣh 8tuhqunumaṣh: newaj wame Edemmehtugquash, ut wuttittanohketeaonganit God, wuttiṣhkauonukquoh.
E.Eze.31.9: I have made him fair by the multitude of his branches: so that all the trees of Eden, that were in the garden of God, envied him.

α.Eze.31.10 Newutche yeu wussin Jehovah Manit, newutche kukqunuhquitahshin kuhhog, kah noh onuhquekin 8wanasquonk ut kenugke kuppiyeue wuttuhqunit, kah wuttah tahshenumau wutch wussohkunkqussuonk.
E.Eze.31.10: Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Because thou hast lifted up thyself in height, and he hath shot up his top among the thick boughs, and his heart is lifted up in his height;

α.Eze.31.11 Newaj ponog wunnutcheganit pen8wohteae másugkenuk: piṣh wwunnamuhkut 8weoggeheuh, nussohh8kau wutch ummatcheseonk.
E.Eze.31.11: I have therefore delivered him into the hand of the mighty one of the heathen; he shall surely deal with him: I have driven him out for his wickedness.

α.Eze.31.12 Kah penuwohteaog, unkqueneunkqussitcheg wutohtimoneat wuttummetahhukquoh, kah wunnukonouh ut wadchuuhkontu, kah ut wame 8nôuhkoiyeuut 8tuhqunumaṣh penushaaṣh, kah 8tuhqunaṣh pohqshaaṣh, kishke wame sepuaṣh ut ohkeit, kah wame missinninnuog ohkeit, womussuoh wutch wutonkauohtomut, kah wunnukonouh.
E.Eze.31.12: And strangers, the terrible of the nations, have cut him off, and have left him: upon the mountains and in all the valleys his branches are fallen, and his boughs are broken by all the rivers of the land; and all the people of the earth are gone down from his shadow, and have left him.

α.Eze.31.13 Ut sequttahhamauaonganit wame kesukque puppinshasog appuog, kah wame puppinashimwog ut ohteuhkonit pish appuoh 8tuhqunumut
E.Eze.31.13: Upon his ruin shall all the fowls of the heaven remain, and all the beasts of the field shall be upon his branches:

α.Eze.31.14 Onk woh mat mehtugquaṣh ut kishke nippeit misheheau8og wuhhogkauh wutch wussohkunkqussuongan8, onk woh mat sontippasho8og ut kenugke kuppiyeue wuttuhqunit, onk wh mat qunuhqukkompohtano, wame, wadtattogig nippeash: newutche wame nag ponoog nuppunat ut tiohquonkquohtag ohke, ut nashauh wunnaumonuh wosketompaog weeche nag womussitcheg passahtheganit.
E.Eze.31.14: To the end that none of all the trees by the waters exalt themselves for their height, neither shoot up their top among the thick boughs, neither their trees stand up in their height, all that drink water: for they are all delivered unto death, to the nether parts of the earth, in the midst of the children of men, with them that go down to the pit.

α.Eze.31.15 Yeu wussin Lord Jehovah ne kesukok womussit ut weenohkeit, nummaumuttamwahuwop, nupputtagquhhomauop m8noagk, kah nukkuphamup wuttomogkanumash, kah mogke nippeaṣh chepohtaaṣh, kah Lebanon nummaumuttamwaheonappoh, kah wame ohteuhkone mehtugquaṣh sauunumwog noh wutch.
E.Eze.31.15: Thus saith the Lord GOD; In the day when he went down to the grave I caused a mourning: I covered the deep for him, and I restrained the floods thereof, and the great waters were stayed: and I caused Lebanon to mourn for him, and all the trees of the field fainted for him.

α.Eze.31.16 Nunnukishahteoh wutohtimoneaṣh panshont, anohteaon chepiohkomukqut, weeche nag womussitcheg en possáhtheganit, kah wame Edenne mehtugquaṣh, tapéneunkquokiṣh kah anue wanegikish ut Lebanon, wame neg wadtattogig nippe piṣh tapheoog ut tiohquonkque ohkeit.
E.Eze.31.16: I made the nations to shake at the sound of his fall, when I cast him down to hell with them that descend into the pit: and all the trees of Eden, the choice and best of Lebanon, all that drink water, shall be comforted in the nether parts of the earth.

α.Eze.31.17 Nag wonk womussuog chepiohkomukqut weeche nagum, en nag nashitcheg wutch togkodteg, kah wuhpit, ne apinitcheh agwe wutonkauohtomut, ut nashaue penuwohteaut. 
E.Eze.31.17: They also went down into hell with him unto them that be slain with the sword; and they that were his arm, that dwelt under his shadow in the midst of the heathen.

α.Eze.31.18 Howan yaneneunkqussean sohsumunat kah mussugkeninat, ut kenugke Edene mehtugqut? qut piṣh k8wômhúinit, kenugke mehtugqut en tiuhquonkquok ohke: piṣh kussepsin nashaue matta quoshqusauségig, weeche nag nashitcheg nashpe togkodteg: yeuoh Pharoh, kah wame ummuttaán8moh, wussin Lord Jehovah.
E.Eze.31.18: To whom art thou thus like in glory and in greatness among the trees of Eden? yet shalt thou be brought down with the trees of Eden unto the nether parts of the earth: thou shalt lie in the midst of the uncircumcised with them that be slain by the sword. This is Pharaoh and all his multitude, saith the Lord GOD.

α.Eze.32.1 KAh nniyeup nabo neese kodtum8g, nabo nees8it nepauz, negonne kesukok wuttinn8waonk Jehovah nuppeyaonuk n8wau,
E.Eze.32.1: And it came to pass in the twelfth year, in the twelfth month, in the first day of the month, that the word of the LORD came unto me, saying,

α.Eze.32.2 Wosketompae wunnaumoniin, maumuttam8ansh Pharoh Egypte ketass8t, kah us, kutogqueneunkqus wutohtimoinne wuske qunnononut, kah kuttatuppeyeu ketahhanne p8tabpáut: kah k8weeche sohham8tamup sepuash, kah k8wogkouunumup nippe nashpe kussetash, kah nishketeop wussepum8ash.
E.Eze.32.2: Son of man, take up a lamentation for Pharaoh king of Egypt, and say unto him, Thou art like a young lion of the nations, and thou art as a whale in the seas: and thou camest forth with thy rivers, and troubledst the waters with thy feet, and fouledst their rivers.

α.Eze.32.3 Yeu wussin Lord Jéhovah, newutche kenuhkenumwe sepagenumoush nuthashab, weeche monaog missinninnuog, kah nag piṣh kukquomphukk8[ô]og ut nuthashabpoh.
E.Eze.32.3: Thus saith the Lord GOD; I will therefore spread out my net over thee with a company of many people; and they shall bring thee up in my net.

α.Eze.32.4 Neit kenukonush wusketohkeit, kuttinnúhkonsh pohquae ohteuhkonit, kah wame kesukque puppinshasog nutappéheáog ut kuhhogkat, kah n8wamepweh wame ohkee puppinashimwog ut kuhhogkat.
E.Eze.32.4: Then will I leave thee upon the land, I will cast thee forth upon the open field, and will cause all the fowls of the heaven to remain upon thee, and I will fill the beasts of the whole earth with thee.

α.Eze.32.5 Kah nupponam k8weyaus wadchuuhkontu, kah numwohtóh 8nauóhtuash kussohkunkqsuonk.
E.Eze.32.5: And I will lay thy flesh upon the mountains, and fill the valleys with thy height.

α.Eze.32.6 N8tattippadtóh wonk ohke ne adt pumôs8wéan, nashpe k8sqheonk, en wadchuuhkontu, kah sepuash piṣh numwohtaash kuhhogkat.
E.Eze.32.6: I will also water with thy blood the land wherein thou swimmest, even to the mountains; and the rivers shall be full of thee.

α.Eze.32.7 Kah sohwhunúnon, nutunkhum kesukquash, kah nuppohkenúmwah neg anogqsog, nutonk8 nepauz mahtokqs, kah nanepaushadt matta wequossum8.
E.Eze.32.7: And when I shall put thee out, I will cover the heaven, and make the stars thereof dark; I will cover the sun with a cloud, and the moon shall not give her light.

α.Eze.32.8 Wame wôsippoht[a]e wequai kesukqut, nuppohkenumwahteauun ut k8waabiyeumut, kah nupponam pohkéni kutohkeit, wussin Lord Jehovah.
E.Eze.32.8: All the bright lights of heaven will I make dark over thee, and set darkness upon thy land, saith the Lord GOD.

α.Eze.32.9 Kah wonk numm8m8squeteóh wuttahhou monaog missinninnúog, paudtauunon kuppagwanuonk, ut kenugke wutohtimóinneat, en wutohtimóinneat ne mo wahteau8an.
E.Eze.32.9: I will also vex the hearts of many people, when I shall bring thy destruction among the nations, into the countries which thou hast not known.

α.Eze.32.10 Nux nutchepsháh monaog missinninnuog ut kuhhogkat, kah ukketass8tam8m8uh piṣh mishe wabesuoh wutche ken, papaumunumon nuttogkodteg ut anaquabhettit, kah nag piṣh hohtôeu nunnukshaog; nishnoh wosketomp wutch nehenwonche uppomantamoonk, ne kesukok penushòan.
E.Eze.32.10: Yea, I will make many people amazed at thee, and their kings shall be horribly afraid for thee, when I shall brandish my sword before them; and they shall tremble at every moment, every man for his own life, in the day of thy fall.

α.Eze.32.11 Newutche yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, wuttogkodteg Babylone ketass8t piṣh kenuhkuhkunk.
E.Eze.32.11: For thus saith the Lord GOD; The sword of the king of Babylon shall come upon thee.

α.Eze.32.12 Nashpe wuttogkodteg manuhkesit, kummutaán8mog nuppenusháh, neg wame wutohtimoinne unkqueneunkqussuog, kah nag piṣh matchehtoog 8netuonk Egypt, kah wame monacheg naut piṣh pagwanóog.
E.Eze.32.12: By the swords of the mighty will I cause thy multitude to fall, the terrible of the nations, all of them: and they shall spoil the pomp of Egypt, and all the multitude thereof shall be destroyed.

α.Eze.32.13 Nuppagwan wonk uppuppinnashum8m8uh, wutch kishke mishe nuppekontu; kah wusseet8 wosketompaog matta piṣh wonk wuttamhikk8og, kah wuhkoss8uh puppinashimwog matta piṣh 8taméhheouh.
E.Eze.32.13: I will destroy also all the beasts thereof from beside the great waters; neither shall the foot of man trouble them any more, nor the hoofs of beasts trouble them.

α.Eze.32.14 Neit numm8nóhteóh wunnippem, kah wussepum8ash nutogque pumitchuáhtauunash pummeit, wussin Lord Jehovah
E.Eze.32.14: Then will I make their waters deep, and cause their rivers to run like oil, saith the Lord GOD.

α.Eze.32.15 Touushitteauon Egypte ohke, kah wutohtimoin piṣh quenauéhhik ne nómwohtunkup: togkomog wame neg na wadohkitcheg, neit piṣh wahteauog nen JEhovah.
E.Eze.32.15: When I shall make the land of Egypt desolate, and the country shall be destitute of that whereof it was full, when I shall smite all them that dwell therein, then shall they know that I am the LORD.

α.Eze.32.16 Yeu maumuttam8onk ne piṣh waj mauemahettit: wutohtimoinne wuttauninneunk piṣh ummauemóuh, nag piṣh ummauémóuh, wutch Egypt, kah wutch wame ummuttaan8m8uh, wussin Lord Jehovah.
E.Eze.32.16: This is the lamentation wherewith they shall lament her: the daughters of the nations shall lament her: they shall lament for her, even for Egypt, and for all her multitude, saith the Lord GOD.

α.Eze.32.17 Wonk n$nih nabo neese kodtumuk; nabo napanna adtahshikquinúhhog nepauz, wuttinn8waonk Lord nuppeyaonuk, n8wau,
E.Eze.32.17: It came to pass also in the twelfth year, in the fifteenth day of the month, that the word of the LORD came unto me, saying,

α.Eze.32.18 Wosketompae wunnaumoniin, mauem mataánukeg Egypt kah penuhteaṣh, nagum, & wuttaum8oh woweenomae wutohtimóinneunk, en tiuhqunkquok ayeuonk en ohkeit, weeche neh womussinutche en passahtheganit.
E.Eze.32.18: Son of man, wail for the multitude of Egypt, and cast them down, even her, and the daughters of the famous nations, unto the nether parts of the earth, with them that go down into the pit.

α.Eze.32.19 Howan anue wunneetúmadt? womsiṣh, kah weeche sepsum8m matta quoshqusausegeg.
E.Eze.32.19: Whom dost thou pass in beauty? go down, and be thou laid with the uncircumcised.

α.Eze.32.20 Nag piṣh penushaog ut nashaue neg nashitcheg wutch togkodteg: noh magun en togkodteganit, pomontonchim, kah wame ummuttaán8moh.
E.Eze.32.20: They shall fall in the midst of them that are slain by the sword: she is delivered to the sword: draw her and all her multitudes.

α.Eze.32.21 Noh manuhkesit ut kenugke masukkenukeg piṣh úkkinn8nóuh wutch nashaue chepiohkomuk, weeche nag aninnumauoncheg: nag womseuk, nag matta quosqusausée sepsinwog, nushôog nashpe togkodteg.
E.Eze.32.21: The strong among the mighty shall speak to him out of the midst of hell with them that help him: they are gone down, they lie uncircumcised, slain by the sword.

α.Eze.32.22 Ashur na wutappin, kah wame wutchippán8moh: 8weenohkeaṣh weenuhkunk: wame nag nushôog, penushaog wutch togkodteg.
E.Eze.32.22: Asshur is there and all her company: his graves are about him: all of them slain, fallen by the sword:

α.Eze.32.23 Neg 8weenohkeaṣh ponumuk sussippoeu passahtheganit, kah wutchippan8moh wéenappuoh 8weenohkeit: wame neg nushôog wutch togkodteg, noh quequenauánumwéheont, ut pomantamwae ohkeit.
E.Eze.32.23: Whose graves are set in the sides of the pit, and her company is round about her grave: all of them slain, fallen by the sword, which caused terror in the land of the living.

α.Eze.32.24 Na wutappin Elam, kah wame ummutaán8moh waéene 8wenohkeit, wame nag nushôog, penushaog wutch togkodteg, neg matquoshqusausée wamussitcheg en tiuhqu[n]kok ohke, neg quequenauánumwéhuacheg, ut pomantamwae ohkeit, qut kenunnumw[o]g wutakodchuongan8 kenugke nag womussitcheg passahtheganit.
E.Eze.32.24: There is Elam and all her multitude round about her grave, all of them slain, fallen by the sword, which are gone down uncircumcised into the nether parts of the earth, which caused their terror in the land of the living; yet have they borne their shame with them that go down to the pit.

α.Eze.32.25 Nag ponamwog wutappinneau ut kenugke nashitcheg, weeche wame ummuttaán8moh: 8weenohkeaṣh weenuhkunk, wame mat quosqussauseóg, nushôog nashpe togkodteg: tôhkonogque qushaékhéonáh ut pomantamwae ohkeit, qut kenunnumwog wutákodchuongan8 weeche nag womussitcheg en passahtheganit, noh ponau nashaue neg nashitcheg.
E.Eze.32.25: They have set her a bed in the midst of the slain with all her multitude: her graves are round about him: all of them uncircumcised, slain by the sword: though their terror was caused in the land of the living, yet have they borne their shame with them that go down to the pit: he is put in the midst of them that be slain.

α.Eze.32.26 Na wutappin Meshech, Tubal, kah wame ummuttaân8moh: 8weenohkeaṣh quinuppuhkunk: wame nag mat quosqusauseog, nushôog nashpe togkodteg, tôkonogque qushaékheoneau ut pomantamwae ohkeit.
E.Eze.32.26: There is Meshech, Tubal, and all her multitude: her graves are round about him: all of them uncircumcised, slain by the sword, though they caused their terror in the land of the living.

α.Eze.32.27 Kah nag matta piṣh weesuomomo8og mat quosqusausue masugkenitcheh neg panushoncheg, neg womussitcheg en chepsohkomukqut, nashpe ummattompagwe auwohteaongaṣh: kah nag ponamwog wuttogkodtegan8 agwe uppuhkuk8óut, qut ummatcheseongan8 piṣh wuskón8óut ohteau tohkônogque nag ukqushaékinneau masugkenukeg ut pomantamwae ohkeit.
E.Eze.32.27: And they shall not lie with the mighty that are fallen of the uncircumcised, which are gone down to hell with their weapons of war: and they have laid their swords under their heads, but their iniquities shall be upon their bones, though they were the terror of the mighty in the land of the living.

α.Eze.32.28 Nux, piṣh kuppohquinit ut nushaue matta quosqusausegig, kah piṣh k8weeche seepsum8m nag nashitcheg nashpe togkodteg.
E.Eze.32.28: Yea, thou shalt be broken in the midst of the uncircumcised, and shalt lie with them that are slain with the sword.

α.Eze.32.29 Na wutappen Edom, ukketass8tam8moh, kah wame wussontimomoh, neg nashpe ummenuhkesuongan8, kishke sepsinwog neh nashitcheg nashpe togkodteg, nag piṣh weetsum8máog mat quosqus[a]usenégeh, kah weeche neh womussinitcheh, en passahtheganit.
E.Eze.32.29: There is Edom, her kings, and all her princes, which with their might are laid by them that were slain by the sword: they shall lie with the uncircumcised, and with them that go down to the pit.

α.Eze.32.30 Na wutappineau wame nanummiyeue sontimóog, kah wame Zidoniansog: neg weeche womussúmoncheg nashómukeh, nashpe qushaongan8 nag akodchuwontamwog ummenuhkesuongan8, kah mat quosqusausée sepsinwog, weeche neg nashitcheg nashpe togkodteg, kah nag kenunnumauáog wutakodchuongan8 neh womussinutcheh en passahtheganit.
E.Eze.32.30: There be the princes of the north, all of them, and all the Zidonians, which are gone down with the slain; with their terror they are ashamed of their might; and they lie uncircumcised with them that be slain by the sword, and bear their shame with them that go down to the pit.

α.Eze.32.31 Pharaoh nah piṣh wunnauoh, kah piṣh tapheau wutch wame ummuttaán8moh, Pharaoh kah wame ukkenauwámeumoh, nushôog nashpe togkodteg wussin Lord Jehovah.
E.Eze.32.31: Pharaoh shall see them, and shall be comforted over all his multitude, even Pharaoh and all his army slain by the sword, saith the Lord GOD.

α.Eze.32.32 N8wabesuah ut pomantamwae ohkeit, kah noh piṣh sepsin nashaue matta quosqusausénegeh, weeche nag nashitcheg nashpe togkodteg, Pharaoh kah wame ummuttaán8moh, wussin Lord Jehovah.
E.Eze.32.32: For I have caused my terror in the land of the living: and he shall be laid in the midst of the uncircumcised with them that are slain with the sword, even Pharaoh and all his multitude, saith the Lord GOD.

α.Eze.33.1 WOnk wuttinn8waonk Jehovah nuppeyaonuk, n8wau,
E.Eze.33.1: Again the word of the LORD came unto me, saying,

α.Eze.33.2 Wosketompae wunnaumoniin, ken8s wunneechan8oh kummissinninneumog, kah nag us, paudtauon togkodteg ohkeit, missinninnuog ne ohkeit neemunahettit wosketompuh wutch wutohkeóut, kah wutaskwhéteaneumhettit.
E.Eze.33.2: Son of man, speak to the children of thy people, and say unto them, When I bring the sword upon a land, if the people of the land take a man of their coasts, and set him for their watchman:

α.Eze.33.3 Noh nag* togkodteg nuhkuhkom ohke, p8tóntog monopuhpeg, kah amâmont missinninnùh.
E.Eze.33.3: If when he seeth the sword come upon the land, he blow the trumpet, and warn the people;

α.Eze.33.4 Neit howan n8tog wunont8wae monopuhpeg, káh matta n8tam8g amôntuonk, togkodteg peyaum8uk, & amaunout, piṣ[h] 8sqheonk ohteáu néhenwonche uppuhkukqut.
E.Eze.33.4: Then whosoever heareth the sound of the trumpet, and taketh not warning; if the sword come, and take him away, his blood shall be upon his own head.

α.Eze.33.5 Noh n8tam wunnont8wae monopuhpeg, kah matta n8tam8 amôntuonk 8sqheonk piṣh nuhkuhkunk: qut noh n8tog amontuonk piṣh pohquohwhunau ukketeahogkóunoh.
E.Eze.33.5: He heard the sound of the trumpet, and took not warning; his blood shall be upon him. But he that taketh warning shall deliver his soul.

α.Eze.33.6 Qut Askuhwheteaen nag* togkodteg peyom8, matta p8tantam8g monopuhpeg, kah missinninnuog matta amomoont: togkodteg peyom8uk, kah amaunit howan wutch kenugke nagoh, noh amaunau nashpe ummatcheséonk: qut 8sqheonk n8nompagunumauon ut wunnutcheganit askuhwheteaenin.
E.Eze.33.6: But if the watchman see the sword come, and blow not the trumpet, and the people be not warned; if the sword come, and take any person from among them, he is taken away in his iniquity; but his blood will I require at the watchman's hand.

α.Eze.33.7 Ne nan ken woi wosketompae wunnaumoniin, kutaskwheteaenuheṣh ut wekit Israel: newaj woh n8taman kutt8onk ut nutt8nut, kah nag woh kuttamwontamwanshinneunk wutch nuhhogkat.
E.Eze.33.7: So thou, O son of man, I have set thee a watchman unto the house of Israel; therefore thou shalt hear the word at my mouth, and warn them from me.

α.Eze.33.8 Unnog matcheetou, woi matchet8waenin, pish wuñamuhkut kenup: matta amaumoe ken8noadt wutch umayut, noh matcheetowaen piṣh nup ut ummatcheseonganit qut 8sqheonk k8nompagunumauunun.
E.Eze.33.8: When I say unto the wicked, O wicked man, thou shalt surely die; if thou dost not speak to warn the wicked from his way, that wicked man shall die in his iniquity; but his blood will I require at thine hand.

α.Eze.33.9 Qut amaumat matchetou wutch ummayit ukqushkeontamunat: matta quinnuppek wutch ummayut, piṣh nup ut ummatcheseonganit, qut ken kuppohquohwhun kukketeahogkou.
E.Eze.33.9: Nevertheless, if thou warn the wicked of his way to turn from it; if he do not turn from his way, he shall die in his iniquity; but thou hast delivered thy soul.

α.Eze.33.10 Newaj, woi ken wosketompae wunnaumoniin, ken8s wek Israel: yeu kussinneau kussimw8, nuppanneseonganunonaṣh, kah num̃atcheseonganunonaṣh nuhkuhkongqueog, kah niṣh mahchum8ontantog, neit toh woh nuttin pomantamunan?
E.Eze.33.10: Therefore, O thou son of man, speak unto the house of Israel; Thus ye speak, saying, If our transgressions and our sins be upon us, and we pine away in them, how should we then live?

α.Eze.33.11 Nag us, pomantamon, wussin Jehovah Manit, matta n8weekontam8h wunnupp8onk matcheetou, qut matchetou woh ukquinnuppenat wutch ummayut, onk woh pomantam: qushkek, qushkek wutch kummatchemayout, newutche tohwutch woh nuppok woi Israelle wek?
E.Eze.33.11: Say unto them, As I live, saith the Lord GOD, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked; but that the wicked turn from his way and live: turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways; for why will ye die, O house of Israel?

α.Eze.33.12 Newutche ken wosketompae wunnaumoniin us wunneechan8oh kummissinninnumog wussampweseonk sampweusseaen matta piṣh pohquohwhunuk8un, ut uppanneseae kesukkodtumut: kah papaume ummatcheseonk matcheetou, matta piṣh ne wunnashpe penushóun ne kesukok quinnuppeit wutch ummatcheseonganit, kah sampwusseaenin matta piṣh tapenum8 pomantamun ne kesukok matchesit.
E.Eze.33.12: Therefore, thou son of man, say unto the children of thy people, The righteousness of the righteous shall not deliver him in the day of his transgression: as for the wickedness of the wicked, he shall not fall thereby in the day that he turneth from his wickedness; neither shall the righteous be able to live for his righteousness in the day that he sinneth.

α.Eze.33.13 Unnog sampweusseaénin noh piṣh wunnamuhkut pomantam; pabahtantog nehenwonche wussampweusseonk, kah matcheseit: wame wussampweusseonk matta piṣh mehquontam8un, qut wutch ummatcheseonk ne asit, piṣh wunnupp8wontamun.
E.Eze.33.13: When I shall say to the righteous, that he shall surely live; if he trust to his own righteousness, and commit iniquity, all his righteousnesses shall not be remembered; but for his iniquity that he hath committed, he shall die for it.

α.Eze.33.14 Wonk, unnog matcheetou, piṣh wunnamuhkut kenup; quinnuppeit wutch ummatcheseonganit, kah usseit ne wanegik kah sampwagk.
E.Eze.33.14: Again, when I say unto the wicked, Thou shalt surely die; if he turn from his sin, and do that which is lawful and right;

α.Eze.33.15 Matcheou nompenuk kenohtóadtuonk, nompenuk ne mak8kinnúadt, pomushadt pomantamwae kuhk8waonganit, kah matta matchesegk, noh piṣh wunnamuhkut pomantam matta piṣh nupp8.
E.Eze.33.15: If the wicked restore the pledge, give again that he had robbed, walk in the statutes of life, without committing iniquity; he shall surely live, he shall not die.

α.Eze.33.16 Wanne ummatcheseonk piṣh missohham8un, ussu ne wanegik kah sampwagk, piṣh wunnamuhkut pomantam.
E.Eze.33.16: None of his sins that he hath committed shall be mentioned unto him: he hath done that which is lawful and right; he shall surely live.

α.Eze.33.17 Qut wunneechan8oh kummissinninnumog n8waog, ummay Lord matta sampwano, qut nag ummayou matta sampwan8.
E.Eze.33.17: Yet the children of thy people say, The way of the Lord is not equal: but as for them, their way is not equal.

α.Eze.33.18 Sampweusseaenin quinnuppit wutch wussampweusseonganit, kah matchesit, ne piṣh wuttit nuppun.
E.Eze.33.18: When the righteous turneth from his righteousness, and committeth iniquity, he shall even die thereby.

α.Eze.33.19 Qut matchetou quinnuppeit wutch ummatchetoonganit, kah usseit ne wanegik kah sampwag, ne piṣh wunnashpe pomantamun.
E.Eze.33.19: But if the wicked turn from his wickedness, and do that which is lawful and right, he shall live thereby.

α.Eze.33.20 Qut kussimw8 ummay Lord matta sampwan8; woi kenaau wek Israel, k8sumunumw8 nishnoh pasuk neaunak ummayaṣh.
E.Eze.33.20: Yet ye say, The way of the Lord is not equal. O ye house of Israel, I will judge you every one after his ways.

α.Eze.33.21 Kah n$niyeup, nabo neese kodtumwae missináyeog, piogqussit nepauz, kah napanna adtahshikqunohhog nepauz, pasuk noh pohquohhog wutch Jerusalem, nuppeyaonuk, n8wau, keitotan sohkomun.
E.Eze.33.21: And it came to pass in the twelfth year of our captivity, in the tenth month, in the fifth day of the month, that one that had escaped out of Jerusalem came unto me, saying, The city is smitten.

α.Eze.33.22 Kah wunnutcheg Lord nuhkuhkongkup, negonáe wanonkqueuk ash pápeyonkup noh pohquohhog, kah n8wohshinnumunk nutt8n, nô pajeh nuppeyógqunat mohtompog, kah nutt8n woshwem8, kah matta wonk nukkáket8.
E.Eze.33.22: Now the hand of the LORD was upon me in the evening, afore he that was escaped came; and had opened my mouth, until he came to me in the morning; and my mouth was opened, and I was no more dumb.

α.Eze.33.23 Neit wuttinn8waonk Lord nuppeyaónuk, n8wau,
E.Eze.33.23: Then the word of the LORD came unto me, saying,

α.Eze.33.24 Wosketompae wunnaumoniin, yeug apitcheg mahchim8e ayeuonganit ut ohkeit Israel, kutt8og, n8waog, Abraham pasuk88, kah noh ohto8p ohke, qut nenawun numm8namun, ohke nuttinnumonteanan wutche ohtoonk.
E.Eze.33.24: Son of man, they that inhabit those wastes of the land of Israel speak, saying, Abraham was one, and he inherited the land: but we are many; the land is given us for inheritance.

α.Eze.33.25 Newutche nag us, yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, kukk8chtamumw8 musqueheonk, kah kuttahshinumumw8 kuskesuk8aṣh en nogque kittinnúkontunkan8out, kah kenushteamw8, kah sun woh kutahtomw8 ohke?
E.Eze.33.25: Wherefore say unto them, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Ye eat with the blood, and lift up your eyes toward your idols, and shed blood: and shall ye possess the land?

α.Eze.33.26 Kukquésukkompómw8 kuttogkodtegan8, kutussemw8 nishkeneunkquok, kah nishnoh pasuk mamauau weetatteamungoh ummittamwussoh, kah sun woh kutahtomw8 ohke?
E.Eze.33.26: Ye stand upon your sword, ye work abomination, and ye defile every one his neighbour's wife: and shall ye possess the land?

α.Eze.33.27 Yeu nag us, yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, pomantamon, wunnamuhkut neg apitcheg mahchim8e ayeuonganit, nag piṣh penushaog ut togkodteganit: kah noh apit pohquáhshinne ohteuhkonit nuttinninnumauónuh puppinashim ummahchipwuneat: kah neg apitcheg wonkon8sinit, kah hassunnekit, piṣh enninneae nupp8og.
E.Eze.33.27: Say thou thus unto them, Thus saith the Lord GOD; As I live, surely they that are in the wastes shall fall by the sword, and him that is in the open field will I give to the beasts to be devoured, and they that be in the forts and in the caves shall die of the pestilence.

α.Eze.33.28 Newutche nuppápaquanne touishitteóh ohke, kah wunnetue menuhkesuonk pish wohkukquoshin, kah Israelle wadchuaṣh piṣh touishineaṣh, matta woh howan uppannupwushaun.
E.Eze.33.28: For I will lay the land most desolate, and the pomp of her strength shall cease; and the mountains of Israel shall be desolate, that none shall pass through.

α.Eze.33.29 Neit piṣh wahteauog nen Jehovah, papaquanne toushitteauon ohke, wutche wame wunnishkeneunkquodt8m8aṣh niṣh aséhetticheh.
E.Eze.33.29: Then shall they know that I am the LORD, when I have laid the land most desolate because of all their abominations which they have committed.

α.Eze.33.30 Wonk ken wosketompae wunnaumoniin, wunneechan8oh kummissiñinnumog ash kuppumee ayeuhkonittue kéketunkquog, ut kishkeneutunkan, kah wetuóme squontamut, ken8nittuog, nishnoh pasuk weematoh, n8waog, peyunk, k8wehquetumauunumw8 kah n8tam8k teagwe kutt8wonk ne wâm8uk Lordut.
E.Eze.33.30: Also, thou son of man, the children of thy people still are talking against thee by the walls and in the doors of the houses, and speak one to another, every one to his brother, saying, Come, I pray you, and hear what is the word that cometh forth from the LORD.

α.Eze.33.31 Kah nag kuppeyaónukquog, onatuh missinninnuog paáhettit, kah nag appuog anaquabean onatuh nummissinninnúmog, kah n8tamwog kukkutt8wongaṣh, qut matta wutussenàoaṣh, newutche nashpe wutt8n8 womoausuog, qut wuttahhou asuhkom8m8 wutahahchuwontam8ongan8.
E.Eze.33.31: And they come unto thee as the people cometh, and they sit before thee as my people, and they hear thy words, but they will not do them: for with their mouth they shew much love, but their heart goeth after their covetousness.

α.Eze.33.32 Newutche kusseh, kutogqueyeu ut nag noh wanont8wa8hamont, kah wunnuppuhpequau: newutche nag n8tamwog kukkutt8wongaṣh, qut matta wutussenáoaṣh.
E.Eze.33.32: And, lo, thou art unto them as a very lovely song of one that hath a pleasant voice, and can play well on an instrument: for they hear thy words, but they do them not.

α.Eze.33.33 Kah yeu ânak, (kusseh, piṣh n$nih) neit piṣh wahteauog quoshodtumwaenúh kenukshâog.
E.Eze.33.33: And when this cometh to pass, (lo, it will come,) then shall they know that a prophet hath been among them.

α.Eze.34.1 KAh wuttinn8waonk Jehovah nuppeyaónuk, n8wau,
E.Eze.34.1: And the word of the LORD came unto me, saying,

α.Eze.34.2 Wosketompae wunnaumoniin, ayeuhkonittue quoshoe missohhamouṣh Israelle shephersdog, quoshodtuṣh kah nag us, Lord Jehovah yeu wuttinnon shepherdsoh, missi wutonkapunnaongan8 Israelle shepherdsog neg nehenwonche assamoncheg wuhhogkauh: sunnummatta woh shepherdsog assamauoog flocksoh?
E.Eze.34.2: Son of man, prophesy against the shepherds of Israel, prophesy, and say unto them, Thus saith the Lord GOD unto the shepherds; Woe be to the shepherds of Israel that do feed themselves! should not the shepherds feed the flocks?

α.Eze.34.3 Kummeechumw8 wees, kah kuthogkumw8 w8l, kenushoog neg wânogqutcheg: qut matta kutassamomw8 flockoh
E.Eze.34.3: Ye eat the fat, and ye clothe you with the wool, ye kill them that are fed: but ye feed not the flock.

α.Eze.34.4 Mahchinácheg matta kummenuhkéheóog, kah matta keneetskeheomw8 noh mahchinadt, kah matta kutaséhpanomw8 ne pohquag, kah matta wonk kuppaudtauomw8 ne moncha8hkomuk, kah matta kenatinneáham8mw8 ne wanteómuk, qut chekeeyeuuk kah unkqueneunkquog nag kenanawunauóog.
E.Eze.34.4: The diseased have ye not strengthened, neither have ye healed that which was sick, neither have ye bound up that which was broken, neither have ye brought again that which was driven away, neither have ye sought that which was lost; but with force and with cruelty have ye ruled them.

α.Eze.34.5 Kah nag seahwhóog newutche na matta shephersun8h: kah neg 8meetsuonganunneauh wame ohteuhkone puppinashimwog, seáhwhut.
E.Eze.34.5: And they were scattered, because there is no shepherd: and they became meat to all the beasts of the field, when they were scattered.

α.Eze.34.6 Nutshepsumog nanwiyeuog pannuppe wame wadchútu, kah ut nishnoh kussohkói wadchu; nux nuf-flockum nanwiyeum8p, ut wame wosketohkeit, kah matta howan natinohteaou, kah wunnátinneawhoh.
E.Eze.34.6: My sheep wandered through all the mountains, and upon every high hill: yea, my flock was scattered upon all the face of the earth, and none did search or seek after them.

α.Eze.34.7 Newutche kenaau shepherdsog n8tam8k wuttinn8waonk Lord.
E.Eze.34.7: Therefore, ye shepherds, hear the word of the LORD;

α.Eze.34.8 Pomantamon, wussin Lord Jehovah, wunnamuhkut, newutche nuf$flockum, tohqunnumwonkanú8, kah nuf$flockum ummeechummuwonganin nishnoh ohteuhkone puppinashim, newutch matta shepherdunn8, kah nutsheperdumog matta natinneuhkóntam8og nuf-flockum, qut shepherdsog meetseheaog wuhhogkauh, kah matta meetsehteau8og nuf$flockum.
E.Eze.34.8: As I live, saith the Lord GOD, surely because my flock became a prey, and my flock became meat to every beast of the field, because there was no shepherd, neither did my shepherds search for my flock, but the shepherds fed themselves, and fed not my flock;

α.Eze.34.9 Newutche, woi shepherdsog, n8tam8k wuttinn8waonk Lord.
E.Eze.34.9: Therefore, O ye shepherds, hear the word of the LORD;

α.Eze.34.10 Yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, kusseh, nutáyeuuhkon sheperdsog: kah n8nompagunnumauóog nuf$flockum[o]h, kah n8wohkukquoshitteauoog assamónat nuf$flockumoh, kah shepherdsog matta pish wonk assam8og wuhhogkauh, newutche nuppohquohwhun nuf$flockum wutch wutt8n8out, onk woh mat nah 8meechumuméinauh.
E.Eze.34.10: Thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I am against the shepherds; and I will require my flock at their hand, and cause them to cease from feeding the flock; neither shall the shepherds feed themselves any more; for I will deliver my flock from their mouth, that they may not be meat for them.

α.Eze.34.11 Newutche yeu wussin Lord Jéhovah, kusseh, nen, nen naneeswe nunnatinneuhkon, nutshepsumog kah nunnatinneawhôog.
E.Eze.34.11: For thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I, even I, will both search my sheep, and seek them out.

α.Eze.34.12 Onatuh Shepard natinneahwhont uf[-]flockum kônukshont nashwaiyeue Shepsoh: ne nuttin natinnewhoneau nutshepsumog, kah nuppohquohwhunoog wutch wame ayeuonganit uttoh adt seahwhut unkquohquodtaeu kah pohkenumwe.
E.Eze.34.12: As a shepherd seeketh out his flock in the day that he is among his sheep that are scattered; so will I seek out my sheep, and will deliver them out of all places where they have been scattered in the cloudy and dark day.

α.Eze.34.13 Kah nussohk8wunoog wutch missinninnutu, kah nummukinoog wutch wutohtimoinneat, kah nuppas8oog nehenwonche wutohtuout, kah nutassamoog Israelle wadchuuhkontu, kishke sepuehtu, ut wame wutohtue ohkeit.
E.Eze.34.13: And I will bring them out from the people, and gather them from the countries, and will bring them to their own land, and feed them upon the mountains of Israel by the rivers, and in all the inhabited places of the country.

α.Eze.34.14 Nag nutassamoog ut wunnee tannadtupp8onganit, kah ut kussohkoiyeue Israelle wadchutu ne piṣh wutchippinnutunkan8: na piṣh wussepsinneau wunne chippinnutunkanit, kah ut wunnogk8e tannadtupp8onganit piṣh nag tanadtupp8og Israelle wadchuuhkontu.
E.Eze.34.14: I will feed them in a good pasture, and upon the high mountains of Israel shall their fold be: there shall they lie in a good fold, and in a fat pasture shall they feed upon the mountains of Israel.

α.Eze.34.15 Nutassam nufflokum kah nussepsinn8w[à]heoog wussin L[e]rd Jehovah.
E.Eze.34.15: I will feed my flock, and I will cause them to lie down, saith the Lord GOD.

α.Eze.34.16 Nunnatinneuhham ne wanteomuk wonk nuppaudtauun ne sohh8komuk, kah nutasseepunoh ne pohqshunk nummenuhkeh noh mahchinat, qutnuppaguan wanogqutcheg kah manuhkesitcheg, nussohkom8unoog wussittumoonk.
E.Eze.34.16: I will seek that which was lost, and bring again that which was driven away, and will bind up that which was broken, and will strengthen that which was sick: but I will destroy the fat and the strong; I will feed them with judgment.

α.Eze.34.17 Kah papaume kenaau, woi nuf-flokumong, yeu wussin Lord Jehovah: kusseh, n8sittum ut nashaue puppinaṣhimwut, kah nashaue ramsog kah miṣhe nomposhimwe goatsog.
E.Eze.34.17: And as for you, O my flock, thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I judge between cattle and cattle, between the rams and the he goats.

α.Eze.34.18 Sun yeu kutogquontamuneau peasik, mahchipwunneat wunne tannadtupp8onk, qut woh kuttahtaṣhkuhkomumw8 sekqshunkiṣh tanadtupp8ongaṣh? kah wuttattamunat m8noe nippeaṣh qut woh akqshunk kenishketeauuneau nashpe kusseet8oash?
E.Eze.34.18: Seemeth it a small thing unto you to have eaten up the good pasture, but ye must tread down with your feet the residue of your pastures? and to have drunk of the deep waters, but ye must foul the residue with your feet?

α.Eze.34.19 Kah papaume nuf-flockum, nag meechwog, ne tahtashkuhkomog naṣhpe kusseet8out: kah nag wuttattamwog ne niṣhketeauog naṣhpe kusseet8oaṣh.
E.Eze.34.19: And as for my flock, they eat that which ye have trodden with your feet; and they drink that which ye have fouled with your feet.

α.Eze.34.20 Newutche yeu Lord Jehovah nah wuttinnon, kusseh, nen, n8sittum nashaue wunnogque kah ó[nau]wussue neetasuut.
E.Eze.34.20: Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD unto them; Behold, I, even I, will judge between the fat cattle and between the lean cattle.

α.Eze.34.21 Newutche keneepukkomumw8 nashpe kussissippoiyeum8, kah kuttugku, kah wame n8cumwesitcheg kuppadtohkehtohwhooog kutaskonouh nô pajeh kusseahwhonaoont.
E.Eze.34.21: Because ye have thrust with side and with shoulder, and pushed all the diseased with your horns, till ye have scattered them abroad;

α.Eze.34.22 Newaj wadchanog nuf$flokum, kah nag matta piṣh wonk to[n]qun8og, kah n8sittum ut nashaue papuppinashimwut kah puppinashimwut.
E.Eze.34.22: Therefore will I save my flock, and they shall no more be a prey; and I will judge between cattle and cattle.

α.Eze.34.23 Kah nanawunnumwaheonuh pasuk shephard, kah noh piṣh nah wutassamouh, nuttinneum David, noh nah piṣh wutassamoh, kah noh piṣh nag wut-shephardum8uh.
E.Eze.34.23: And I will set up one shepherd over them, and he shall feed them, even my servant David; he shall feed them, and he shall be their shepherd.

α.Eze.34.24 Nen Jehovah piṣh um-Manitt8m8uh[,] kah nuttinneum David piṣh sontimoou ut kenugke nagoh, nen Jehovah nussin.
E.Eze.34.24: And I the LORD will be their God, and my servant David a prince among them; I the LORD have spoken it.

α.Eze.34.25 Kah nutayimauoog wunohteae wunn8waonk, kah n8wohkukquossum matche puppinashim wutch ohkeit: kah nag piṣh wunniyeue ayeuog ut touohkomuk, kah kouéog touohkomuk.
E.Eze.34.25: And I will make with them a covenant of peace, and will cause the evil beasts to cease out of the land: and they shall dwell safely in the wilderness, and sleep in the woods.

α.Eze.34.26 Kah n8nanetuwáhkonunk, kah ayeuongaṣh waeene n8wadchumut, kah nunn8keah sokanon ut wutahquompiyeuut: na$ut piṣh wunnanittue sokanonaṣh.
E.Eze.34.26: And I will make them and the places round about my hill a blessing; and I will cause the shower to come down in his season; there shall be showers of blessing.

α.Eze.34.27 Kah ohteuhkone mehtug piṣh tannegen ummeechummuonk, kah ohke piṣh tannegen ummiṣhegitteauonk kah nag piṣh wunayeuog ut wutohkeout, kah piṣh wahteauog nen Jehovah pohquenumon weyoak8e kiṣhpissuongan8oaṣh, kah pohquohwhunog wutch wunnutchegan8out nag nah wadchiyeuononcheg.
E.Eze.34.27: And the tree of the field shall yield her fruit, and the earth shall yield her increase, and they shall be safe in their land, and shall know that I am the LORD, when I have broken the bands of their yoke, and delivered them out of the hand of those that served themselves of them.

α.Eze.34.28 Kah nag matta piṣh wonk 8tohqunum8onganeinauh penuwohteaog: kah ohkee puppinaṣhimwog matta piṣh ummahchipp8unauh: qut nag piṣh wunnayeuog, kah matta piṣh howane wabesuhikk8og.
E.Eze.34.28: And they shall no more be a prey to the heathen, neither shall the beast of the land devour them; but they shall dwell safely, and none shall make them afraid.

α.Eze.34.29 Kah n8waapinnumauoog waeenodtumewe ohkehteamuk, kah nag matta piṣj wonk mahtupanuk8og kodtupp8onk ut ohkeit, kah matta piṣh wonk kenunnum8og penuwohteae akodchuonk.
E.Eze.34.29: And I will raise up for them a plant of renown, and they shall be no more consumed with hunger in the land, neither bear the shame of the heathen any more.

α.Eze.34.30 Yeu piṣh wuttinne wahteauuneau, nen Jehovah um-Manitt8m8uh, n8weetomoog, kah nag wek Israel nummissinninnumog.
E.Eze.34.30: Thus shall they know that I the LORD their God am with them, and that they, even the house of Israel, are my people, saith the Lord GOD.

α.Eze.34.31 Kah kenaau nuf-flockum, nuttit tannadtuppoe flockum, k8wosketomp8mw8, kah nen kum-Manitt8mw8, wussin Jehovah Manit.
E.Eze.34.31: And ye my flock, the flock of my pasture, are men, and I am your God, saith the Lord GOD.

α.Eze.35.1 NAno wuttinn8waonk Jehovah nuppeyaonuk n8wau,
E.Eze.35.1: Moreover the word of the LORD came unto me, saying,

α.Eze.35.2 Wosketompae wunnaumoniin, ayeuhkonittue ponsh kuskesuk wadchuut Seir, kah ayeuhkonittue quoshodtsh.
E.Eze.35.2: Son of man, set thy face against mount Seir, and prophesy against it,

α.Eze.35.3 Kah uttash, yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, kusseh woi wadchu Seir, nen kutayeuuhkonṣh, ka[h] kutayeuuhkonittue summagunnumouṣh nuhpit, kah kuppapukquanne touushinnuwaṣh.
E.Eze.35.3: And say unto it, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, O mount Seir, I am against thee, and I will stretch out mine hand against thee, and I will make thee most desolate.

α.Eze.35.4 Nummahchumwushitteoh kukkeitotanaṣh, kah ken piṣh kuttauwussin, kah piṣh k8wahteoh nen Jehovah.
E.Eze.35.4: I will lay thy cities waste, and thou shalt be desolate, and thou shalt know that I am the LORD.

α.Eze.35.5 Newutche kutohto nukkone sekeneaadtuonk, kah kusseahham 8s[e]heongan8 wunnaumonuh Israel, nashpe cheke[a]e togkodteg, unkuppanahettit, wohkukquoshik ummatcheseongan8.
E.Eze.35.5: Because thou hast had a perpetual hatred, and hast shed the blood of the children of Israel by the force of the sword in the time of their calamity, in the time that their iniquity had an end:

α.Eze.35.6 Newutche pomantamon wussin Jehovah Manit, kukquoshowehtoush en musqueheonganit, kah musqueheonk piṣh ken8sittohuk: newutche matta kussekeneam8 musqueheonk, musqueheonk piṣh kutasuhkunk.
E.Eze.35.6: Therefore, as I live, saith the Lord GOD, I will prepare thee unto blood, and blood shall pursue thee: sith thou hast not hated blood, even blood shall pursue thee.

α.Eze.35.7 Yeu nuttinne papaquanne touussumwáheon Seire wadchu, kah nan8ch tummetahwhon noh sohhog kah noh quashkeit.
E.Eze.35.7: Thus will I make mount Seir most desolate, and cut off from it him that passeth out and him that returneth.

α.Eze.35.8 Kah nunnumwapeh 8wadchúmut náhtauitcheh: ut k8wadchumehtu, kah kutt8nóuhkóiyeumut, kah ut wame kussepeumut, nag piṣh penushaog neg nashitcheg nashpe togkodteg.
E.Eze.35.8: And I will fill his mountains with his slain men: in thy hills, and in thy valleys, and in all thy rivers, shall they fall that are slain with the sword.

α.Eze.35.9 Kummichemohtae touussumwáheṣh, kah kukkeitotanaṣh matta piṣh qushkemun8aṣh, kah piṣh k8wahteomw8 nen Jehovah.
E.Eze.35.9: I will make thee perpetual desolations, and thy cities shall not return: and ye shall know that I am the LORD.

α.Eze.35.10 Newutche kussip, yeush neesinaṣh wutohtim[ó]ineaṣh, kah yeuṣh neesinaṣh ohkeaṣh piṣh nuttaiheaṣh, kah nutohtinánonaṣh, tôkonogque Jehovah wutappinneáh.
E.Eze.35.10: Because thou hast said, These two nations and these two countries shall be mine, and we will possess it; whereas the LORD was there:

α.Eze.35.11 Newutche pomantamon, n8wau Lord Jehovah: nutussen neaunak kummusquantamoonk, kah neaunak kutishkauósuonk, ne iskauosue anheadt newutche nag kussekeneauoog: n8wahshan nuhhog, nag wussumog.
E.Eze.35.11: Therefore, as I live, saith the Lord GOD, I will even do according to thine anger, and according to thine envy which thou hast used out of thy hatred against them; and I will make myself known among them, when I have judged thee.

α.Eze.35.12 Kah piṣh k8wahteoun nen Lord, nunn8tam wame kup-blasphemaongaṣh niṣh an ayeuhkonittue ken8nadcheh Israelle wadchuaṣh, an8waan, niṣh touishineaṣh, niṣh nuttinnumonteanánonaṣh mahsumunat.
E.Eze.35.12: And thou shalt know that I am the LORD, and that I have heard all thy blasphemies which thou hast spoken against the mountains of Israel, saying, They are laid desolate, they are given us to consume.

α.Eze.35.13 Yeu kuttinne nashpe kutt8n8oaṣh, ayeuhkonittue wowéenomwósumw8, kah kutayeuhkonittue mishehteomw8 kukkutt8wongan8oaṣh: nunn8tamunaṣh.
E.Eze.35.13: Thus with your mouth ye have boasted against me, and have multiplied your words against me: I have heard them.

α.Eze.35.14 Yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, mamusse ohke muskouántog kuttouushinnumwaṣh.
E.Eze.35.14: Thus saith the Lord GOD; When the whole earth rejoiceth, I will make thee desolate.

α.Eze.35.15 Neane wekontamwóntaman wutohtoonk Israel wek, newutche touishin, ne kuttinhennin: piṣh kuttouwushin, woi Seire wadchu, kah wame Idumea, ne wame, kah nag piṣh wahteauog nen Jehovah.
E.Eze.35.15: As thou didst rejoice at the inheritance of the house of Israel, because it was desolate, so will I do unto thee: thou shalt be desolate, O mount Seir, and all Idumea, even all of it: and they shall know that I am the LORD.

α.Eze.36.1 WOnk wosketompae wunnaumonii, quoshodtaṣh Israelle wadchuaṣh, kah n8waṣh, kenaau Israelle wadchuog, n8tam8k wuttinn8waonk Lord.
E.Eze.36.1: Also, thou son of man, prophesy unto the mountains of Israel, and say, Ye mountains of Israel, hear the word of the LORD:

α.Eze.36.2 Yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, newutche kutayeuhkonittue unnukumw8, hoh, nukkóne qunuhqui ayeuongaṣh nutahtôe nutaihenonaṣh.
E.Eze.36.2: Thus saith the Lord GOD; Because the enemy hath said against you, Aha, even the ancient high places are ours in possession:

α.Eze.36.3 Newutche quoshodtṣh kah n8waṣh, yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, newutche nag kuttóuussinnumwahik8óog, kah kummisseaṣhkoónuk8o8og aeehtaue, onk woh kena[a]u wutohtoongan8 askqshóncheg penuwohteáog, kah k8weadtimukkumw8 wussissitt8n8oash kogké[n]túmoog, kah kummishanánumukumw8 missinninnúog.
E.Eze.36.3: Therefore prophesy and say, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Because they have made you desolate, and swallowed you up on every side, that ye might be a possession unto the residue of the heathen, and ye are taken up in the lips of talkers, and are an infamy of the people:

α.Eze.36.4 Newutche kenaau Israelle wadchog n8tam8k wuttinn8waonk Lord Jehovah, yeu Lord Jehovah wuttittamun wadchuaṣh; kah wadchuemesaṣh, kah seupaṣh, kah 8noúhtuaṣh, kah touishinne mahchim8aṣh, kah nukkodtumwe otanaṣh, niṣh tohqunnum8onganeú8giṣh, kah hahanehtam8onganeú8k en ashqshoncheg penuwohteaog, neg weenuhkauoncheg.
E.Eze.36.4: Therefore, ye mountains of Israel, hear the word of the Lord GOD; Thus saith the Lord GOD to the mountains, and to the hills, to the rivers, and to the valleys, to the desolate wastes, and to the cities that are forsaken, which became a prey and derision to the residue of the heathen that are round about;

α.Eze.36.5 Newutche yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, wunnamuhkut ut n8tae numm8summuaonganit nutayeukonittue ken8n askqshoncheg penuwohteaog, kah ayeuhkonittue wame Idumea, neg kohquttumauutcheg nutohke wutohtauunnaóut, nashpe wame wekontamoe wuttahh8oaṣh, sekeneaádtue sohwohkonat en tohqunnum8onganit.
E.Eze.36.5: Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Surely in the fire of my jealousy have I spoken against the residue of the heathen, and against all Idumea, which have appointed my land into their possession with the joy of all their heart, with despiteful minds, to cast it out for a prey.

α.Eze.36.6 Newutche quoshodtsh papaume Israelle ohke, kah uttaṣh wadchuaṣh, wadchuemesaṣh, sepuaṣh, kah 8nóuhkôiyeuaṣh, yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, kusseh, nukket8kom ut numm8sitteam8onganit, kah ut nummusquantam8onganit, newutche kukkenunnumw8 wutákodchuongan8 penuwohteaog.
E.Eze.36.6: Prophesy therefore concerning the land of Israel, and say unto the mountains, and to the hills, to the rivers, and to the valleys, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I have spoken in my jealousy and in my fury, because ye have borne the shame of the heathen:

α.Eze.36.7 Newutche yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, nuttahshinnum nunnutcheg, wunnamuhkut penuwohteaog neg weenuhkonkqueógig, nag piṣh kenunnumwog wutakodchuongan8.
E.Eze.36.7: Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; I have lifted up mine hand, Surely the heathen that are about you, they shall bear their shame.

α.Eze.36.8 Qut kenaau, woi Israelle wadchuaṣh, kenaau piṣh k8tuhqunnumw8, kah piṣh kuppaudtauomw8 kummeechummuongan8 nummissiñinnúmog Israel, newutche nag nahen peyaog.
E.Eze.36.8: But ye, O mountains of Israel, ye shall shoot forth your branches, and yield your fruit to my people of Israel; for they are at hand to come.

α.Eze.36.9 Newutche kusseh, k8weech8humunumw8, kah nukquinnuppinnumun en kuhhogkaout, kah kenaau piṣh kutanaskkohhamwonitteamw8, kah kutohteuhkonitteamw8.
E.Eze.36.9: For, behold, I am for you, and I will turn unto you, and ye shall be tilled and sown:

α.Eze.36.10 Kah nummisheh wosketompaog ut kuhhogkaout, wame wek Israel, ne wame, kah otanaṣh piṣh ayinneaṣh kah mahchumwushikiṣh piṣh wekikontamunash.
E.Eze.36.10: And I will multiply men upon you, all the house of Israel, even all of it: and the cities shall be inhabited, and the wastes shall be builded:

α.Eze.36.11 Kah kummisheh wosketomp ut kuhhogkaout kah puppinashim, kah nag piṣh nano monaog, kah meechummuog, kah kittinne menehkhennumw8 neaunak nukkone kittinniyeuongan8: kah kutanue wunnenehennumw8, onk weske, kah piṣh k8wahteomw8, nen Jehovah.
E.Eze.36.11: And I will multiply upon you man and beast; and they shall increase and bring fruit: and I will settle you after your old estates, and will do better unto you than at your beginnings: and ye shall know that I am the LORD.

α.Eze.36.12 Nux, nuppomushah wosketompaog kuhhogkaout, nummissinninnuog Israel, kah nag piṣh wuttaiheog kuhhog, kah ken piṣh nag wutohtoongan8, kah matta piṣh wonk kuppagwano wosketompaog.
E.Eze.36.12: Yea, I will cause men to walk upon you, even my people Israel; and they shall possess thee, and thou shalt be their inheritance, and thou shalt no more henceforth bereave them of men.

α.Eze.36.13 Yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, newutche nag kuttugquog, ken mohchipw[é]an wosketompaog, kah kuppagwodtoh kutohtimoin.
E.Eze.36.13: Thus saith the Lord GOD; Because they say unto you, Thou land devourest up men, and hast bereaved thy nations:

α.Eze.36.14 Newaj matta piṣh wonk pagwanoadt wosketompaog, kah matt[t]a piṣh wonk kuppagwato kutohtimoineaṣh wussin Lord Jehovah.
E.Eze.36.14: Therefore thou shalt devour men no more, neither bereave thy nations any more, saith the Lord GOD.

α.Eze.36.15 Kah matta wonk n8tamwaheoh wosketompaog ut kuhhogkat, wutakodchuongan8 penuwohteaog, kah matta piṣh wonk kuhkenunnumw8 kehkomaongan8 missinninnuog, kah matta piṣh wonk kuppenushahtoou wutohtimoneaṣh, wussin Lord Jehovah.
E.Eze.36.15: Neither will I cause men to hear in thee the shame of the heathen any more, neither shalt thou bear the reproach of the people any more, neither shalt thou cause thy nations to fall any more, saith the Lord GOD.

α.Eze.36.16 Nano wuttinn8waonk Jehovah nuppeyaonuk n8wau,
E.Eze.36.16: Moreover the word of the LORD came unto me, saying,

α.Eze.36.17 Wosketompae wunnaumoniin wek Israel aphettit nehenwonche wutohkeout, nishketeoog nashpe nehenwonche ummayash, kah nashpe wutusseongaṣh: ummay8 ut anaquabeh ogqueneunkquot wunnishkeneunkqussuonk ontsapp mittamwossis.
E.Eze.36.17: Son of man, when the house of Israel dwelt in their own land, they defiled it by their own way and by their doings: their way was before me as the uncleanness of a removed woman.

α.Eze.36.18 Newaj sokenumauog nummusquantamoonk, newutche musqueheonk ne seahhamwehettit ut ohkeit, kah wutch wuttinnukontunkanouh neh nashpe nishketeauhettit.
E.Eze.36.18: Wherefore I poured my fury upon them for the blood that they had shed upon the land, and for their idols wherewith they had polluted it:

α.Eze.36.19 Kah nusseahwhoog ut kenugke penuwohteaut, kah seahwhoog papashpe wutohtim[o]inneat, neaunag ummayeuóaṣh, kah neaunak wutusseonganóaṣh n8sumóog.
E.Eze.36.19: And I scattered them among the heathen, and they were dispersed through the countries: according to their way and according to their doings I judged them.

α.Eze.36.20 Kah kônukusháhettit pen8wohteáut ne aáhettit, nag niṣhketeauog n8neetupanatamwe wesuonk, nag unnáhettit, yeuh ummissinninnúmog Jehovah, kah sohhamwog wutch wutohkeóut.
E.Eze.36.20: And when they entered unto the heathen, whither they went, they profaned my holy name, when they said to them, These are the people of the LORD, and are gone forth out of his land.

α.Eze.36.21 Qut nukkitteamúnkinneam wutch n8ne wesuonk, ne wek Israel nishketeunk ut kenugke penuwohteaut ut$toh aáhettit.
E.Eze.36.21: But I had pity for mine holy name, which the house of Israel had profaned among the heathen, whither they went.

α.Eze.36.22 Newutche us wek Israel, yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, matta yeu nutussen wutche kenaau woi wek Israel, qut wutche n8neetupanatamwe wesuonk, ne nishketeauog ut kenugke penuwohteaut, uttoh aôóg.
E.Eze.36.22: Therefore say unto the house of Israel, thus saith the Lord GOD; I do not this for your sakes, O house of Israel, but for mine holy name's sake, which ye have profaned among the heathen, whither ye went.

α.Eze.36.23 Kah n8neetupanatamwáhteoh nummishe wesuonk ne nishketeómukup ut kenugke penuwohteáut, ne nishketeauog ut kenugke nagoh, kah penuwohteaog piṣh wahteauog nen Jehovah, wussin Lord Jehovah wunneetupanatamwáhimuk ut kuhhogkaóut, ut anaquabhettit.
E.Eze.36.23: And I will sanctify my great name, which was profaned among the heathen, which ye have profaned in the midst of them; and the heathen shall know that I am the LORD, saith the Lord GOD, when I shall be sanctified in you before their eyes.

α.Eze.36.24 Newutche keneemununumw8 wutch kenugke penuwohteaut, kah kummóununumw8 wutch wame wutohtimóinneat, kah kuppas8unumw8 ut nehenwonche kutohtuóut.
E.Eze.36.24: For I will take you from among the heathen, and gather you out of all countries, and will bring you into your own land.

α.Eze.36.25 Neit kusseahhamauonumw8 pahke nippe, kah piṣh kuppahkesumw8: wutch wame kénishkeneunkqussuongan8óut, kah wutch wame kittinnukontunkan8out, kuppahkhennumw8.
E.Eze.36.25: Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean: from all your filthiness, and from all your idols, will I cleanse you.

α.Eze.36.26 Wonk wuske metah kittinnumauunumw8, kah wuske nashauanit kupponamauonumw8: kah nutamaunum qussukquane metah wutch keyaús8óut, kah kittinnumauunumw8 weyausée metah.
E.Eze.36.26: A new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you: and I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give you an heart of flesh.

α.Eze.36.27 Kah nuppon nunnashauanitt8m kuttinnómiyeum8óut, kah kuppomushenumw8 nukkuhk8waonganit, kah kenaau piṣh kenanawéhteomw8 n8sittum8ongaṣh kah niṣh kutussenáoaṣh.
E.Eze.36.27: And I will put my spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments, and do them.

α.Eze.36.28 Kah piṣh kutáyimw8 ohkeit ne anumauogkup k8sh8oog, kah kenaau piṣh nummissinninnumog, kah piṣh nen kum-Manitt8mw8.
E.Eze.36.28: And ye shall dwell in the land that I gave to your fathers; and ye shall be my people, and I will be your God.

α.Eze.36.29 Kah k8wadchanunumw8 wutch wame kenishkeneunkqussuongan8oaṣh, kah n8wehquetum weatchiminneaṣh, kah numm8chekehteauun, kah matta kuppónamauonómw8 mahshagquodt.
E.Eze.36.29: I will also save you from all your uncleannesses: and I will call for the corn, and will increase it, and lay no famine upon you.

α.Eze.36.30 Kah piṣh nummishteóh ummeechummuonk mehtug, kah ummissétuonk ohteuk, matta wonk woh kutattumunum8uneat kehkontuonk wutch mahshagquodt, ut kenugke penuwohteaog.
E.Eze.36.30: And I will multiply the fruit of the tree, and the increase of the field, that ye shall receive no more reproach of famine among the heathen.

α.Eze.36.31 Neit piṣh kummequont[à]mumw8 nehenwonche kummatchemayeuoaṣh, kah kutusseongan8aṣh niṣh mat wanegenin8giṣh, kah piṣh kutunkquanumomw8 kuhhogkaog nehenwonche kenaum8ongan8out, wutch kummatcheseonganooaṣh, kah wutch kenishkeneunkquodt8m8aṣh.
E.Eze.36.31: Then shall ye remember your own evil ways, and your doings that were not good, and shall lothe yourselves in your own sight for your iniquities and for your abominations.

α.Eze.36.32 Matta wutch kenaau yeu nutussen wussin Lord Jehovah wahteau8k: akodch8k kah chepshunk wutch nehenwonche kummayyeuoaṣh, woi wek Israel.
E.Eze.36.32: Not for your sakes do I this, saith the Lord GOD, be it known unto you: be ashamed and confounded for your own ways, O house of Israel.

α.Eze.36.33 Yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, ne kesukok pahkhennog wutch wame kummatcheseongan8out, kutáyeuwéhenumw8 wonk keitotanash, kah matchteómuk piṣh wonk ayimun.
E.Eze.36.33: Thus saith the Lord GOD; In the day that I shall have cleansed you from all your iniquities I will also cause you to dwell in the cities, and the wastes shall be builded.

α.Eze.36.34 Kah touishinne ohke piṣh anaskhamun, táoushik anaquabhettit wame neg paumwushácheg.
E.Eze.36.34: And the desolate land shall be tilled, whereas it lay desolate in the sight of all that passed by.

α.Eze.36.35 Kah nag piṣh n8waog, yeu ohke touishinip, ogqueneunkquodt Edene tanohketeaonganit, kah mahchum8e, touishinne, kah sohquetahham8e keitotanaṣh, pummenutausuaṣh, kah wadohkeimukiṣh.
E.Eze.36.35: And they shall say, This land that was desolate is become like the garden of Eden; and the waste and desolate and ruined cities are become fenced, and are inhabited.

α.Eze.36.36 Neit penuwohteaog neg sekquttahwhutcheg waeenu, piṣh wahteauog nen Jehovah n8nteoh mahchimoe ayeuongaṣh, kah nutohketeam ne táwushikup: nen Jehovah nussin, kah piṣh nutussen.
E.Eze.36.36: Then the heathen that are left round about you shall know that I the LORD build the ruined places, and plant that that was desolate: I the LORD have spoken it, and I will do it.

α.Eze.36.37 Yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, qut onch woh nen nuppeantamont nashpe wek Israel nutusseaunshónaout: nag piṣh nutogque mishteauóog missinninnúh flockut.
E.Eze.36.37: Thus saith the Lord GOD; I will yet for this be enquired of by the house of Israel, to do it for them; I will increase them with men like a flock.

α.Eze.36.38 Neane wunneetupanatamwe flock, neane Jerusaleme flock ut 8neetupantamwe mishadtupp8onganit: ne piṣh unnu mahchumm8e otanaṣh wunnumwápinneau wosketompae flocksog, kah nag piṣh wahteauog nen Jehovah.
E.Eze.36.38: As the holy flock, as the flock of Jerusalem in her solemn feasts; so shall the waste cities be filled with flocks of men: and they shall know that I am the LORD.

α.Eze.37.1 Wunnutcheg Jehovah nunnuhkukkongkup, kah nussohh8wunukup ut wunnashainitt8mut Jehovah, kah nupponukup ut nashaue 8[nao]uhkôiyeuut ne nomwohtag wuskona[s]h.
E.Eze.37.1: The hand of the LORD was upon me, and carried me out in the spirit of the LORD, and set me down in the midst of the valley which was full of bones,

α.Eze.37.2 Kah niṣh nukkishkekomwáhikqunaṣh waeenu, kah kusseh muttaantaṣh ut pohquashinne 8nóuhkôiyeuut, kah kusseh niṣh papaquanne nunohtaash.
E.Eze.37.2: And caused me to pass by them round about: and, behold, there were very many in the open valley; and, lo, they were very dry.

α.Eze.37.3 Kah nuttinuk wosketompae wunnaumoniin, sun woh yeush wuskonaṣh pomantam8m8aṣh? kah nunnamp8hamup, woi Lord Jehovah k8wahte[a]uun.
E.Eze.37.3: And he said unto me, Son of man, can these bones live? And I answered, O Lord GOD, thou knowest.

α.Eze.37.4 Wonk nuttinuk, quoshoe missohhamóntaṣh yeush wuskonaṣh, kah nag us, woi kenaau nunohtaeu wuskonaṣh, n8tam8k wuttinn8waonk Jehovah.
E.Eze.37.4: Again he said unto me, Prophesy upon these bones, and say unto them, O ye dry bones, hear the word of the LORD.

α.Eze.37.5 Lord Jehovah, yeu wuttittamun yeush wuskonaṣh, kusseh, nuppetutteahto nashauonk ut kuhhogkaóut, kah piṣh kuppomantamumw8.
E.Eze.37.5: Thus saith the Lord GOD unto these bones; Behold, I will cause breath to enter into you, and ye shall live:

α.Eze.37.6 Kah kupponamauonumw8 wutchohtash, kah kuppadtauunumw8 weyaus, kah kupputtogguhwhunumw8 wuttuhquab, kah k8nashaonganuhkauunumw8, kah piṣh kuppomantamumw8, kah piṣh k8wahteomw8, nen Jehovah.
E.Eze.37.6: And I will lay sinews upon you, and will bring up flesh upon you, and cover you with skin, and put breath in you, and ye shall live; and ye shall know that I am the LORD.

α.Eze.37.7 Neit nuttinnukquoshódtum nean ann8sumuk: kah quoshódtumon, na wadtauatongquodt, kah kusseh nunnukshaonk, kah wuskonash moeu peyaum8aṣh, wuskon ne wadchukónnu8k.
E.Eze.37.7: So I prophesied as I was commanded: and as I prophesied, there was a noise, and behold a shaking, and the bones came together, bone to his bone.

α.Eze.37.8 Kah kuhkeneaumon, kusseh, mutchóhtaṣh, kah weyaus wunnuhkukkongquneau, kah mattúhquab nuhkuhkunk ut woskeche, qut matta wunnashaonganéog.
E.Eze.37.8: And when I beheld, lo, the sinews and the flesh came up upon them, and the skin covered them above: but there was no breath in them.

α.Eze.37.9 Neit nuttinuk, quoshoe missohhamwontaṣh waban, quoshodtsh wosketompae wunnaumoniin, uttush waban, yeu wussin Lord Manit, peyaush wutch yaue wabanit, woi nashauonk, kah potantash yeug nashitcheg, onk woh pomantamwog.
E.Eze.37.9: Then said he unto me, Prophesy unto the wind, prophesy, son of man, and say to the wind, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Come from the four winds, O breath, and breathe upon these slain, that they may live.

α.Eze.37.10 Neit nukquoshodtum nean ann8sit, kah nashauonk nag peyaonukquog, kah nag pomantamwog, kah neepouwéhtauoog wusseetowash, muttanunkquodt kenauwameonk.
E.Eze.37.10: So I prophesied as he commanded me, and the breath came into them, and they lived, and stood up upon their feet, an exceeding great army.

α.Eze.37.11 Neit nuttinuk, wosketompae wunnaumoniin, yeush wuskonaṣh mamusse wek Israel, kusseh, n8waog, nuskononaṣh nunohtópaṣh, kah nutanno[o]suonganun wannehteauun, nuttumwhutteamun nenawun.
E.Eze.37.11: Then he said unto me, Son of man, these bones are the whole house of Israel: behold, they say, Our bones are dried, and our hope is lost: we are cut off for our parts.

α.Eze.37.12 Newutche quoshodtsh, kah nag us, yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, kusseh, wame nummissinninnúmog, n8wóhshinum k8weenohkeaṣh, kah kukkuhkuhquéhennumw8 wutch k8weenohkeóut, kah kuppas8unumw8 ut ohkeit Israel.
E.Eze.37.12: Therefore prophesy and say unto them, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, O my people, I will open your graves, and cause you to come up out of your graves, and bring you into the land of Israel.

α.Eze.37.13 Kah piṣh k8wahteomw8 nen Lord, wohshwunnumon k8weenohkeoaṣh, woi nummissinninnúmog, kah kohkuhqunumóg k8weenohkeóut.
E.Eze.37.13: And ye shall know that I am the LORD, when I have opened your graves, O my people, and brought you up out of your graves,

α.Eze.37.14 Ponamauunog nunnushauonk kah pomantamog, kah wunnashinog ut nehenwonche k[u]to[h]keout: neit piṣh k8wáhteomw8 nen Jehovah nussin kah nutussen wussin Jehovah.
E.Eze.37.14: And shall put my spirit in you, and ye shall live, and I shall place you in your own land: then shall ye know that I the LORD have spoken it, and performed it, saith the LORD.

α.Eze.37.15 Wuttinn8waonk Jehovah wonk nuppeyaonuk n8wau,
E.Eze.37.15: The word of the LORD came again unto me, saying,

α.Eze.37.16 Nano ken wosketompae wunnaumoniin, nemunuṣh pasuk mehtug, kah wussukwhuṣh, wutche Judah, kah wunnaumonuh Israel weech[a]yeumoncheh, neit nemunuṣh onkatuk mehtug, kah wussukwhuṣh, wutche Joseph, ummehtugk8m Ephraim, kah wutche wame wek Israel weechayeumoncheh.
E.Eze.37.16: Moreover, thou son of man, take thee one stick, and write upon it, For Judah, and for the children of Israel his companions: then take another stick, and write upon it, For Joseph, the stick of Ephraim and for all the house of Israel his companions:

α.Eze.37.17 Kah mósogquehteouṣh en pasukqunnu8ut mehtug, kah niṣh piṣh pasukqunnu8aṣh ut kenutcheganit.
E.Eze.37.17: And join them one to another into one stick; and they shall become one in thine hand.

α.Eze.37.18 Kah wunnaumonuh kummissinninnumog unnukquean an8wahettit, sunnum̃atta kenahtuss8mun uttiyeuṣh anauwuttaman yeuṣh naṣhpe?
E.Eze.37.18: And when the children of thy people shall speak unto thee, saying, Wilt thou not shew us what thou meanest by these?

α.Eze.37.19 Nag us, yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, kusseh, piṣh nunnemunum ummehtugkum Joseph, ne ohtag wunnutcheganit Ephraim, kah Israelle chippan8ongaṣh weechayeumoncheh, kah n8weeche pononuh, weeche ummehtugk8m Judah, kah nuppasukqunteauun mehtug k[a]h neg piṣh pasuk88og ut nunnutcheganit.
E.Eze.37.19: Say unto them, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I will take the stick of Joseph, which is in the hand of Ephraim, and the tribes of Israel his fellows, and will put them with him, even with the stick of Judah, and make them one stick, and they shall be one in mine hand.

α.Eze.37.20 Kah mehtugquaṣh niṣh wasukkuhhamaniṣh, piṣh ohtaush kenutcheganit ut anaquabhettit.
E.Eze.37.20: And the sticks whereon thou writest shall be in thine hand before their eyes.

α.Eze.37.21 Kah nag us, yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, kusseh, piṣh nunneemun wunnaumonuh Israel, wutch kenugke penuwohteaut uttoh aáhettit, kah piṣh nummukkinoog wutch waeenu, kah nag nuppas8oog nehenwonche wutohkeout.
E.Eze.37.21: And say unto them, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I will take the children of Israel from among the heathen, whither they be gone, and will gather them on every side, and bring them into their own land:

α.Eze.37.22 Kah nag nuppasukqunnue wutohtimoinahheoog ut ohkeit, ut Israelle wadchutu, kah pasuk ketass8t piṣh nah ukketass8tam8onuh wame: kah nag piṣh matt[t]a wonk neese wutohtimoinnaeyeuog, kah matta pish wonk neese chippee ass8tam88og.
E.Eze.37.22: And I will make them one nation in the land upon the mountains of Israel; and one king shall be king to them all: and they shall be no more two nations, neither shall they be divided into two kingdoms any more at all.

α.Eze.37.23 Kah matta piṣh wonk nishkheau8og wuhhogkauh nashpe wuttinnukontunkan8 kah matta nashpe wunnishkodchasum8oash kah matta nashpe ne teagwe ummatcheseongan8: qut nag n8wadchanoog wutch wame wutayeuongan8out, uttoh adt matchesehettit, kah nag nuppahkheoog: ne piṣh nuttinne ummissinninnumuneau, kah nen nag um-Manitt8m8oh.
E.Eze.37.23: Neither shall they defile themselves any more with their idols, nor with their detestable things, nor with any of their transgressions: but I will save them out of all their dwellingplaces, wherein they have sinned, and will cleanse them: so shall they be my people, and I will be their God.

α.Eze.37.24 Kah David nuttinneum piṣh ketass8tam88 naut, kah piṣh pasukk88oh nanauwshipsaenuh: nag piṣh wonk pomushaog ut n8sittum8onganehtu, kah piṣh nanauunumog nukkuhk8waongaṣh, kah piṣh wutussenaoash.
E.Eze.37.24: And David my servant shall be king over them; and they all shall have one shepherd: they shall also walk in my judgments, and observe my statutes, and do them.

α.Eze.37.25 Kah nag piṣh ayeuog ohkeit, ne anumauogkup Jakob nuttinninneum, uttoh k8sh8oog ayeuhhetteup, kah nag piṣh na wutt[aii]nneau, kah nagumau, kah ummukkièseum8uh, kah ummukkieseum8uh ummukkiesum8oh micheme, kah nuttinninneum David piṣh micheme wussontimóm8uh.
E.Eze.37.25: And they shall dwell in the land that I have given unto Jacob my servant, wherein your fathers have dwelt; and they shall dwell therein, even they, and their children, and their children's children for ever: and my servant David shall be their prince for ever.

α.Eze.37.26 Nano n8nohteae wunn8waonk nutayimauôog, ne piṣh machemée wunn8waonk wutchu nagumau; kah n8nashâog kah nummuttaanheoog, kah nupponum nussanctuarihum wunnashóm8out micheme.
E.Eze.37.26: Moreover I will make a covenant of peace with them; it shall be an everlasting covenant with them: and I will place them, and multiply them, and will set my sanctuary in the midst of them for evermore.

α.Eze.37.27 Nuttabernaklum wonk nag piṣh weetómukquog: nux, nen piṣh um$Manitt8m8uh, kah nag piṣh nummissinninnúmog.
E.Eze.37.27: My tabernacle also shall be with them: yea, I will be their God, and they shall be my people.

α.Eze.37.28 Kah penuwohteaog piṣh wahteauog, nen Lord waneetupantamwaheog Israel: nussanctuarium ohtag wunnashómuóut micheme.
E.Eze.37.28: And the heathen shall know that I the LORD do sanctify Israel, when my sanctuary shall be in the midst of them for evermore.

α.Eze.38.1 KAh wuttinn8waonk Jehovah nuppeyaónuk, n8wau,
E.Eze.38.1: And the word of the LORD came unto me, saying,

α.Eze.38.2 Wosketompae wunnaumoniin, ayeuhkonittue ponamau kuskesuk Gog, Magoge ohke, kehche Mesheke kah Tubale sontim, kah ayeuhkonittue quoshoe missohhamau,
E.Eze.38.2: Son of man, set thy face against Gog, the land of Magog, the chief prince of Meshech and Tubal, and prophesy against him,

α.Eze.38.3 Kah n8waṣh, yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, kusseh, kutayeúkonṣh, woi Gog, kehche Mesheke kah Tubale sontim.
E.Eze.38.3: And say, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I am against thee, O Gog, the chief prince of Meshech and Tubal:

α.Eze.38.4 Kah kukqushkinaṣh, kah nupponum uhquónaṣh kutompekonit, kah kussohh8wunuṣh kah wame kukkenauwamúmog, horsesog kah horsmenog, wame neg hogk8og ay[á]nakiṣh, muttaánwog nashpe bucklersaṣh kah ogqunnegaṣh, wame neg nehtónumwog togkotegaṣh.
E.Eze.38.4: And I will turn thee back, and put hooks into thy jaws, and I will bring thee forth, and all thine army, horses and horsemen, all of them clothed with all sorts of armour, even a great company with bucklers and shields, all of them handling swords:

α.Eze.38.5 Persia, Ethiopia, kah Lyvia weechogquog, wame neg kenunnumwog ogqunnegaṣh kah helmetsaṣh:
E.Eze.38.5: Persia, Ethiopia, and Libya with them; all of them with shield and helmet:

α.Eze.38.6 Gomer kah wame ukkenauwamúmoh, Tog[a]rmahe wek wutch nanummiyeu, kah wame ukkenauwamúmoh, kah monaog missinninnúog k8weetomuk.
E.Eze.38.6: Gomer, and all his bands; the house of Togarmah of the north quarters, and all his bands: and many people with thee.

α.Eze.38.7 Quagqushwish, kah quagwashwéh kuhhog, ken kah wame chábánukeg neg miyaitcheg ut kuhhogkat, kah nag nánawéh.
E.Eze.38.7: Be thou prepared, and prepare for thyself, thou, and all thy company that are assembled unto thee, and be thou a guard unto them.

α.Eze.38.8 M8chetikquinogkog piṣh kenátauwahet: ogkomáe kodtum8ut, piṣh kuppetutteam ohkeit ne quáhchuwuttomuk wutch togkodteganit, kah ne mâgkinnumuk wutch m8cheke missinninnútu, ayeuhkonittue Israelle wadchuaṣh, niṣh na nagwutteae mahchumwushúkiṣh: qut ne sohh8wuttauun wutch wutohtimóinneat, kah nag piṣh wunniyeuog, nag wame.
E.Eze.38.8: After many days thou shalt be visited: in the latter years thou shalt come into the land that is brought back from the sword, and is gathered out of many people, against the mountains of Israel, which have been always waste: but it is brought forth out of the nations, and they shall dwell safely all of them.

α.Eze.38.9 Ken piṣh kutushpem, kah kutogque peyom mishetashinit, piṣh kutogqueneunkqus matokqsit unkhumunat ohke, ken kah wame kukkenauwamúmog, kah monaog missinninnúog k8weechóg.
E.Eze.38.9: Thou shalt ascend and come like a storm, thou shalt be like a cloud to cover the land, thou, and all thy bands, and many people with thee.

α.Eze.38.10 Yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, wonk piṣh n$nih, ne nan aquompag[,] piṣh kummehquontam teagwasinnish, kah piṣh kuppakodtantam matche unnantam8onk.
E.Eze.38.10: Thus saith the Lord GOD; It shall also come to pass, that at the same time shall things come into thy mind, and thou shalt think an evil thought:

α.Eze.38.11 Kah piṣh kussin, nukkuhkukquem en matta pummenútausue otanáe ohkeit: nutâonóog neg, anwôsikeg, neg wâniitcheg, wame neg matta pummenútausue ayigeg, kah matta ohtó8gig barsaṣh kah squontamaṣh.
E.Eze.38.11: And thou shalt say, I will go up to the land of unwalled villages; I will go to them that are at rest, that dwell safely, all of them dwelling without walls, and having neither bars nor gates,

α.Eze.38.12 Mukk8kinnumwóntamunat, kah tohqunumwontamunat, quinnuppinnumunat kenutcheg en touuishinne ayeuonganit niṣh yeuyeu wadtohtimukiṣh, kah ut missinniñutu neg moécheg wutch wutohtimôinneat, neg waneetassúmutcheg, kah wamaumatchiitcheg, neg wadohkitcheg nashaue ohkeit.
E.Eze.38.12: To take a spoil, and to take a prey; to turn thine hand upon the desolate places that are now inhabited, and upon the people that are gathered out of the nations, which have gotten cattle and goods, that dwell in the midst of the land.

α.Eze.38.13 Sheba, kah Dedan, kah Tarshishe anaqushaénuog, kah wame 8shsquoshimwe qunnonou8m8óh, nag piṣh kuttugquog, sun k8ch peyom neemunnumunat tohqunnumoonk, sun kummukkin kummuttaánumog mukk8kinnúónat? monchatauunat silver kah gold, amauuónat neetasuog kah maumachiaṣh, kah mishe mukk8kinnuáonk?
E.Eze.38.13: Sheba, and Dedan, and the merchants of Tarshish, with all the young lions thereof, shall say unto thee, Art thou come to take a spoil? hast thou gathered thy company to take a prey? to carry away silver and gold, to take away cattle and goods, to take a great spoil?

α.Eze.38.14 Newutche wosketompae wunnaumoniin, quoshodtsh, kah us Gog, yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, ne kesukok Israelle missinninnúmog wunaihettit, sun matta woh k8wahteauouun?
E.Eze.38.14: Therefore, son of man, prophesy and say unto Gog, Thus saith the Lord GOD; In that day when my people of Israel dwelleth safely, shalt thou not know it?

α.Eze.38.15 Kah piṣh k8m kutáyeuonganit, wutch nanummiyeu, ken kah weeche monaog missinninnuog, wame nayeumukquog horsesoh, m8chequshaog, kah mishe kenauwameonk.
E.Eze.38.15: And thou shalt come from thy place out of the north parts, thou, and many people with thee, all of them riding upon horses, a great company, and a mighty army:

α.Eze.38.16 Kah piṣh kutayeuhkonittue kukkuhquéhtau Israelle nummissinninnúmog, onatuh matohqus nohkuhkquog ohke: ne piṣh ogkomáe kesukkodtut, kah kutayeuhkonittue pas8sh nutohkeit, onk woh penuwohteaog n8wahik, wunneetupanatamwahimuk ut kuhhogkat, woi Gog, ut anaquabhettit.
E.Eze.38.16: And thou shalt come up against my people of Israel, as a cloud to cover the land; it shall be in the latter days, and I will bring thee against my land, that the heathen may know me, when I shall be sanctified in thee, O Gog, before their eyes.

α.Eze.38.17 Yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, sun ken woh an8wáomp n8adt, nashpe nuttinneumog Israelle quoshodtumwaenuog, neg quoshódtukeg ut yeush kesukodtaṣh, monatash kodtum8aṣh, nag kutayeuhkonittue paudtauununaóont?
E.Eze.38.17: Thus saith the Lord GOD; Art thou he of whom I have spoken in old time by my servants the prophets of Israel, which prophesied in those days many years that I would bring thee against them?

α.Eze.38.18 Kah piṣh n$nih, na nan ahquompag, Gog ayeuhkonittue kuhkuhquehtog Israelle ohkeit, wussin Lord Jehovah, nummusquantam8onk piṣh nuhkuhkom nuskesuk.
E.Eze.38.18: And it shall come to pass at the same time when Gog shall come against the land of Israel, saith the Lord GOD, that my fury shall come up in my face.

α.Eze.38.19 Newutche numm8sitteam8onganit kah n8tae nummusquantam8onganit nussim: wunnamuhkut ne kesukok piṣh mishe nunnukshaonganú8 ut wutohkeit Israel.
E.Eze.38.19: For in my jealousy and in the fire of my wrath have I spoken, Surely in that day there shall be a great shaking in the land of Israel;

α.Eze.38.20 Newaj pish kehtahhanne namohsog, kah kesukque puppinshasog, kah ohteuhkone puppinashimwog, kah wame papomompakecheg ohkeit, kah wame wosketompaog wosketohkit, pish nunnukshaog ut anaquabeh, kah wadchuaṣh piṣh kepuhkonaṣh, kah womuhkôâgiṣh piṣh penushaaṣh, kah nishnoh hassunnutunk piṣh penusheau en ohkeit.
E.Eze.38.20: So that the fishes of the sea, and the fowls of the heaven, and the beasts of the field, and all creeping things that creep upon the earth, and all the men that are upon the face of the earth, shall shake at my presence, and the mountains shall be thrown down, and the steep places shall fall, and every wall shall fall to the ground.

α.Eze.38.21 Kah nutayeuhkonittue wehquetumwansh togkodteg, papashpe wame n8wadchumaṣh, wussin Lord Jehovah, nishnoh wosketomp wuttogkodteg piṣh ayeuhkonau weematoh.
E.Eze.38.21: And I will call for a sword against him throughout all my mountains, saith the Lord GOD: every man's sword shall be against his brother.

α.Eze.38.22 Kah nutayeuúhkon nashpe enninneaonk, kah nashpe 8squeheonk, kah nussokenuttau, kah ukkenauwamumoh, kah ut monaog missinninnuog neh weechógqutcheh, tomogkonue sokanon, kah mishe mussegan, n8tau, kah brimstone.
E.Eze.38.22: And I will plead against him with pestilence and with blood; and I will rain upon him, and upon his bands, and upon the many people that are with him, an overflowing rain, and great hailstones, fire, and brimstone.

α.Eze.38.23 Yeu pish nuttinne misheheon nuhhog, kah n8neetupanatamwah nuhhog, kah pish n8wahik [a]naquabhettit monaog wutohtimoneunk, k[a]h nag pish wahteauog nen Jehovah.
E.Eze.38.23: Thus will I magnify myself, and sanctify myself; and I will be known in the eyes of many nations, and they shall know that I am the LORD.

α.Eze.39.1 NEwutche ken wosketompae wunnaumoniin, ayeuhkonittue quoshoe missohhamau Gog, kah n8wash, yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, kusseh, kutáyeuuhkonush, woi Gog, kehche Mesheche kah Tubale ketass8t.
E.Eze.39.1: Therefore, thou son of man, prophesy against Gog, and say, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I am against thee, O Gog, the chief prince of Meshech and Tubal:

α.Eze.39.2 Kah kukquehchuunsh, kah nussequn webe nequtta kutteashu chippissue, kah kukkuhkiuhquehesh wutch nanummiyeu, kah kuppas8ush ut Israelle wadchuukontu.
E.Eze.39.2: And I will turn thee back, and leave but the sixth part of thee, and will cause thee to come up from the north parts, and will bring thee upon the mountains of Israel:

α.Eze.39.3 Kah nutogkom kutohtomp wutch kummenadcheit, kah nuppenushahtoh kukko[u]hquodtash wutch kittinohkôunit.
E.Eze.39.3: And I will smite thy bow out of thy left hand, and will cause thine arrows to fall out of thy right hand.

α.Eze.39.4 Pish kuppenushom ut 8wadchumut Israel, ken kah wame kukkenauwamúmog, kah missinninnúog neg weechayeumukqueaneg: kutassamsh wame eiyáne mohweyausaeu psuksesuk, kah ohteuhkone puppinashimwog.
E.Eze.39.4: Thou shalt fall upon the mountains of Israel, thou, and all thy bands, and the people that is with thee: I will give thee unto the ravenous birds of every sort, and to the beasts of the field to be devoured.

α.Eze.39.5 Pish kuppenusham ut pohquashinne ohteuhkonit, newutche nussin, n8wau Lord Jehovah.
E.Eze.39.5: Thou shalt fall upon the open field: for I have spoken it, saith the Lord GOD.

α.Eze.39.6 Kah nutann8tam n8tau en Magog, kah kenugke neg mat tohhentupantamoe pomontogig menahhanéhtu, kah nag pish wahteauog nen Jehovah.
E.Eze.39.6: And I will send a fire on Magog, and among them that dwell carelessly in the isles: and they shall know that I am the LORD.

α.Eze.39.7 Newaj wahteauwáhuwi n8wesuonk, ut nashaue Israelle num̃issinninnúmut, kah matta wonk nuttenánumóog nishketeau8k n8neetupanatamwe wesuonk, kah pénuwohteaog pish wahteauog nen Jehovah, 8neetupanatam8moh Israel.
E.Eze.39.7: So will I make my holy name known in the midst of my people Israel; and I will not let them pollute my holy name any more: and the heathen shall know that I am the LORD, the Holy One in Israel.

α.Eze.39.8 Kusseh, peyaum8, kah mahche n$nih wussin Lord Jehovah, yeu kesukok ne an8wi.
E.Eze.39.8: Behold, it is come, and it is done, saith the Lord GOD; this is the day whereof I have spoken.

α.Eze.39.9 Kah neg ayitcheg Israelle keitotanehtu, pish sohhamwog, kah nashqunanumwog kah chikossumwog, auwohteaongash, naneeswe ogqunegash kah buklersash, ahtompeog, kah kôuhquodtash, anwohh8unash kah qunuhtugquash, kah nish piṣh wutchikkussumunáoash n8taut, nesausuk tahshe kodtumwaeu.
E.Eze.39.9: And they that dwell in the cities of Israel shall go forth, and shall set on fire and burn the weapons, both the shields and the bucklers, the bows and the arrows, and the handstaves, and the spears, and they shall burn them with fire seven years:

α.Eze.39.10 Newaj matta pish nemunnumohetteg wuttuhqunash wutch ohteuhkonit, kah matta pish tumehtham8og wutch touohkomuk newutche nag pish chikossumwog auohteaongash ut n8taut, nag pish matcheheaog yeuh machikqhetticheh kah pish mukk8kináog neh muk8kinukqhettupoh, wussin Lord Jehovah.
E.Eze.39.10: So that they shall take no wood out of the field, neither cut down any out of the forests; for they shall burn the weapons with fire: and they shall spoil those that spoiled them, and rob those that robbed them, saith the Lord GOD.

α.Eze.39.11 Kah pish n$nih ne kesukok, nuttinnumau Gog weenohkee ayeuonk ut Israel, wut8nohkôiyeum8 pomushaenuog, wutchepwáyeue kehtahhanit, kah piṣh kuppuhhamwog wutchan8ash pomushaenuog, kah na piṣh wuttut posekinoneau Gog kah wame ukkenawameumoh, kah nag pish wuttissowétamuneau, 8nâuhkòiyeum Hamon-Gog.
E.Eze.39.11: And it shall come to pass in that day, that I will give unto Gog a place there of graves in Israel, the valley of the passengers on the east of the sea: and it shall stop the noses of the passengers: and there shall they bury Gog and all his multitude: and they shall call it The valley of Hamongog.

α.Eze.39.12 Kah nesausuk tahs8oh nepauzsoh pish upposkinóuh Israelle wek, onk woh pahketeauog ohke.
E.Eze.39.12: And seven months shall the house of Israel be burying of them, that they may cleanse the land.

α.Eze.39.13 Nux wame ohkee missinninnuog pish noh upposekinouh; kah ne pish woweenomaongan8, ne kesukok sohsum8[ô]sumuk wussin Lord Jehovah.
E.Eze.39.13: Yea, all the people of the land shall bury them; and it shall be to them a renown the day that I shall be glorified, saith the Lord GOD.

α.Eze.39.14 Kha nag pish chippinaog nawhutche nagwutteae anakausinitcheh, panupshonat ohke, posekinnuwônat weeche pomushacheg, neg sekshoncheg ut wosketohkit, pahketeauunat: mahtsh[á]hettit nesausuk tahsuog nepauzsaog, pish natinnehteáog.
E.Eze.39.14: And they shall sever out men of continual employment, passing through the land to bury with the passengers those that remain upon the face of the earth, to cleanse it: after the end of seven months shall they search.

α.Eze.39.15 Kah pomushaenuog páumushacheg ohkeit, howan nag wosketomp wuskon, piṣh ne kishke ponamun kuhkinneasuonk, nô pajeh posekinnuwacheg upposekinnumunaóut ut 8nóuhkôiyeumut Hamon-Gog.
E.Eze.39.15: And the passengers that pass through the land, when any seeth a man's bone, then shall he set up a sign by it, till the buriers have buried it in the valley of Hamongog.

α.Eze.39.16 Kah wonk ne as8wesik keitotan Hamonuh; yeu pish wuttinne pahketeauuneau ohke.
E.Eze.39.16: And also the name of the city shall be Hamonah. Thus shall they cleanse the land.

α.Eze.39.17 Kah ken wosketompae wunnaumoniin, yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, ken8s niṣh$noh ummequnnue puppinshaas, kah niṣh$noh ohteuhkone puppinashim, móyek, kah peyunk, miyaek waéenu, ut nuppagwohteaonganit, ne sephamauwanshinóg, miṣhe sephausuonk ut Israelle wadchuuhkontu, onk woh kummeechumw8 weyaus, kah woh k8tattamw8 musqueheonk.
E.Eze.39.17: And, thou son of man, thus saith the Lord GOD; Speak unto every feathered fowl, and to every beast of the field, Assemble yourselves, and come; gather yourselves on every side to my sacrifice that I do sacrifice for you, even a great sacrifice upon the mountains of Israel, that ye may eat flesh, and drink blood.

α.Eze.39.18 Piṣh kummeechumw8 8weyaus manuhkesitcheg, kah piṣh k8tattamw8 8sqheongan8 ohkee sontimóog, ramsog, lambsog, kah goatsóg, kah oxinog, wame neg Bashane wánogqutcheg.
E.Eze.39.18: Ye shall eat the flesh of the mighty, and drink the blood of the princes of the earth, of rams, of lambs, and of goats, of bullocks, all of them fatlings of Bashan.

α.Eze.39.19 Kah piṣh kummeechumw8 wees nô pajeh k8wamepwunneaóut, kah piṣh k8tattamw8 musqueheonk nô pajeh kukkogkeissippaminneaóut, nussephamonteaonk ne sephamauwanshinog.
E.Eze.39.19: And ye shall eat fat till ye be full, and drink blood till ye be drunken, of my sacrifice which I have sacrificed for you.

α.Eze.39.20 Yeu piṣh kuttinne wamep8unneau ut nuttablumut, náṣhpe horsesog kah chariotsaṣh, nashpe manuhkesitcheg kah wame ayeuhteaenuog wussin Lord Jehovah.
E.Eze.39.20: Thus ye shall be filled at my table with horses and chariots, with mighty men, and with all men of war, saith the Lord GOD.

α.Eze.39.21 Kah nupponum nussohsumóonk ut kenugke penuwohteaut, kah wame penuwohteaog piṣh naumwog n8sittum8onk ne asee, kah nunnutcheg ne ponamauog.
E.Eze.39.21: And I will set my glory among the heathen, and all the heathen shall see my judgment that I have executed, and my hand that I have laid upon them.

α.Eze.39.22 Newaj piṣh Israel wek wahteunk nen Jehovah um-Manitt8m8uh, wutch ne kesukok k[a]h ongkoue.
E.Eze.39.22: So the house of Israel shall know that I am the LORD their God from that day and forward.

α.Eze.39.23 Kah penuwohteaog piṣh wahteauog wek Israel missinno8panneg wutch ummatcheseongan8, newutche nag nuppannesetunkquog, newaj adtahtauog nuskesuk, kah nummagununk ut wunnutchegan8óut ummatwom8oh, newaj wame penushahettit nashpe togkodteg.
E.Eze.39.23: And the heathen shall know that the house of Israel went into captivity for their iniquity: because they trespassed against me, therefore hid I my face from them, and gave them into the hand of their enemies: so fell they all by the sword.

α.Eze.39.24 Neaunak wunnishkeneunkqussuongan8, kah neaunak uppanneseongan8aṣh nag nuttinheóneau, kah nag nutadtahtau[o]og nuskesuk.
E.Eze.39.24: According to their uncleanness and according to their transgressions have I done unto them, and hid my face from them.

α.Eze.39.25 Newutche yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, yeuyeu wonk nukqushkeáh ummissinnoongan8 Jakob, kah piṣh nummonánum mamusse wek Israel, kah numm8sitteam wutch n8neetupanatamwe wesuonk.
E.Eze.39.25: Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Now will I bring again the captivity of Jacob, and have mercy upon the whole house of Israel, and will be jealous for my holy name;

α.Eze.39.26 Mahche kenunaumwehettit wutakodchuongan8, kah wame uppanneseongaṣh, nish nashpe pannesetunkqueaniṣh, nag wunnaihettit, kah matta howan wabeséheunk.
E.Eze.39.26: After that they have borne their shame, and all their trespasses whereby they have trespassed against me, when they dwelt safely in their land, and none made them afraid.

α.Eze.39.27 Wonk nag pas8og wutch missinninnutu, kah mohmounog wutohtuóut ummatwomóh, kah wunneetupanatamwáhimuk ut wuhhogkaóut, ut anaquabhettit monaash wutohtimóneaṣh.
E.Eze.39.27: When I have brought them again from the people, and gathered them out of their enemies' lands, and am sanctified in them in the sight of many nations;

α.Eze.39.28 Neit piṣh wahteauog nen Lord um-Manitt8m8uh, másinóhteáhuwi ut kenugke penuwohteaut: qut nag nummukkinoog ut nehenwonche wutohtuóut, kah matta wonk na$ut sequnóog.
E.Eze.39.28: Then shall they know that I am the LORD their God, which caused them to be led into captivity among the heathen: but I have gathered them unto their own land, and have left none of them any more there.

α.Eze.39.29 Kah matta wonk nutadtahtauóog nuskesuk: newutche nussokun nunnashauanit wekit Israel, wussin Lord Jehovah.
E.Eze.39.29: Neither will I hide my face any more from them: for I have poured out my spirit upon the house of Israel, saith the Lord GOD.

α.Eze.40.1 NEesneechage kodtumwae, kah napanna tahshe masináyeog, waj kutchissik kodtumm8, piogkukquinuhhog nepauz, nabo weyaue kodtum8mut mahche keitotan togkodtamuk, ne nan kesukok, wunnutcheg Jehovah nunnuhkuhkunk, kah na nuppas8kqun.
E.Eze.40.1: In the five and twentieth year of our captivity, in the beginning of the year, in the tenth day of the month, in the fourteenth year after that the city was smitten, in the selfsame day the hand of the LORD was upon me, and brought me thither.

α.Eze.40.2 Ut Manittoe monomansuónaonganit nuppas8k ut Israelle ohkeit, kah nupponuk ut kussohkôiyeue wadchuut, ne kishkohteau keitotanae mehtonkquhkónut sowaniyeu.
E.Eze.40.2: In the visions of God brought he me into the land of Israel, and set me upon a very high mountain, by which was as the frame of a city on the south.

α.Eze.40.3 Kah na nuppas8kqun, kah kusseh, na wosketomp, wutogqueneunkqussuonk neane brasse, hashabpe pemunneat ohteau wunnutcheganit, kah quttuhham8e qunnuhtug: kah neepau ushquontamut.
E.Eze.40.3: And he brought me thither, and, behold, there was a man, whose appearance was like the appearance of brass, with a line of flax in his hand, and a measuring reed; and he stood in the gate.

α.Eze.40.4 Kah wosketomp nuttinuk, wosketompae wunnaumoniin, naish wutch kuskesukqut, kah n8taṣh wutch kehtauogut, kah ponsh kuttah ut wame ne nóhtinun, newutch yeu waj yeu pas8wunumuk, onk noh niṣh kenáhtinununaṣh: wahteauwáhuash wame ne nauman en wekit Israelut.
E.Eze.40.4: And the man said unto me, Son of man, behold with thine eyes, and hear with thine ears, and set thine heart upon all that I shall shew thee; for to the intent that I might shew them unto thee art thou brought hither: declare all that thou seest to the house of Israel.

α.Eze.40.5 Kah kusseh, hassunnútunk ut poquodchekommukqut waeenu, kah ut wunnutcheganit wosketomp quttuhwhósue wekinasq, nequtta tashishquanogkod nesahtag, kah menutcheganit unnukque kishkói: neit quttuhhum neanukkishkag wetu, pasuk wekinasq, kah ne sohkunkquok pasuk wekinasq.
E.Eze.40.5: And behold a wall on the outside of the house round about, and in the man's hand a measuring reed of six cubits long by the cubit and an hand breadth: so he measured the breadth of the building, one reed; and the height, one reed.

α.Eze.40.6 Neit peyau squontamut nogque wutchipwoiyeu, kah noh kuhkuhqueu stairsut, kah quttuhhum anuishkham8onk ut squontamut, ne pasuk wekinaskq anukkishk[a]g onkatog anuishkham8onk ut squontamut pasuk wekinasq unnukque kishki.
E.Eze.40.6: Then came he unto the gate which looketh toward the east, and went up the stairs thereof, and measured the threshold of the gate, which was one reed broad; and the other threshold of the gate, which was one reed broad.

α.Eze.40.7 Kah nishnoh pasuk chamber[è]mes pasuk wekinasq ne sahteagk, kah pasuk wekinasq neanukkishkag, kah ut nashaue chamberemesehtu, napanna tahshishquanogkod: kah squontame anusqham8onk, ut kishke squontame ahut petutte[a]muk, anomut, pasuk wekinasq.
E.Eze.40.7: And every little chamber was one reed long, and one reed broad; and between the little chambers were five cubits; and the threshold of the gate by the porch of the gate within was one reed.

α.Eze.40.8 Wonk quttuhhum squontame ahut petutteamuk anomut, pasuk wekinasq.
E.Eze.40.8: He measured also the porch of the gate within, one reed.

α.Eze.40.9 Neit quttuhhum squontame ahut petutteamuk, shwosuk tashishquan[o]gkod, kah postog neesishquanogkussuog, kah squontame ahut petutteamuk ánomiyeu.
E.Eze.40.9: Then measured he the porch of the gate, eight cubits; and the posts thereof, two cubits; and the porch of the gate was inward.

α.Eze.40.10 Kah squontame chambermesaṣh wutchepwoiyeu, nishwe yeu wutch, kah nishwin[a]sh nanogque wutch, nash nishwe, pasuk quttuhwheg, kah postog pasuk kuhkuhheg yeu wutch, kah nanogque wutch.
E.Eze.40.10: And the little chambers of the gate eastward were three on this side, and three on that side; they three were of one measure: and the posts had one measure on this side and on that side.

α.Eze.40.11 Kah quttuhhum nean ukkishkag ahhut petutteamuk ussquont piogquishquanogkod, kah ne sahteag squont nabo nishweskquanogkod.
E.Eze.40.11: And he measured the breadth of the entry of the gate, ten cubits; and the length of the gate, thirteen cubits.

α.Eze.40.12 Neont8tohtag wonk chamberemesash, nequt ishquanogkod wuttuhwhin, kah ne adt8t[ó]htag onkaue wutch nequtishquanogkod, kah chamberemesaṣh nequttatashishquanogkodtaṣh yeu nogque wutch kah nequtta tashishquanogkod na nogque wutch.
E.Eze.40.12: The space also before the little chambers was one cubit on this side, and the space was one cubit on that side: and the little chambers were six cubits on this side, and six cubits on that side.

α.Eze.40.13 Neit quttuhhum squont, wutch onkwhosik pasuk chamberémes, en onkatoganit onkwhonganit: nean ukkishkag neesnechage kah napanna taskishquanogkod, papiuhsuke squontamash.
E.Eze.40.13: He measured then the gate from the roof of one little chamber to the roof of another: the breadth was five and twenty cubits, door against door.

α.Eze.40.14 Ayeuau wonk postaṣh nequtta tahshinchagiṣhquanogkod, weeque chippinnutungane postut waeenu squontamut.
E.Eze.40.14: He made also posts of threescore cubits, even unto the post of the court round about the gate.

α.Eze.40.15 Kah wutch woskeche petutteae squontamut, wehque woskeche porchut anome squontamut, napanna tahshinchagishquanogkod.
E.Eze.40.15: And from the face of the gate of the entrance unto the face of the porch of the inner gate were fifty cubits.

α.Eze.40.16 Kah pegskiyeue kenogkeneganaṣh ut chamberemesut, kah ut uppostum8out anome squ[ò]ntamut waeenu, kah netatuppe ut porchehtue, kah kenogkenegaṣh weenohteau anomut: kah ut niṣh$noh postut palmuhtugquaṣh.
E.Eze.40.16: And there were narrow windows to the little chambers, and to their posts within the gate round about, and likewise to the arches: and windows were round about inward: and upon each post were palm trees.

α.Eze.40.17 Kah nuppas8k en paquadche chippinnutunkanit, kah kusseh chambersaṣh, kah wunompskinausuwu wutche chippinnutunk waeenu: nishwinch[a]gkodtaṣh chambérsaṣh woskechec wunompskinneganit.
E.Eze.40.17: Then brought he me into the outward court, and, lo, there were chambers, and a pavement made for the court round about: thirty chambers were upon the pavement.

α.Eze.40.18 Kah wunompskinegaṣh ut sussippoi ut squontamut piuhsukeh ne s[a]hteag squont, ne tiuhquonkohtag wunompskinneg
E.Eze.40.18: And the pavement by the side of the gates over against the length of the gates was the lower pavement.

α.Eze.40.19 Neit quttuhham ne anukkiṣhkag, wutch anaquohtag womokôag[u] ussquont, wehque anaquogtag anome chippinnutunk poquodchiyeu, nequt pasuk8ishquanogkod wutchepwoiyeu kah nanummiyeu.
E.Eze.40.19: Then he measured the breadth from the forefront of the lower gate unto the forefront of the inner court without, an hundred cubits eastward and northward.

α.Eze.40.20 Kah poquodchee chippinnutunganee squont, ne nanummiyeu, quttuhham ne sohteag, kah ne anogque kiṣhkag.
E.Eze.40.20: And the gate of the outward court that looked toward the north, he measured the length thereof, and the breadth thereof.

α.Eze.40.21 Kah wutchamberemesaṣh, niṣhwinaṣh yeu nogque wutch, kah niṣhwinaṣh nanogque wutch, kah uppostumaṣh, kah upporchumaṣh, ne nan sahteag negonusquont: ne sahteag napanna tahshinchagishquanogkod, kah ne anukiṣhkag neesneechag kah napanna tahishquanogkodtaṣh.
E.Eze.40.21: And the little chambers thereof were three on this side and three on that side; and the posts thereof and the arches thereof were after the measure of the first gate: the length thereof was fifty cubits, and the breadth five and twenty cubits.

α.Eze.40.22 Kah ukkenogkenegan8oaṣh kah upputtugquonogk8maṣh, kah uppalmuhtugk8maṣh, ne nan nu[k]ski wutchepwoiyeue squont; kah nag ukkuhkuhqueantamuneau nesausuk tahshantuonganogkod, kah 8woweyoiyeumaṣh ohtaaṣh anaquohtag.
E.Eze.40.22: And their windows, and their arches, and their palm trees, were after the measure of the gate that looketh toward the east; and they went up unto it by seven steps; and the arches thereof were before them.

α.Eze.40.23 Kah anome chippinnutungane squont, piuhsuke nanumwiyeue squont, kah wutchepwoiyeue, kah quttuhham wutch ushquontamut nequt paṣuk8ishquanogkod
E.Eze.40.23: And the gate of the inner court was over against the gate toward the north, and toward the east; and he measured from gate to gate an hundred cubits.

α.Eze.40.24 Ne mahche nnag, nuppas8k nogque sowaniyeue, kah kusseh usquont Sowaniyeu, kah quttuhwhau Postaṣh naut, kah woweyoiyeumaṣh, neaunak yeush quttuhwhegaṣh.
E.Eze.40.24: After that he brought me toward the south, and behold a gate toward the south: and he measured the posts thereof and the arches thereof according to these measures.

α.Eze.40.25 Kah kenogkeneganaṣh na ut ohtaash, kah ut woweyoiyeumaṣh waeenu, tatuppeyeu8aṣh, niṣh kenogk[e]nega[n]aṣh, nesahteag napanna tahshinchagishquanogkodtaṣh, kah ne anukkiṣhkag neesnechage kah napanna tashishqoanogk[o]d.
E.Eze.40.25: And there were windows in it and in the arches thereof round about, like those windows: the length was fifty cubits, and the breadth five and twenty cubits.

α.Eze.40.26 K[a]h nesausuk tahshantuonganogkod kuhkuhquenat, káh wayoagiṣh ohtaaṣh anaquohtag, kah palmuhtugquaṣh wuttuhshin, kah onkatuk na nogque wutch ut uppostumut.
E.Eze.40.26: And there were seven steps to go up to it, and the arches thereof were before them: and it had palm trees, one on this side, and another on that side, upon the posts thereof.

α.Eze.40.27 Kah ushquont ut anomie chippinnutunkanit Sowaniyeu, kah ukquthumun ah[u]shquontamut Sowaniyeu nequt pasuk8 ishquanogkod.
E.Eze.40.27: And there was a gate in the inner court toward the south: and he measured from gate to gate toward the south an hundred cubits.

α.Eze.40.28 Kah nuppetukonuk anome chippinnutonganit, sowaniyeue squontamut, kah quttuhham sowaniyeue squont, neaunag yeuṣh quttuhwhegaṣh.
E.Eze.40.28: And he brought me to the inner court by the south gate: and he measured the south gate according to these measures;

α.Eze.40.29 
E.Eze.40.29: And the little chambers thereof, and the posts thereof, and the arches thereof, according to these measures: and there were windows in it and in the arches thereof round about: it was fifty cubits long, and five and twenty cubits broad.

α.Eze.40.30 
E.Eze.40.30: And the arches round about were five and twenty cubits long, and five cubits broad.

α.Eze.40.31 
E.Eze.40.31: And the arches thereof were toward the utter court; and palm trees were upon the posts thereof: and the going up to it had eight steps.

α.Eze.40.32 
E.Eze.40.32: And he brought me into the inner court toward the east: and he measured the gate according to these measures.
<START PG 39B>
α.Eze.40.33 
E.Eze.40.33: And the little chambers thereof, and the posts thereof, and the arches thereof, were according to these measures: and there were windows therein and in the arches thereof round about: it was fifty cubits long, and five and twenty cubits broad.

α.Eze.40.34 
E.Eze.40.34: And the arches thereof were toward the outward court; and palm trees were upon the posts thereof, on this side, and on that side: and the going up to it had eight steps.

α.Eze.40.35 
E.Eze.40.35: And he brought me to the north gate, and measured it according to these measures;

α.Eze.40.36 
E.Eze.40.36: The little chambers thereof, the posts thereof, and the arches thereof, and the windows to it round about: the length was fifty cubits, and the breadth five and twenty cubits.

α.Eze.40.37 
E.Eze.40.37: And the posts thereof were toward the utter court; and palm trees were upon the posts thereof, on this side, and on that side: and the going up to it had eight steps.

α.Eze.40.38 
E.Eze.40.38: And the chambers and the entries thereof were by the posts of the gates, where they washed the burnt offering.

α.Eze.40.39 
E.Eze.40.39: And in the porch of the gate were two tables on this side, and two tables on that side, to slay thereon the burnt offering and the sin offering and the trespass offering.

α.Eze.40.40 
E.Eze.40.40: And at the side without, as one goeth up to the entry of the north gate, were two tables; and on the other side, which was at the porch of the gate, were two tables.

α.Eze.40.41 
E.Eze.40.41: Four tables were on this side, and four tables on that side, by the side of the gate; eight tables, whereupon they slew their sacrifices.

α.Eze.40.42 
E.Eze.40.42: And the four tables were of hewn stone for the burnt offering, of a cubit and an half long, and a cubit and an half broad, and one cubit high: whereupon also they laid the instruments wherewith they slew the burnt offering and the sacrifice.

α.Eze.40.43 
E.Eze.40.43: And within were hooks, an hand broad, fastened round about: and upon the tables was the flesh of the offering.

α.Eze.40.44 
E.Eze.40.44: And without the inner gate were the chambers of the singers in the inner court, which was at the side of the north gate; and their prospect was toward the south: one at the side of the east gate having the prospect toward the north.

α.Eze.40.45 
E.Eze.40.45: And he said unto me, This chamber, whose prospect is toward the south, is for the priests, the keepers of the charge of the house.

α.Eze.40.46 
E.Eze.40.46: And the chamber whose prospect is toward the north is for the priests, the keepers of the charge of the altar: these are the sons of Zadok among the sons of Levi, which come near to the LORD to minister unto him.

α.Eze.40.47 
E.Eze.40.47: So he measured the court, an hundred cubits long, and an hundred cubits broad, foursquare; and the altar that was before the house.

α.Eze.40.48 
E.Eze.40.48: And he brought me to the porch of the house, and measured each post of the porch, five cubits on this side, and five cubits on that side: and the breadth of the gate was three cubits on this side, and three cubits on that side.

α.Eze.40.49 
E.Eze.40.49: The length of the porch was twenty cubits, and the breadth eleven cubits, and he brought me by the steps whereby they went up to it: and there were pillars by the posts, one on this side, and another on that side.

α.Eze.41.1 
E.Eze.41.1: Afterward he brought me to the temple, and measured the posts, six cubits broad on the one side, and six cubits broad on the other side, which was the breadth of the tabernacle.

α.Eze.41.2 
E.Eze.41.2: And the breadth of the door was ten cubits; and the sides of the door were five cubits on the one side, and five cubits on the other side: and he measured the length thereof, forty cubits: and the breadth, twenty cubits.

α.Eze.41.3 
E.Eze.41.3: Then went he inward, and measured the post of the door, two cubits; and the door, six cubits; and the breadth of the door, seven cubits.

α.Eze.41.4 
E.Eze.41.4: So he measured the length thereof, twenty cubits; and the breadth, twenty cubits, before the temple: and he said unto me, This is the most holy place.

α.Eze.41.5 
E.Eze.41.5: After he measured the wall of the house, six cubits; and the breadth of every side chamber, four cubits, round about the house on every side.

α.Eze.41.6 
E.Eze.41.6: And the side chambers were three, one over another, and thirty in order; and they entered into the wall which was of the house for the side chambers round about, that they might have hold, but they had not hold in the wall of the house.

α.Eze.41.7 
E.Eze.41.7: And there was an enlarging, and a winding about still upward to the side chambers: for the winding about of the house went still upward round about the house: therefore the breadth of the house was still upward, and so increased from the lowest chamber to the highest by the midst.

α.Eze.41.8 
E.Eze.41.8: I saw also the height of the house round about: the foundations of the side chambers were a full reed of six great cubits.

α.Eze.41.9 
E.Eze.41.9: The thickness of the wall, which was for the side chamber without, was five cubits: and that which was left was the place of the side chambers that were within.

α.Eze.41.10 
E.Eze.41.10: And between the chambers was the wideness of twenty cubits round about the house on every side.

α.Eze.41.11 
E.Eze.41.11: And the doors of the side chambers were toward the place that was left, one door toward the north, and another door toward the south: and the breadth of the place that was left was five cubits round about.

α.Eze.41.12 
E.Eze.41.12: Now the building that was before the separate place at the end toward the west was seventy cubits broad; and the wall of the building was five cubits thick round about, and the length thereof ninety cubits.

α.Eze.41.13 
E.Eze.41.13: So he measured the house, an hundred cubits long; and the separate place, and the building, with the walls thereof, an hundred cubits long;

α.Eze.41.14 
E.Eze.41.14: Also the breadth of the face of the house, and of the separate place toward the east, an hundred cubits.

α.Eze.41.15 
E.Eze.41.15: And he measured the length of the building over against the separate place which was behind it, and the galleries thereof on the one side and on the other side, an hundred cubits, with the inner temple, and the porches of the court;

α.Eze.41.16 
E.Eze.41.16: The door posts, and the narrow windows, and the galleries round about on their three stories, over against the door, cieled with wood round about, and from the ground up to the windows, and the windows were covered;

α.Eze.41.17 
E.Eze.41.17: To that above the door, even unto the inner house, and without, and by all the wall round about within and without, by measure.

α.Eze.41.18 
E.Eze.41.18: And it was made with cherubims and palm trees, so that a palm tree was between a cherub and a cherub; and every cherub had two faces;

α.Eze.41.19 
E.Eze.41.19: So that the face of a man was toward the palm tree on the one side, and the face of a young lion toward the palm tree on the other side: it was made through all the house round about.

α.Eze.41.20 
E.Eze.41.20: From the ground unto above the door were cherubims and palm trees made, and on the wall of the temple.

α.Eze.41.21 
E.Eze.41.21: The posts of the temple were squared, and the face of the sanctuary; the appearance of the one as the appearance of the other.

α.Eze.41.22 
E.Eze.41.22: The altar of wood was three cubits high, and the length thereof two cubits; and the corners thereof, and the length thereof, and the walls thereof, were of wood: and he said unto me, This is the table that is before the LORD.

α.Eze.41.23 
E.Eze.41.23: And the temple and the sanctuary had two doors.

α.Eze.41.24 
E.Eze.41.24: And the doors had two leaves apiece, two turning leaves; two leaves for the one door, and two leaves for the other door.

α.Eze.41.25 
E.Eze.41.25: And there were made on them, on the doors of the temple, cherubims and palm trees, like as were made upon the walls; and there were thick planks upon the face of the porch without.

α.Eze.41.26 
E.Eze.41.26: And there were narrow windows and palm trees on the one side and on the other side, on the sides of the porch, and upon the side chambers of the house, and thick planks.

α.Eze.42.1 
E.Eze.42.1: Then he brought me forth into the utter court, the way toward the north: and he brought me into the chamber that was over against the separate place, and which was before the building toward the north.

α.Eze.42.2 
E.Eze.42.2: Before the length of an hundred cubits was the north door, and the breadth was fifty cubits.

α.Eze.42.3 
E.Eze.42.3: Over against the twenty cubits which were for the inner court, and over against the pavement which was for the utter court, was gallery against gallery in three stories.

α.Eze.42.4 
E.Eze.42.4: And before the chambers was a walk to ten cubits breadth inward, a way of one cubit; and their doors toward the north.

α.Eze.42.5 
E.Eze.42.5: Now the upper chambers were shorter: for the galleries were higher than these, than the lower, and than the middlemost of the building.

α.Eze.42.6 
E.Eze.42.6: For they were in three stories, but had not pillars as the pillars of the courts: therefore the building was straitened more than the lowest and the middlemost from the ground.

α.Eze.42.7 
E.Eze.42.7: And the wall that was without over against the chambers, toward the utter court on the forepart of the chambers, the length thereof was fifty cubits.

α.Eze.42.8 
E.Eze.42.8: For the length of the chambers that were in the utter court was fifty cubits: and, lo, before the temple were an hundred cubits.

α.Eze.42.9 
E.Eze.42.9: And from under these chambers was the entry on the east side, as one goeth into them from the utter court.

α.Eze.42.10 
E.Eze.42.10: The chambers were in the thickness of the wall of the court toward the east, over against the separate place, and over against the building.

α.Eze.42.11 
E.Eze.42.11: And the way before them was like the appearance of the chambers which were toward the north, as long as they, and as broad as they: and all their goings out were both according to their fashions, and according to their doors.

α.Eze.42.12 
E.Eze.42.12: And according to the doors of the chambers that were toward the south was a door in the head of the way, even the way directly before the wall toward the east, as one entereth into them.

α.Eze.42.13 
E.Eze.42.13: Then said he unto me, The north chambers and the south chambers, which are before the separate place, they be holy chambers, where the priests that approach unto the LORD shall eat the most holy things: there shall they lay the most holy things, and the meat offering, and the sin offering, and the trespass offering; for the place is holy.

α.Eze.42.14 
E.Eze.42.14: When the priests enter therein, then shall they not go out of the holy place into the utter court, but there they shall lay their garments wherein they minister; for they are holy; and shall put on other garments, and shall approach to those things which are for the people.

α.Eze.42.15 
E.Eze.42.15: Now when he had made an end of measuring the inner house, he brought me forth toward the gate whose prospect is toward the east, and measured it round about.

α.Eze.42.16 
E.Eze.42.16: He measured the east side with the measuring reed, five hundred reeds, with the measuring reed round about.

α.Eze.42.17 
E.Eze.42.17: He measured the north side, five hundred reeds, with the measuring reed round about.

α.Eze.42.18 
E.Eze.42.18: He measured the south side, five hundred reeds, with the measuring reed.

α.Eze.42.19 
E.Eze.42.19: He turned about to the west side, and measured five hundred reeds with the measuring reed.

α.Eze.42.20 
E.Eze.42.20: He measured it by the four sides: it had a wall round about, five hundred reeds long, and five hundred broad, to make a separation between the sanctuary and the profane place.

α.Eze.43.1 
E.Eze.43.1: Afterward he brought me to the gate, even the gate that looketh toward the east:

α.Eze.43.2 
E.Eze.43.2: And, behold, the glory of the God of Israel came from the way of the east: and his voice was like a noise of many waters: and the earth shined with his glory.

α.Eze.43.3 
E.Eze.43.3: And it was according to the appearance of the vision which I saw, even according to the vision that I saw when I came to destroy the city: and the visions were like the vision that I saw by the river Chebar; and I fell upon my face.

α.Eze.43.4 
E.Eze.43.4: And the glory of the LORD came into the house by the way of the gate whose prospect is toward the east.

α.Eze.43.5 
E.Eze.43.5: So the spirit took me up, and brought me into the inner court; and, behold, the glory of the LORD filled the house.

α.Eze.43.6 
E.Eze.43.6: And I heard him speaking unto me out of the house; and the man stood by me.

α.Eze.43.7 
E.Eze.43.7: And he said unto me, Son of man, the place of my throne, and the place of the soles of my feet, where I will dwell in the midst of the children of Israel for ever, and my holy name, shall the house of Israel no more defile, neither they, nor their kings, by their whoredom, nor by the carcases of their kings in their high places.

α.Eze.43.8 
E.Eze.43.8: In their setting of their threshold by my thresholds, and their post by my posts, and the wall between me and them, they have even defiled my holy name by their abominations that they have committed: wherefore I have consumed them in mine anger.

α.Eze.43.9 
E.Eze.43.9: Now let them put away their whoredom, and the carcases of their kings, far from me, and I will dwell in the midst of them for ever.

α.Eze.43.10 
E.Eze.43.10: Thou son of man, shew the house to the house of Israel, that they may be ashamed of their iniquities: and let them measure the pattern.

α.Eze.43.11 
E.Eze.43.11: And if they be ashamed of all that they have done, shew them the form of the house, and the fashion thereof, and the goings out thereof, and the comings in thereof, and all the forms thereof, and all the ordinances thereof, and all the forms thereof, and all the laws thereof: and write it in their sight, that they may keep the whole form thereof, and all the ordinances thereof, and do them.

α.Eze.43.12 
E.Eze.43.12: This is the law of the house; Upon the top of the mountain the whole limit thereof round about shall be most holy. Behold, this is the law of the house.

α.Eze.43.13 
E.Eze.43.13: And these are the measures of the altar after the cubits: The cubit is a cubit and an hand breadth; even the bottom shall be a cubit, and the breadth a cubit, and the border thereof by the edge thereof round about shall be a span: and this shall be the higher place of the altar.

α.Eze.43.14 
E.Eze.43.14: And from the bottom upon the ground even to the lower settle shall be two cubits, and the breadth one cubit; and from the lesser settle even to the greater settle shall be four cubits, and the breadth one cubit.

α.Eze.43.15 
E.Eze.43.15: So the altar shall be four cubits; and from the altar and upward shall be four horns.

α.Eze.43.16 
E.Eze.43.16: And the altar shall be twelve cubits long, twelve broad, square in the four squares thereof.

α.Eze.43.17 
E.Eze.43.17: And the settle shall be fourteen cubits long and fourteen broad in the four squares thereof; and the border about it shall be half a cubit; and the bottom thereof shall be a cubit about; and his stairs shall look toward the east.

α.Eze.43.18 
E.Eze.43.18: And he said unto me, Son of man, thus saith the Lord GOD; These are the ordinances of the altar in the day when they shall make it, to offer burnt offerings thereon, and to sprinkle blood thereon.

α.Eze.43.19 
E.Eze.43.19: And thou shalt give to the priests the Levites that be of the seed of Zadok, which approach unto me, to minister unto me, saith the Lord GOD, a young bullock for a sin offering.

α.Eze.43.20 
E.Eze.43.20: And thou shalt take of the blood thereof, and put it on the four horns of it, and on the four corners of the settle, and upon the border round about: thus shalt thou cleanse and purge it.

α.Eze.43.21 
E.Eze.43.21: Thou shalt take the bullock also of the sin offering, and he shall burn it in the appointed place of the house, without the sanctuary.

α.Eze.43.22 
E.Eze.43.22: And on the second day thou shalt offer a kid of the goats without blemish for a sin offering; and they shall cleanse the altar, as they did cleanse it with the bullock.

α.Eze.43.23 
E.Eze.43.23: When thou hast made an end of cleansing it, thou shalt offer a young bullock without blemish, and a ram out of the flock without blemish.

α.Eze.43.24 
E.Eze.43.24: And thou shalt offer them before the LORD, and the priests shall cast salt upon them, and they shall offer them up for a burnt offering unto the LORD.

α.Eze.43.25 
E.Eze.43.25: Seven days shalt thou prepare every day a goat for a sin offering: they shall also prepare a young bullock, and a ram out of the flock, without blemish.

α.Eze.43.26 
E.Eze.43.26: Seven days shall they purge the altar and purify it; and they shall consecrate themselves.

α.Eze.43.27 
E.Eze.43.27: And when these days are expired, it shall be, that upon the eighth day, and so forward, the priests shall make your burnt offerings upon the altar, and your peace offerings; and I will accept you, saith the Lord GOD.

α.Eze.44.1 
E.Eze.44.1: Then he brought me back the way of the gate of the outward sanctuary which looketh toward the east; and it was shut.

α.Eze.44.2 
E.Eze.44.2: Then said the LORD unto me; This gate shall be shut, it shall not be opened, and no man shall enter in by it; because the LORD, the God of Israel, hath entered in by it, therefore it shall be shut.

α.Eze.44.3 
E.Eze.44.3: It is for the prince; the prince, he shall sit in it to eat bread before the LORD; he shall enter by the way of the porch of that gate, and shall go out by the way of the same.

α.Eze.44.4 
E.Eze.44.4: Then brought he me the way of the north gate before the house: and I looked, and, behold, the glory of the LORD filled the house of the LORD: and I fell upon my face.

α.Eze.44.5 
E.Eze.44.5: And the LORD said unto me, Son of man, mark well, and behold with thine eyes, and hear with thine ears all that I say unto thee concerning all the ordinances of the house of the LORD, and all the laws thereof; and mark well the entering in of the house, with every going forth of the sanctuary.

α.Eze.44.6 
E.Eze.44.6: And thou shalt say to the rebellious, even to the house of Israel, Thus saith the Lord GOD; O ye house of Israel, let it suffice you of all your abominations,

α.Eze.44.7 
E.Eze.44.7: In that ye have brought into my sanctuary strangers, uncircumcised in heart, and uncircumcised in flesh, to be in my sanctuary, to pollute it, even my house, when ye offer my bread, the fat and the blood, and they have broken my covenant because of all your abominations.

α.Eze.44.8 
E.Eze.44.8: And ye have not kept the charge of mine holy things: but ye have set keepers of my charge in my sanctuary for yourselves.

α.Eze.44.9 
E.Eze.44.9: Thus saith the Lord GOD; No stranger, uncircumcised in heart, nor uncircumcised in flesh, shall enter into my sanctuary, of any stranger that is among the children of Israel.

α.Eze.44.10 
E.Eze.44.10: And the Levites that are gone away far from me, when Israel went astray, which went astray away from me after their idols; they shall even bear their iniquity.

α.Eze.44.11 
E.Eze.44.11: Yet they shall be ministers in my sanctuary, having charge at the gates of the house, and ministering to the house: they shall slay the burnt offering and the sacrifice for the people, and they shall stand before them to minister unto them.

α.Eze.44.12 
E.Eze.44.12: Because they ministered unto them before their idols, and caused the house of Israel to fall into iniquity; therefore have I lifted up mine hand against them, saith the Lord GOD, and they shall bear their iniquity.

α.Eze.44.13 
E.Eze.44.13: And they shall not come near unto me, to do the office of a priest unto me, nor to come near to any of my holy things, in the most holy place: but they shall bear their shame, and their abominations which they have committed.

α.Eze.44.14 
E.Eze.44.14: But I will make them keepers of the charge of the house, for all the service thereof, and for all that shall be done therein.

α.Eze.44.15 
E.Eze.44.15: But the priests the Levites, the sons of Zadok, that kept the charge of my sanctuary when the children of Israel went astray from me, they shall come near to me to minister unto me, and they shall stand before me to offer unto me the fat and the blood, saith the Lord GOD:

α.Eze.44.16 
E.Eze.44.16: They shall enter into my sanctuary, and they shall come near to my table, to minister unto me, and they shall keep my charge.

α.Eze.44.17 
E.Eze.44.17: And it shall come to pass, that when they enter in at the gates of the inner court, they shall be clothed with linen garments; and no wool shall come upon them, whiles they minister in the gates of the inner court, and within.

α.Eze.44.18 
E.Eze.44.18: They shall have linen bonnets upon their heads, and shall have linen breeches upon their loins; they shall not gird themselves with any thing that causeth sweat.

α.Eze.44.19 
E.Eze.44.19: And when they go forth into the utter court, even into the utter court to the people, they shall put off their garments wherein they ministered, and lay them in the holy chambers, and they shall put on other garments; and they shall not sanctify the people with their garments.

α.Eze.44.20 
E.Eze.44.20: Neither shall they shave their heads, nor suffer their locks to grow long; they shall only poll their heads.

α.Eze.44.21 
E.Eze.44.21: Neither shall any priest drink wine, when they enter into the inner court.

α.Eze.44.22 
E.Eze.44.22: Neither shall they take for their wives a widow, nor her that is put away: but they shall take maidens of the seed of the house of Israel, or a widow that had a priest before.

α.Eze.44.23 
E.Eze.44.23: And they shall teach my people the difference between the holy and profane, and cause them to discern between the unclean and the clean.

α.Eze.44.24 
E.Eze.44.24: And in controversy they shall stand in judgment; and they shall judge it according to my judgments: and they shall keep my laws and my statutes in all mine assemblies; and they shall hallow my sabbaths.

α.Eze.44.25 
E.Eze.44.25: And they shall come at no dead person to defile themselves: but for father, or for mother, or for son, or for daughter, for brother, or for sister that hath had no husband, they may defile themselves.

α.Eze.44.26 
E.Eze.44.26: And after he is cleansed, they shall reckon unto him seven days.

α.Eze.44.27 
E.Eze.44.27: And in the day that he goeth into the sanctuary, unto the inner court, to minister in the sanctuary, he shall offer his sin offering, saith the Lord GOD.

α.Eze.44.28 
E.Eze.44.28: And it shall be unto them for an inheritance: I am their inheritance: and ye shall give them no possession in Israel: I am their possession.

α.Eze.44.29 
E.Eze.44.29: They shall eat the meat offering, and the sin offering, and the trespass offering: and every dedicated thing in Israel shall be theirs.

α.Eze.44.30 
E.Eze.44.30: And the first of all the firstfruits of all things, and every oblation of all, of every sort of your oblations, shall be the priest's: ye shall also give unto the priest the first of your dough, that he may cause the blessing to rest in thine house.

α.Eze.44.31 
E.Eze.44.31: The priests shall not eat of any thing that is dead of itself, or torn, whether it be fowl or beast.

α.Eze.45.1 
E.Eze.45.1: Moreover, when ye shall divide by lot the land for inheritance, ye shall offer an oblation unto the LORD, an holy portion of the land: the length shall be the length of five and twenty thousand reeds, and the breadth shall be ten thousand. This shall be holy in all the borders thereof round about.

α.Eze.45.2 
E.Eze.45.2: Of this there shall be for the sanctuary five hundred in length, with five hundred in breadth, square round about; and fifty cubits round about for the suburbs thereof.

α.Eze.45.3 
E.Eze.45.3: And of this measure shalt thou measure the length of five and twenty thousand, and the breadth of ten thousand: and in it shall be the sanctuary and the most holy place.

α.Eze.45.4 
E.Eze.45.4: The holy portion of the land shall be for the priests the ministers of the sanctuary, which shall come near to minister unto the LORD: and it shall be a place for their houses, and an holy place for the sanctuary.

α.Eze.45.5 
E.Eze.45.5: And the five and twenty thousand of length, and the ten thousand of breadth shall also the Levites, the ministers of the house, have for themselves, for a possession for twenty chambers.

α.Eze.45.6 
E.Eze.45.6: And ye shall appoint the possession of the city five thousand broad, and five and twenty thousand long, over against the oblation of the holy portion: it shall be for the whole house of Israel.

α.Eze.45.7 
E.Eze.45.7: And a portion shall be for the prince on the one side and on the other side of the oblation of the holy portion, and of the possession of the city, before the oblation of the holy portion, and before the possession of the city, from the west side westward, and from the east side eastward: and the length shall be over against one of the portions, from the west border unto the east border.

α.Eze.45.8 
E.Eze.45.8: In the land shall be his possession in Israel: and my princes shall no more oppress my people; and the rest of the land shall they give to the house of Israel according to their tribes.

α.Eze.45.9 
E.Eze.45.9: Thus saith the Lord GOD; Let it suffice you, O princes of Israel: remove violence and spoil, and execute judgment and justice, take away your exactions from my people, saith the Lord GOD.

α.Eze.45.10 
E.Eze.45.10: Ye shall have just balances, and a just ephah, and a just bath.

α.Eze.45.11 
E.Eze.45.11: The ephah and the bath shall be of one measure, that the bath may contain the tenth part of an homer, and the ephah the tenth part of an homer: the measure thereof shall be after the homer.

α.Eze.45.12 
E.Eze.45.12: And the shekel shall be twenty gerahs: twenty shekels, five and twenty shekels, fifteen shekels, shall be your maneh.

α.Eze.45.13 
E.Eze.45.13: This is the oblation that ye shall offer; the sixth part of an ephah of an homer of wheat, and ye shall give the sixth part of an ephah of an homer of barley:

α.Eze.45.14 
E.Eze.45.14: Concerning the ordinance of oil, the bath of oil, ye shall offer the tenth part of a bath out of the cor, which is an homer of ten baths; for ten baths are an homer:

α.Eze.45.15 
E.Eze.45.15: And one lamb out of the flock, out of two hundred, out of the fat pastures of Israel; for a meat offering, and for a burnt offering, and for peace offerings, to make reconciliation for them, saith the Lord GOD.

α.Eze.45.16 
E.Eze.45.16: All the people of the land shall give this oblation for the prince in Israel.

α.Eze.45.17 
E.Eze.45.17: And it shall be the prince's part to give burnt offerings, and meat offerings, and drink offerings, in the feasts, and in the new moons, and in the sabbaths, in all solemnities of the house of Israel: he shall prepare the sin offering, and the meat offering, and the burnt offering, and the peace offerings, to make reconciliation for the house of Israel.

α.Eze.45.18 
E.Eze.45.18: Thus saith the Lord GOD; In the first month, in the first day of the month, thou shalt take a young bullock without blemish, and cleanse the sanctuary:

α.Eze.45.19 
E.Eze.45.19: And the priest shall take of the blood of the sin offering, and put it upon the posts of the house, and upon the four corners of the settle of the altar, and upon the posts of the gate of the inner court.

α.Eze.45.20 
E.Eze.45.20: And so thou shalt do the seventh day of the month for every one that erreth, and for him that is simple: so shall ye reconcile the house.

α.Eze.45.21 
E.Eze.45.21: In the first month, in the fourteenth day of the month, ye shall have the passover, a feast of seven days; unleavened bread shall be eaten.

α.Eze.45.22 
E.Eze.45.22: And upon that day shall the prince prepare for himself and for all the people of the land a bullock for a sin offering.

α.Eze.45.23 
E.Eze.45.23: And seven days of the feast he shall prepare a burnt offering to the LORD, seven bullocks and seven rams without blemish daily the seven days; and a kid of the goats daily for a sin offering.

α.Eze.45.24 
E.Eze.45.24: And he shall prepare a meat offering of an ephah for a bullock, and an ephah for a ram, and an hin of oil for an ephah.

α.Eze.45.25 
E.Eze.45.25: In the seventh month, in the fifteenth day of the month, shall he do the like in the feast of the seven days, according to the sin offering, according to the burnt offering, and according to the meat offering, and according to the oil.

α.Eze.46.1 YEu wussin Lord Jehovah, anomie chippinnutunkane squont ne anaquohtag wutchepwoiyeu, ne piṣh kuppuhhausu nequtta tahshe anakausuwae kesukodtaṣh: qut ut Sabbath piṣh woshinumun, kah ut wuske nepauzsae kesukodtut piṣh woshinumun.
E.Eze.46.1: Thus saith the Lord GOD; The gate of the inner court that looketh toward the east shall be shut the six working days; but on the sabbath it shall be opened, and in the day of the new moon it shall be opened.

α.Eze.46.2 Kah sontim piṣh petutteau, ut ne porche squontamwe mayut poquadchit, kah sephausuenuog piṣh quaguoshwunnumwog wutchikohtae mag8onk, kah wunohteae mag8ongaṣh, kah noh piṣh wowussummuau, ut ahhut anuishkhamuk squontamut: neit piṣh sohham, qut squont matta piṣh kuppuhhausin8 pajeh wunnonk8ut.
E.Eze.46.2: And the prince shall enter by the way of the porch of that gate without, and shall stand by the post of the gate, and the priests shall prepare his burnt offering and his peace offerings, and he shall worship at the threshold of the gate: then he shall go forth; but the gate shall not be shut until the evening.

α.Eze.46.3 Netatuppe wonk ohkee missinninnuog piṣh wowuss[u]mmuaog yeu ut squontamut anaquabit Lord, Sabath-dayeu, kah wuske nepauzsaeu.
E.Eze.46.3: Likewise the people of the land shall worship at the door of this gate before the LORD in the sabbaths and in the new moons.

α.Eze.46.4 Kah chikohtae mag8onk ne sontim piṣh maguk en Jehovah ut Sabothdayeu, nequtta tahsuog lambsog matta chohkeseg kah ram matta chohkeseg.
E.Eze.46.4: And the burnt offering that the prince shall offer unto the LORD in the sabbath day shall be six lambs without blemish, and a ram without blemish.

α.Eze.46.5 Kah meetsue mag8onk piṣh Ephah wutch ramsut, kah meetsue saphausuonk wutch Lambsut piṣh nnih neane tapenuk ummagunat, kah hinne pummee wutch Ephah.
E.Eze.46.5: And the meat offering shall be an ephah for a ram, and the meat offering for the lambs as he shall be able to give, and an hin of oil to an ephah.

α.Eze.46.6 Kah ut wuske nepauzsae kesukod ne piṣh wuske ox mat chohkeseg, kah nequtta tahsuog Lambsog, kah ram: neg piṣh mat chohkeseog.
E.Eze.46.6: And in the day of the new moon it shall be a young bullock without blemish, and six lambs, and a ram: they shall be without blemish.

α.Eze.46.7 Kah n[o]h piṣh quagquoshwunum meetsue mag8onk, Ephah wutche ox: kah Ephah wutche ram, kah wutche Lambsog neane tapenuk, kah hinne pummee wutch Ephah.
E.Eze.46.7: And he shall prepare a meat offering, an ephah for a bullock, and an ephah for a ram, and for the lambs according as his hand shall attain unto, and an hin of oil to an ephah.

α.Eze.46.8 Kah petutteadt sontim, noh piṣh petutteau ut porche ne squontame mayut, kah ne piṣh 8tch sohhamun.
E.Eze.46.8: And when the prince shall enter, he shall go in by the way of the porch of that gate, and he shall go forth by the way thereof.

α.Eze.46.9 Qut ohkee missinninnuog peyahettit anaquabit Lord, ut miyaee mishadtupp8onganit, noh petutteadt nanummiyeue squontamut wowussummuwonat, noh piṣh sohham en sowaniyeue squontamwe mayut, k[a]h noh petutteadt sowaniyeue squontamwe mayut, noh piṣh sohham nanu[m̃]iyeue squontamwe mayut: matta pish en qushkeu ut squontamut ne wagkup: qut noh piṣh piuhsuke sohham.
E.Eze.46.9: But when the people of the land shall come before the LORD in the solemn feasts, he that entereth in by the way of the north gate to worship shall go out by the way of the south gate; and he that entereth by the way of the south gate shall go forth by the way of the north gate: he shall not return by the way of the gate whereby he came in, but shall go forth over against it.

α.Eze.46.10 K[a]h sontim wunnashaum8out petutteahettit, piṣh petutteau, kah nag sohhamwehettit noh piṣh sohham.
E.Eze.46.10: And the prince in the midst of them, when they go in, shall go in; and when they go forth, shall go forth.

α.Eze.46.11 Kah ut mishadtup8onganehtu, kah [a]dt miyaeonganéhtu meetsue mag8onk pish Ephah wutch ox kah ephah wutch ram, kah wutch lambsog neane tapenuk ummagunat, kah hinne pummee wutch ephah.
E.Eze.46.11: And in the feasts and in the solemnities the meat offering shall be an ephah to a bullock, and an ephah to a ram, and to the lambs as he is able to give, and an hin of oil to an ephah.

α.Eze.46.12 Neit Sontim unnantamwe quagquoshweet chikohtae mag8onk, asuh unnantamwe wunohtae mag8onk en Lordut, neit howan pish 8wóshwunnumauoh wutchepwoiyeue squont, kah noh pish quaquoshwunum wutchikohtae mag8onk, kah 8nohteae mag8ongash neáseep sabbath$dayeu, neit pish sohham, kah mahche sohhog, howan pish kuppuhham squont.
E.Eze.46.12: Now when the prince shall prepare a voluntary burnt offering or peace offerings voluntarily unto the LORD, one shall then open him the gate that looketh toward the east, and he shall prepare his burnt offering and his peace offerings, as he did on the sabbath day: then he shall go forth; and after his going forth one shall shut the gate.

α.Eze.46.13 Pish asekesukokish kukquagquoshwunum chikohtae mag8onk en Jehovahut; negonne kodtumwae mat chohkesue lamb, pish kukquaguoshwun nish$noh mohtompan.
E.Eze.46.13: Thou shalt daily prepare a burnt offering unto the LORD of a lamb of the first year without blemish: thou shalt prepare it every morning.

α.Eze.46.14 Kah piṣh kukquaquoshwunnumau meetsue mag8onk nishnoh mohtompog, nequtta tahshe ephae chepai, kah nashwe chippag hinne pummee, kenukkenumunat pishque n8khik, nagwutteae meetsue mag8onk, nashpe machemohtag kuhk8waonk en Jehovah$ut.
E.Eze.46.14: And thou shalt prepare a meat offering for it every morning, the sixth part of an ephah, and the third part of an hin of oil, to temper with the fine flour; a meat offering continually by a perpetual ordinance unto the LORD.

α.Eze.46.15 Yeu piṣh kuttinne quagquoshwunum lamb: kah meetsue mag8onk, kah pummee, nishnoh mohtompog wutche nagwutteae chikohtae mag8onk.
E.Eze.46.15: Thus shall they prepare the lamb, and the meat offering, and the oil, every morning for a continual burnt offering.

α.Eze.46.16 Yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, sontim aninnumauont mag8onk howae wunnaumonuh ne ahtoou piṣh wuttaihéeu wunnaumonuh, ne piṣh wutohtoe wutchippiyeum.
E.Eze.46.16: Thus saith the Lord GOD; If the prince give a gift unto any of his sons, the inheritance thereof shall be his sons'; it shall be their possession by inheritance.

α.Eze.46.17 Qut aninnumauont, ohtoe mag8onk howae wuttinneumoh, neit piṣh wuttaihe pajeh chippinnúe kodtum8ut: ompetag piṣh qushkem8 en sontimóut, qut wutohtoonk ne piṣh wunnaumonuh wuttaiheeu.
E.Eze.46.17: But if he give a gift of his inheritance to one of his servants, then it shall be his to the year of liberty; after it shall return to the prince: but his inheritance shall be his sons' for them.

α.Eze.46.18 Nano, sontim matta piṣh chekee nemunnum8 wutohtoongan8 missinninnúog, sohwhôhkonat wutch wutohtoongan8óut, qut piṣh aninnumauau wunnaumonuh ohtoonk wutch nehenwonche wutohtoonganit, onk woh nummissinninnumog matta seahwhóog nishnoh pasuk wutch wuttaiheit.
E.Eze.46.18: Moreover the prince shall not take of the people's inheritance by oppression, to thrust them out of their possession; but he shall give his sons inheritance out of his own possession: that my people be not scattered every man from his possession.

α.Eze.46.19 Neit, nuppapashpe pas8uk ahhut petutteamuk, ne ohtag sussippoe squontamut, ut wunneetupanatamwe wutchambersum8out sephausuenuog, ne anaquohtag nanummiyeu: kah kusseh, na ayeuonk neese sussippoiyeuut wutcheksuiyeu,
E.Eze.46.19: After he brought me through the entry, which was at the side of the gate, into the holy chambers of the priests, which looked toward the north: and, behold, there was a place on the two sides westward.

α.Eze.46.20 Neit nuttinuk, yeu ayeuonk uttoh piṣh adt sephausuenuog annam panneseae mag8onk, uttoh piṣh adt apwahettit meetsue mag8onk, matta wussohh8wuttau8[o]nat en poquodche chippinnutunkanit, wunneetupanatamweheonat missinninnuog.
E.Eze.46.20: Then said he unto me, This is the place where the priests shall boil the trespass offering and the sin offering, where they shall bake the meat offering; that they bear them not out into the utter court, to sanctify the people.

α.Eze.46.21 Neit nussohh8wunuk en poquadche chippinnutunkanit, kah nupp[a]umwusháhik chippinnutunkane yauut náeu, kah kusseh, ut nishnoh naeu chippinnutunkanit, na chippinnú unk[o]hteau
E.Eze.46.21: Then he brought me forth into the utter court, and caused me to pass by the four corners of the court; and, behold, in every corner of the court there was a court.

α.Eze.46.22 Ut yaúe naiyeue chippinnutunk, na$ut chippinnutungaṣh wáitchissin, yauunchag ishquanogkod ne sahteag, kah shwinchage kishkag: yeuṣh yaue nayieuaṣh pasuk quttuhwheg.
E.Eze.46.22: In the four corners of the court there were courts joined of forty cubits long and thirty broad: these four corners were of one measure.

α.Eze.46.23 Kah na wuske wekitteaonk weenushunk niṣh yaueu: kah unnehteauun tannussohkuhquáeu ayeuongaṣh, ut agwe qunnehteóunnutáeu waéenu.
E.Eze.46.23: And there was a row of building round about in them, round about them four, and it was made with boiling places under the rows round about.

α.Eze.46.24 Neit nuttinuk, yeuṣh wutayeuongan8oaṣh namatohkuhquácheg, uttoh adt weetuómue wuttinnúmuneunk piṣh annamwog wussephausuongan8oaṣh missinninúog.
E.Eze.46.24: Then said he unto me, These are the places of them that boil, where the ministers of the house shall boil the sacrifice of the people.

α.Eze.47.1 OMpetak wonk nuppas8k wetuóme squontamut, kah kusseh, nippe sohwhutchuon wutch agwe wetuóme ánuiskham8onganit wutchepwoiyeu, newutche anaquâag wetu wutchepwoe nogquohteau, kah nippeaṣh womussum8 wutch agwe enninnuhkôeniyeu wetuout, sowaniyeue Altarut.
E.Eze.47.1: Afterward he brought me again unto the door of the house; and, behold, waters issued out from under the threshold of the house eastward: for the forefront of the house stood toward the east, and the waters came down from under from the right side of the house, at the south side of the altar.

α.Eze.47.2 Neit nussohh8wunuk wutch squontame mayut nanummiyeu, kah nukquinnuppuwunuk poquadche mayut, en poquodche squontamut, en mayut ne wutchepwoiyeueyeu, kah kusseh, na wutch sohwutchuan nippeaṣh enninnohkôuneiyeu.
E.Eze.47.2: Then brought he me out of the way of the gate northward, and led me about the way without unto the utter gate by the way that looketh eastward; and, behold, there ran out waters on the right side.

α.Eze.47.3 Kah noh wosketomp pemuneat ohtag wunnutcheganit, sohhog en wutchepwoiyeu, quttuhhum nequt muttannonganeishquanogkod, kah nuppannuppú[u]nuk nippekontu: nippeaṣh mussipskut.
E.Eze.47.3: And when the man that had the line in his hand went forth eastward, he measured a thousand cubits, and he brought me through the waters; the waters were to the ankles.

α.Eze.47.4 Wonk quttuhhum nequt mattannung, kah nuppannuppúunuk nippe, nippeaṣh mukkuttukqut: wonk quttuhhum nequt muttannong, kah nuppannuppúunnuk, nippeaṣh musseganit.
E.Eze.47.4: Again he measured a thousand, and brought me through the waters; the waters were to the knees. Again he measured a thousand, and brought me through; the waters were to the loins.

α.Eze.47.5 Ompetak quttuhham nequt muttannunganogkod, neit sepu8 ne matta nukqushk[ó]dteaon newutche nippeaṣh tommogkem8 nippeaṣh ne woh pámwôs8emuk, sep ne woh mo quoshkodtéomuk.
E.Eze.47.5: Afterward he measured a thousand; and it was a river that I could not pass over: for the waters were risen, waters to swim in, a river that could not be passed over.

α.Eze.47.6 Kah nuttinnuk wosketompae wunnaumoniin sun yeu kenaumun? neit nuppas8k, kah nukqushkeahik en kishketuk.
E.Eze.47.6: And he said unto me, Son of man, hast thou seen this? Then he brought me, and caused me to return to the brink of the river.

α.Eze.47.7 Kah quashkeon, kusseh, ut kiṣhketuk monataṣh metukquaṣh aeetane wutch.
E.Eze.47.7: Now when I had returned, behold, at the bank of the river were very many trees on the one side and on the other.

α.Eze.47.8 Neit nuttinuk, yeush nippeaṣh unnitchuanash nogque wutchepwoohkit, kah w8msum8aṣh en touohkomukqut, kah padshaaṣh keitahhanit, niṣh paudshunkiṣh kehtahhanit nippeaṣh piṣh neetskehuwom8aṣh.
E.Eze.47.8: Then said he unto me, These waters issue out toward the east country, and go down into the desert, and go into the sea: which being brought forth into the sea, the waters shall be healed.

α.Eze.47.9 Kah piṣh n$nih, niṣh$noh oaas pâmontog, noh mamonchit, uttoh paudshunk sepuaṣh, pish pomantamwog, kah na piṣh wutut muttaaneau namohsog, newutche yeush nippeaṣh pish na peyom8aṣh: newutche nish piṣh neetskehuwom8aṣh, kah niṣh oaas piṣh pomantam uttoh sep paom8uk.
E.Eze.47.9: And it shall come to pass, that every thing that liveth, which moveth, whithersoever the rivers shall come, shall live: and there shall be a very great multitude of fish, because these waters shall come thither: for they shall be healed; and every thing shall live whither the river cometh.

α.Eze.47.10 Kah piṣh nnih, omaenuog piṣh ukquesikkompauinneau wutch Engedi wehque Eneglaim: na piṣh ahhut sepagenit hashabpog: wunnamoss8uh piṣh tatuppeyeu8oh mishe ketahhane namossit, neanussehettit, muttaanwog.
E.Eze.47.10: And it shall come to pass, that the fishers shall stand upon it from Engedi even unto Eneglaim; they shall be a place to spread forth nets; their fish shall be according to their kinds, as the fish of the great sea, exceeding many.

α.Eze.47.11 Qut pisseogquane naut ayeuongaṣh kah na$ut wosashquit matta piṣh neetskehuwomun8aṣh, niṣh piṣh magunaṣh en saltut.
E.Eze.47.11: But the miry places thereof and the marishes thereof shall not be healed; they shall be given to salt.

α.Eze.47.12 Kah ut kiṣhke sepuut, aeetawe wussapenuk, na piṣh tannegen wame meetsue mehtugquaṣh: noh wunneepog matta piṣh pa[n]shan8g: kah ummeechummuonk matta pish mahchumunn8: piṣh wushke meechummu niṣh$noh nepauz, newutche 8nippem8 wuttitchuan Sanctuaryut kah ummeechummuongan8 ne piṣh meetsuonganu8, kah ne wunneepog wutche mahskit.
E.Eze.47.12: And by the river upon the bank thereof, on this side and on that side, shall grow all trees for meat, whose leaf shall not fade, neither shall the fruit thereof be consumed: it shall bring forth new fruit according to his months, because their waters they issued out of the sanctuary: and the fruit thereof shall be for meat, and the leaf thereof for medicine.

α.Eze.47.13 Yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, yeu piṣh sussippoi ne piṣh nashpe ahtauog ohke, neane naboneese chippa[n]hettit Israel, Joseph neese chippiyeum8.
E.Eze.47.13: Thus saith the Lord GOD; This shall be the border, whereby ye shall inherit the land according to the twelve tribes of Israel: Joseph shall have two portions.

α.Eze.47.14 Kah ne piṣh kutahtauuneau, pasuk kah netatuppe onkatuk, ne papaume tahshinumomp nunnutch woh nuttinnumauonat k8sh8oog, kah yeu ohke pish k8tohkeinneau.
E.Eze.47.14: And ye shall inherit it, one as well as another: concerning the which I lifted up mine hand to give it unto your fathers: and this land shall fall unto you for inheritance.

α.Eze.47.15 Kah yeu piṣh ohkee sussippoi en nogque nanummiyeu, wutch mishe kehtahhannit Hethlone may, anshik Zedad.
E.Eze.47.15: And this shall be the border of the land toward the north side, from the great sea, the way of Hethlon, as men go to Zedad;

α.Eze.47.16 Hamath, Berothath, Sibraim, ne nashaue Damaskusse sussippoiyeuut, kah Hamathe sussippoi: Hazar-Hatticon, ne kishke Haurane sussippoiyeuut.
E.Eze.47.16: Hamath, Berothah, Sibraim, which is between the border of Damascus and the border of Hamath; Hazarhatticon, which is by the coast of Hauran.

α.Eze.47.17 Kah sussippoi wutch ketahhannit ne piṣh Hazarenan, Damaskusse sussippoi, kah nanumme nanumohkeit, kah Hamathee sussippoiyeuut yeu nanummiyeue sussippoi.
E.Eze.47.17: And the border from the sea shall be Hazarenan, the border of Damascus, and the north northward, and the border of Hamath. And this is the north side.

α.Eze.47.18 Kah wutchepwoiyeu pish kukquthamumw8 wutch Hauran, kah wutch Damáscus kah wutch Gilead, kah wutch Israelle ohkeit kishke Jordan, wutch sussippoiyeuut wehque wutchepwoiyeue kehtahhanit, kah yeu wutchepwoiyeue.
E.Eze.47.18: And the east side ye shall measure from Hauran, and from Damascus, and from Gilead, and from the land of Israel by Jordan, from the border unto the east sea. And this is the east side.

α.Eze.47.19 Kah sowaniyeue sowanohkeit, wutch Tamer, wehque penuanittue nippeut ut Kadesh, seip wehque mishe ketahhannit, kah yeu sowaniyeu sowanohke.
E.Eze.47.19: And the south side southward, from Tamar even to the waters of strife in Kadesh, the river to the great sea. And this is the south side southward.

α.Eze.47.20 Wutcheksuiyeu piṣh mishe keitoh wutch sussippoyeuut, nô pajeh howan peyont piuhsuke Hamath: yeu wutchekwuiyeue sussippoi.
E.Eze.47.20: The west side also shall be the great sea from the border, till a man come over against Hamath. This is the west side.

α.Eze.47.21 Neit pish kuttinne chadchabenumoatinnea[u] ohke, neadtahshik wutchippan8ongan8 Israel.
E.Eze.47.21: So shall ye divide this land unto you according to the tribes of Israel.

α.Eze.47.22 Kah piṣh n$nih, piṣh kuttittanohtôadtue chadchabenumunneau wutche kutohtoongan8, kah pen8wohteaog neg keohteacheg, neg waneechanitcheg ut kenugke ku[h]hogkaout kah nag piṣh kutogquanumoog, neg nekitcheg ut ohkeit, ut kenugke wunnaumonuh Israel, neg pish ohtoog ohtoonk weeche kenaau, ut kenugke wutchippan8ongan8out Israel.
E.Eze.47.22: And it shall come to pass, that ye shall divide it by lot for an inheritance unto you, and to the strangers that sojourn among you, which shall beget children among you: and they shall be unto you as born in the country among the children of Israel; they shall have inheritance with you among the tribes of Israel.

α.Eze.47.23 Kah piṣh nnih, uttoh chippan8onk pen8wot adt noh n8sausit, na piṣh ut aniñumauon wutohtoonk wussin Lord Jehovah.
E.Eze.47.23: And it shall come to pass, that in what tribe the stranger sojourneth, there shall ye give him his inheritance, saith the Lord GOD.

α.Eze.48.1 KAh yeush chippan8e wesuongaṣh, wutch nanummiyeue wehqshik, wehque sussippoiyeue may ut H[e]thlom, aunshik Hamath, Hazarenan, nanummiyeue Damascusse sussippoi, wehque Hamathe sussippoiyeuut, newutch yeush wussissippoiyeumash wutchepwoiyeue, kah wutcheksuiyeue: yeu wuttaihe Dan.
E.Eze.48.1: Now these are the names of the tribes. From the north end to the coast of the way of Hethlon, as one goeth to Hamath, Hazarenan, the border of Damascus northward, to the coast of Hamath; for these are his sides east and west; a portion for Dan.

α.Eze.48.2 Kah ut wussissippoiyeumut Dan, wutch wutchepwoiyeu wehque wutcheksuiyeu, ne wuttaihe Asher.
E.Eze.48.2: And by the border of Dan, from the east side unto the west side, a portion for Asher.

α.Eze.48.3 Kah ut wussissippoiyeumut Asher, wutch wutchepwoiyeu wehque wutcheksuiyeu, ne wuttaihe Nephthali.
E.Eze.48.3: And by the border of Asher, from the east side even unto the west side, a portion for Naphtali.

α.Eze.48.4 Kah ut wussissippoiyeumut Nephthali, wutch wutchepwoiyeu wehque wutcheksuiyeu, ne wuttaihe Manasseh.
E.Eze.48.4: And by the border of Naphtali, from the east side unto the west side, a portion for Manasseh.

α.Eze.48.5 Kah ut wussissippoiyeumut Manasseh, wutch wutchepwoiyeu wehque wutcheksuiyeu, ne wuttaihe Ephraim.
E.Eze.48.5: And by the border of Manasseh, from the east side unto the west side, a portion for Ephraim.

α.Eze.48.6 Kah ut wussissippoiyeumut Ephraim, wutch wutchepwoiyeu wehque wutcheksuiyeu, ne wuttaihe Reuben.
E.Eze.48.6: And by the border of Ephraim, from the east side even unto the west side, a portion for Reuben.

α.Eze.48.7 Kah ut wussissippoiyeumut Reuben,w utch wutchepwoiyeu wehque wutcheksuiyeu, ne wuttaihe Judah.
E.Eze.48.7: And by the border of Reuben, from the east side unto the west side, a portion for Judah.

α.Eze.48.8 Kah ut wussissippoiyeumut Judah, wutch wutchepwoiyeu wehque wutcheksuiyeu, na piṣh ohteau mag8onk ne woh maghettit, neesneechag kah napanna tahshe muttannongane weekinask88 ne koshkag, kah ne sahteag tatuppeyeu8 onkatuk chippai, wutch wutchepwoiyeu wehque wutcheksuiyeu kah sanctuary piṣh nashaue ohteau.
E.Eze.48.8: And by the border of Judah, from the east side unto the west side, shall be the offering which ye shall offer of five and twenty thousand reeds in breadth, and in length as one of the other parts, from the east side unto the west side: and the sanctuary shall be in the midst of it.

α.Eze.48.9 Mag8onk ne piṣh anunnumauóg Jehovah, ne piṣh neesneech[a]g kah napanna tahshe muttannunk ne sahteag, kah piogque muttannunk ne koshkag.
E.Eze.48.9: The oblation that ye shall offer unto the LORD shall be of five and twenty thousand in length, and of ten thousand in breadth.

α.Eze.48.10 Kah wutche nagoh, wutche sephausuenuog, yeu piṣh wunneetupanatamwe mag8onk, nogque nanummiyeu neeneechag kah napanna tahshe muttannung, kah nogque nanummiyeu piogque muttannongane kishki kah nogque en wutchepwoiyeu, piogque muttannung ne koshkag, kah nogque s[o]waniyeu neesneechag kah napanna muttannongane ne sahteag, kah wussanctuaryum Jehovah piṣh ohteau nashaue.
E.Eze.48.10: And for them, even for the priests, shall be this holy oblation; toward the north five and twenty thousand in length, and toward the west ten thousand in breadth, and toward the east ten thousand in breadth, and toward the south five and twenty thousand in length: and the sanctuary of the LORD shall be in the midst thereof.

α.Eze.48.11 Yeu piṣh wutch sephausuenuog neg waneetupánatamwahitcheg, wunnaumonuh Zadok, neg nanawehteunkeg nummeechumehteaonk, neg matta waonegeg, wunnaumonuh Israel waonunit neane waonhettit Levitsog.
E.Eze.48.11: It shall be for the priests that are sanctified of the sons of Zadok; which have kept my charge, which went not astray when the children of Israel went astray, as the Levites went astray.

α.Eze.48.12 Kah yeu ohkee mag8onk, ne maghettit, ne piṣh nag wutch wunneetupanatamweyeu8, kishke wussissippoiyeumut Levitsog.
E.Eze.48.12: And this oblation of the land that is offered shall be unto them a thing most holy by the border of the Levites.

α.Eze.48.13 Kah piuhsuke wussissippoiyeumut sephausuenuog, Levitsog pish ohtoog neesneechage kah napanna tahshe muttannunk ne sahteag, kah piogque muttannunk ne koshkag: wame ne sahteag, neesneechage kah napanna tahshe muttannong, kah ne koshkag piogque muttannong.
E.Eze.48.13: And over against the border of the priests the Levites shall have five and twenty thousand in length, and ten thousand in breadth: all the length shall be five and twenty thousand, and the breadth ten thousand.

α.Eze.48.14 Kah nag matta piṣh ukkodtauwompaséinneau, kah matta wutôs8wunum8uneau, kah matta piṣh assan8og ohkee kakenúmuneaṣh: newutche ne wunnetupanatamwe ut Jehovah$ut.
E.Eze.48.14: And they shall not sell of it, neither exchange, nor alienate the firstfruits of the land: for it is holy unto the LORD.

α.Eze.48.15 Kah neesnehchag kah napanna tahshe muttannunk niṣh ashqshunkish ut ne koshkag papiuhsuke neesneechage kah napanna tahshe muttanunk, ne piṣh nanwée ayeuonk wutche keitotan, ayineat, kah wohshishinnit kah keitotan piṣh nôeu ohteau.
E.Eze.48.15: And the five thousand, that are left in the breadth over against the five and twenty thousand, shall be a profane place for the city, for dwelling, and for suburbs: and the city shall be in the midst thereof.

α.Eze.48.16 Kah yeush piṣh quttuhwhosuongaṣh: nanummiyeu yauut muttannunk, kah napanna tahshe pasukq kah sowaniyeu yauut muttannunk, kah napanna tahshe pasuk: kah wutchipwoiyeu yauut muttannunk kah napanna tahshe pasuk kah wutchekwuiyeu, yeuut muttannung, kah napanna tahshe pasuk.
E.Eze.48.16: And these shall be the measures thereof; the north side four thousand and five hundred, and the south side four thousand and five hundred, and on the east side four thousand and five hundred, and the west side four thousand and five hundred.

α.Eze.48.17 Kah wôshishinnu keitotanae aye[u]ongaṣh, nanummiyeue piṣh neese pasuk8e kah napanna tahshinchag; sowaniyeu neese pasuk8e kah napanna tahshinchag, wutchipwoiyeu neese pasuk8e, kah napanna tahshinchag, kah wutcheksuiyeu neese pasuk8e kah n[a]panna tahshinchag.
E.Eze.48.17: And the suburbs of the city shall be toward the north two hundred and fifty, and toward the south two hundred and fifty, and toward the east two hundred and fifty, and toward the west two hundred and fifty.

α.Eze.48.18 Kah ne asqshunk ne|sahteag piuhsukke wunnetupanatamwe mag8onk, piogque muttañonganogkodtaṣh wutchepwoiyeu, & piogque muttañonganogkodtaṣh wutcheksuiyeu, kah ne piṣh piuhs[u]keyeu8 wunnetupanatam8e mag8e chippai, kah ne noh adtannegig ne piṣh ummeechumum8 neg wadtinnunneumukeg keitotan.
E.Eze.48.18: And the residue in length over against the oblation of the holy portion shall be ten thousand eastward, and ten thousand westward: and it shall be over against the oblation of the holy portion; and the increase thereof shall be for food unto them that serve the city.

α.Eze.48.19 Kah neg quoshauéhtamóntogeg keitotan, piṣh ukquagwashwétamwó[n]tamunneau wutch Israelle chippan8onganit.
E.Eze.48.19: And they that serve the city shall serve it out of all the tribes of Israel.

α.Eze.48.20 Wame mag8ongaṣh piṣh neesneechage kah napanna tahshe muttannunk kishke neesneechage muttannongane kah napanna tahshe, piṣh kummagumw8 wunnetupanatamwe mag8onk yauut naeu, weeche keitotanae ohtoonk.
E.Eze.48.20: All the oblation shall be five and twenty thousand by five and twenty thousand: ye shall offer the holy oblation foursquare, with the possession of the city.

α.Eze.48.21 Kah ashqshunk pish wuttaihe sontim aéetaue wunnetupanatamwe mag8onk, kah wutch keitotanáe ohtoonk piuhsuke neesnechage kah napanna tahshe muttannonganogkodut, ut wunneetupanatamwe ayeuonganit wutchepwoiyeu; kah wutcheksuiyeu, piuhsuke neesneechage kah napanna tahshe muttannonganogkodtut, piuhsuke wutchippiyeumut sontim, kah ne piṣh wunneetupanatamwe mag8onk; kah weetue sanctuary piṣh nashaue ohteau.
E.Eze.48.21: And the residue shall be for the prince, on the one side and on the other of the holy oblation, and of the possession of the city, over against the five and twenty thousand of the oblation toward the east border, and westward over against the five and twenty thousand toward the west border, over against the portions for the prince: and it shall be the holy oblation; and the sanctuary of the house shall be in the midst thereof.

α.Eze.48.22 Nano, wutch wutohtoongan8 Levitsog, kah wutch keitotanáe ohtoonganit, ut nashaue wutohtoonganit sontim, ut nashaue wussissippoiyeumut Judah, kah wussissippoiyeumut Benjamin, ne piṣh wuttaihe sontim.
E.Eze.48.22: Moreover from the possession of the Levites, and from the possession of the city, being in the midst of that which is the prince's, between the border of Judah and the border of Benjamin, shall be for the prince.

α.Eze.48.23 Kah ashqshunkiṣh chippan8ongaṣh wutch wutchepwoiyeu wehque wutcheksuiyeu ne wuttaihe Simeon.
E.Eze.48.23: As for the rest of the tribes, from the east side unto the west side, Benjamin shall have a portion.

α.Eze.48.24 Kah ut wussissippoiyeumut Benjamin, wutch wutchepwoiyeu wehque wutcheksuiyeu ne wuttaihe Simeon.
E.Eze.48.24: And by the border of Benjamin, from the east side unto the west side, Simeon shall have a portion.

α.Eze.48.25 Kah ut wussissippoiyeumut Simeon, wutch wutchepwoiyeu wehque wutcheksuiyeu ne wuttaihe Issachar.
E.Eze.48.25: And by the border of Simeon, from the east side unto the west side, Issachar a portion.

α.Eze.48.26 Kah ut wussissippoiyeumut Issachar, wutch wutchepwoiyeu wehque wutcheksuiyeu ne wuttaihe Zebulun.
E.Eze.48.26: And by the border of Issachar, from the east side unto the west side, Zebulun a portion.

α.Eze.48.27 Kah ut wussissippoiyeumut Zebulun, wutch wutchepwoiyeu wehque wutcheksuiyeu ne wuttaihe Gad.
E.Eze.48.27: And by the border of Zebulun, from the east side unto the west side, Gad a portion.

α.Eze.48.28 Kah ut wussissippoiyeumut Gad, sowaniyeu sowanohkeit, sussippoi piṣh ohteau wutch Tamar wehque penuanittue nippeash ut Kadesh, kah wehque sepuut nogque mishe kehtahhannit.
E.Eze.48.28: And by the border of Gad, at the south side southward, the border shall be even from Tamar unto the waters of strife in Kadesh, and to the river toward the great sea.

α.Eze.48.29 Yeu ohke ne tanohtôadtue chachaubenumauóneau Israelle chippan8ongaṣh wutch ohtoonk, kah yeush wutchippiyeum88aṣh wussin Lord Jehovah.
E.Eze.48.29: This is the land which ye shall divide by lot unto the tribes of Israel for inheritance, and these are their portions, saith the Lord GOD.

α.Eze.48.30 Kah yeush waj sohhamuk otanat, nanummiyeu yaue muttannonganogkodtash kah napanna tahshinaṣh quttuhham8ongash.
E.Eze.48.30: And these are the goings out of the city on the north side, four thousand and five hundred measures.

α.Eze.48.31 Kah keitotanáe squontamaṣh niṣh piṣh ne as8weshettit Israelle chippan8ongaṣh, nishwinaṣh squontamaṣh nanummiyeu pasuk 8squont Reuben, pasuk 8squont Judah[,] pasuk 8squont Levi.
E.Eze.48.31: And the gates of the city shall be after the names of the tribes of Israel: three gates northward; one gate of Reuben, one gate of Judah, one gate of Levi.

α.Eze.48.32 Wutchepwoiyeu yauut muttannongane kah napanna tahshe pasuk: kah nishwinash squonatamaṣh, pasuk 8squont Joseph, pasuk 8squont Benjamin, pasuk 8squont Dan.
E.Eze.48.32: And at the east side four thousand and five hundred: and three gates; and one gate of Joseph, one gate of Benjamin, one gate of Dan.

α.Eze.48.33 Kah sowaniyeu, yauut muttannongane kah napanna tahshe pasuk, kah nishwinaṣh squontamaṣh, pasuk 8squont Simeon, pasuk 8squont Issachar, pasuk 8squont Zebulun.
E.Eze.48.33: And at the south side four thousand and five hundred measures: and three gates; one gate of Simeon, one gate of Issachar, one gate of Zebulun.

α.Eze.48.34 Kah wutcheksuiyeu yauut muttannongane, kah napanna tahshe pasuk, kah nishwinaṣh squontamaṣh, pasuk 8squont Gad, pasuk 8squont Asher, pasuk 8squont Nephthali.
E.Eze.48.34: At the west side four thousand and five hundred, with their three gates; one gate of Gad, one gate of Asher, one gate of Naphtali.

α.Eze.48.35 Ne waeenu nabo shwosuk tahshe mutta[ñ]unk, kah ussowétamun ne keitotan, wutch ne kesukok, Jehovah Shammah, {Iehovah na wuttappin}.
E.Eze.48.35: It was round about eighteen thousand measures: and the name of the city from that day shall be, The LORD is there.