
α.1.1 WEske kutchissik ayum God Kesuk kah Ohke.
E.1.1 In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth.

α.1.2 Kah Ohke mô matta kuhkena[u]unneunkquttinn8 kah mo[n]teaguinninno, kah pohkenum woskeche m8n[ô]i, kah Nashauanit popomshau woskeche nippekon[t]u.
E.1.2 And the earth was without form, and void; and darkness was upon the face of the deep. And the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters.

α.1.3 Onk n8wau God wequaiaj, káh mô wequái.
E.1.3 And God said, Let there be light: and there was light.

α.1.4 Kah wunnaumun God wequai ne ne wunnegen: Kah wutchadchaúbe-ponumun God n[ô]eu wequai kah noeu pohk[è]num.
E.1.4 And God saw the light, that it was good: and God divided the light from the darkness.

α.1.5 Kah wutussowétamun God wequai Kesukod, kah pohkenum wutussoweetamun Nukon: kah mô wunnonk88k kah mo mohtompog negonne kesuk.
E.1.5 And God called the light Day, and the darkness he called Night. And the evening and the morning were the first day.

α.1.6 Kah n8wau God sepakehtam8udj nôeu nippekontu, kah chadchapem8udj nashauweit nippe wutch nippekóntu.
E.1.6 And God said, Let there be a firmament in the midst of the waters, and let it divide the waters from the waters.

α.1.7 Kah ayimup God sepakehtamóonk, kah wtuchadchabeponumunnap nashàueu nippe agwu, uttiyeu agwu sepakehtamóonk, kah nashaueu nippekontu uttiyeu ongkouwe sepakehtamóonk, kah mônkô n$nih.
E.1.7 And God made the firmament, and divided the waters which were under the firmament from the waters which were above the firmament: and it was so.

α.1.8 Kah wuttissoweétamun God sèpakehtamóonk Kesukquash, kah mô wunnonk88k, kah mô mohtompog nahohtôeu kesukok.
E.1.8 And God called the firmament Heaven. And the evening and the morning were the second day.

α.1.9 Kah n8wau God moém8idj nippe ut agwu kesukquash kah pasukqunnu, kah pahkemoidj nanabpeu, kah mônkô n$nih.
E.1.9 And God said, Let the waters under the heaven be gathered together unto one place, and let the dry land appear: and it was so.

α.1.10 Kah wuttissoweétam[u]n God nanabpi ohke, kah mô[e]ém8 nippe wuttissowetamun Kehtoh, & wunnaumun God ne en wunnegen.
E.1.10 And God called the dry land Earth; and the gathering together of the waters called he Seas: and God saw that it was good.

α.1.11 Kah n8wau God dtanuékej ohke moskeht, moskeht skannémunú8k skannémun[a]sh, & meechummue magtugquash meechummú8k meechummuonk nish$noh pasuk neane wuttinnussuonk, ubbùhkumminù8k et woskeche ohke, kah mônkò n$nih.
E.1.11 And God said, Let the earth bring forth grass, the herb yielding seed, and the fruit tree yielding fruit after his kind, whose seed is in itself, upon the earth: and it was so.

α.1.12 Kah ohke dtannegenup mosket, kah mosket[u]kannemennù8k skannemunash, nish$noh pasuk neane wuttinnussuonk, kah mahtug, meechummù8k, ubbuhkumminn88k wuhhogkut nish$noh pasuk neane wuttinnussuonk, kah wunnaumun God ne en wunnegen.
E.1.12 And the earth brought forth grass, and herb yielding seed after his kind, and the tree yielding fruit, whose seed was in itself, after his kind: and God saw that it was good.

α.1.13 Kah mo wunnonk88k, kah mo mohtompog shwekesukod.
E.1.13 And the evening and the morning were the third day.

α.1.14 Kah n8wau God, Wequanantéganùohettich ut wussepakehtam8onganit Kesukquash, & pohshehettich ut nashauwe kesukod, kah ut nashauwe nukkonut, kah kukkinneasuonganúhhettich, kah utt8cheye[ù]hettich, kah kesukodtù8wuhhettich, kah kodtumm8[o]wuhhettich.
E.1.14 And God said, Let there be lights in the firmament of the heaven to divide the day from the night; and let them be for signs, and for seasons, and for days, and years:

α.1.15 Kah n$nag wequanantéganuóhettich ut sépakehtam8wonganit wequasumóhettich ohke, onk mô n$nih.
E.1.15 And let them be for lights in the firmament of the heaven to give light upon the earth: and it was so.

α.1.16 Kah ayum God neesunash missiyeuash wequanantéganash, wequananteg mohtag nananum8m8 kesukod, wequananteg peasik nanaum8m8 nukon, kah anogqsog.
E.1.16 And God made two great lights; the greater light to rule the day, and the lesser light to rule the night: he made the stars also.

α.1.17 Kah uppónu[h] God wussepake[h]tam8onganit kesukquash, woh wequohsumwog ohke.
E.1.17 And God set them in the firmament of the heaven to give light upon the earth,

α.1.18 Onk woh wunnananumunneau kesukod kah núkon, kah pohshém8 nashaueu wequai, kah nashaueu pohkénum, kah wunnaumun God ne en wunnegen.
E.1.18 And to rule over the day and over the night, and to divide the light from the darkness: and God saw that it was good.

α.1.19 Kah mô wunnonk88k kah mo mohtompog yaou quinukok.
E.1.19 And the evening and the morning were the fourth day.

α.1.20 Kah n8wau God, m8nahettich nippekóntu pomómutcheg pomantamwae, kah puppinshaúussog pumunahettich ongkouwe ohket woskeche wussépahkehtam8onganit kesukquash.
E.1.20 And God said, Let the waters bring forth abundantly the moving creature that hath life, and fowl that may fly above the earth in the open firmament of heaven.

α.1.21 Kah kezheau God matikkenunutcheh P8tâbpoh, kah nish$noh pomantamòe óâas noh pompâmayit uttiyeug m8nacheg nippekontu, nish$noh pasuk neane wuttinnussuonk, kah nish$noh 8nuppohwhunin puppinshaash, nish$noh pasuk neane wuttinnussuonk, kah wunnaumun God ne en wunnegen.
E.1.21 And God created great whales, and every living creature that moveth, which the waters brought forth abundantly, after their kind, and every winged fowl after his kind: and God saw that it was good.

α.1.22 Kah 8nanumoh nuhhog God n8wau, Mshéneetuónittegk, kah muttaan8k, kah numwapegk nippe ut kehtohhannit, kah puppinshasog muttâanhettich ohket.
E.1.22 And God blessed them, saying, Be fruitful, and multiply, and fill the waters in the seas, and let fowl multiply in the earth.

α.1.23 Kah mo wanonk88k k[à]h mo mohtompog napanna audtahwhikquinukok.
E.1.23 And the evening and the morning were the fifth day.

α.1.24 Kah n8wau God, Pas8waheonch ohke oâas pomantamwaeu, nish$noh pasuk neane wuttinnussin, neetasuog, p[am]ayéch[e]g kah puppimashimwog ohkekontu, nish$noh pasuk neane wuttinnussin kah monko n$nih.
E.1.24 And God said, Let the earth bring forth the living creature after his kind, cattle, and creeping thing, and beast of the earth after his kind: and it was so.

α.1.25 Kah áoúau God puppinn[à]shimwoh ohkekontu neane wuttinnussuongan8, kah neetasu neane wuttin[u]ussuongan8, kah nish$noh paumayit woskeche ohkekontu neane wuttinnussuongan8, kah wunnaumun God ne en wunnegen.
E.1.25 And God made the beast of the earth after his kind, and cattle after their kind, and every thing that creepeth upon the earth after his kind: and God saw that it was good.

α.1.26 Kah n8wau God, ayéuontuh wosketomp neanséog & kutogqunneunkqussuonkanunnónut, kah nanawunonch namóhsog kehtohhannet kah puppinshaussog kesukqut, kah puppinashimwussog, kah wame ohke, kah nish$noh óáas pomompagit woskeche ohket.
E.1.26 And God said, Let us make man in our image, after our likeness: and let them have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over the cattle, and over all the earth, and over every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth.

α.1.27 Kah kézheau God woskeetompuh ut nehenwonche wuttin[n]ussuonganit, wuttinnussuonganit God wuttinne kezheuh nahoh, wosketomp kah mittamwossis ukkezheuh nahog.
E.1.27 So God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he him; male and female created he them.

α.1.28 Onk 8nanumuh nahog God, k[a]h wutt[i]nuh nahog God, Mshéneetuonitteg, monagk, kah muttaan8gk ohke, kah m8steo8gk, kah nanaaun8k namohsog kehtohhannit kah puppinshaussog mamahchekesukqut, kah wam[e] p[u]ppinashimwussog paumayitcheg et woskeche ohket.
E.1.28 And God blessed them, and God said unto them, Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it: and have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over every living thing that moveth upon the earth.

α.1.29 Kah n8wau God, Kusse kittinnum[m]aunumw8 nish$noh mosket skannemunnu8k skannemunash uttiyeu woskeche wame ohket, kah nish$noh matug dtannegkuk meechum úbbuhkumin88k ubbuhkuminash, woh kummeechumw8.
E.1.29 And God said, Behold, I have given you every herb bearing seed, which is upon the face of all the earth, and every tree, in the which is the fruit of a tree yielding seed; to you it shall be for meat.

α.1.30 Onk wame puppinnashimwog ohkekontu, kah wame puppinsha[a]s mamahchekesukqut, kah nish$noh uppumompagen pomantog ohket, woh meechwog nish$noh oshquashqui moskeht, kah mônkô n$nih.
E.1.30 And to every beast of the earth, and to every fowl of the air, and to every thing that creepeth upon the earth, wherein there is life, I have given every green herb for meat: and it was so.

α.1.31 Kah wunnaumun God nish$noh teaug mahche kezteunk, kah kusseh mo ahche wunneg[e]n, kah mo wanonk88k & mo mohtompog nequtta audtashikquinukok.
E.1.31 And God saw every thing that he had made, and, behold, it was very good. And the evening and the morning were the sixth day.

α.2.1 YEU ne kesteounah kesukquash kah ohke, kah wame ne adtahsehettit.
E.2.1 Thus the heavens and the earth were finished, and all the host of them.

α.2.2 Kah nesausuk audtashikquinukok pakodtiteau God wutan[a]kausuonk ne ayik, kah anwôsin nesausuk audtashikquinuk[o]k wutch wame wutanakausuwònganit ne kest[é]unk.
E.2.2 And on the seventh day God ended his work which he had made; and he rested on the seventh day from all his work which he had made.

α.2.3 Kah God on[à]netam nesausuk audtashikquinuk[o]k kah 8t8wóntamun: newutch neit anwosin wutch wame watunakausuwonganit, ne God kesteunkupa kah ayikup.
E.2.3 And God blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it: because that in it he had rested from all his work which God created and made.

α.2.4 Yeush wutontseong[a]sh kesukquash káh ohke, nag kesteomuk: ne kesukok Jehovah Manit kesteunk ohke kah kesukquash.
E.2.4 These are the generations of the heavens and of the earth when they were created, in the day that the LORD God made the earth and the heavens,

α.2.5 Kah nish$noh ohketeámuk ut ohteakonit negonne asquam ahkénug; kah nish$noh mosket ut ohteakonit ásq neekinnin[8] [n]ewutche Jehovah Mani asq sokanonukkontam8g ohke, kah matta mo wosketompáino woh wánteunk ohke.
E.2.5 And every plant of the field before it was in the earth, and every herb of the field before it grew: for the LORD God had not caused it to rain upon the earth, and there was not a man to till the ground.

α.2.6 Qut ouwan waápu wutch ohkekontu kah wutadtipp[a]dto wame woskeche ohkeit.
E.2.6 But there went up a mist from the earth, and watered the whole face of the ground.

α.2.7 Kah Jehovah Manit kenaiheau wosketompuh wutch nunnobúhteaóuut, kah upp8tâmou ut wutchânut pomantam[ó]e nasháuonk, kah wosketomp mo pomantamẃae keteahogkôunnu.
E.2.7 And the LORD God formed man of the dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and man became a living soul.

α.2.8 Kah Jehovah Manit ohkehteau tanohketeaónk ut Eden wutchepwâou: kah ne upponun wosketompuh neh kahkenáiheau[m]poh.
E.2.8 And the LORD God planted a garden eastward in Eden; and there he put the man whom he had formed.

α.2.9 Kah Jehovah Manit wunnéketeauun wutch ohkekontu nish$noh mahtug ne wanompámukquok, kah wunnegen meechinat: kah mahtug pomantamôe ut n[ô]eu adtanohk[e]teámuk, kah mahtug nashpe woh wahteómuk wanegik kah machuk.
E.2.9 And out of the ground made the LORD God to grow every tree that is pleasant to the sight, and good for food; the tree of life also in the midst of the garden, and the tree of knowledge of good and evil.

α.2.10 Kah seip wutchishau Eden wadtattippattunk tanohketeaonk, kah na wutch pohpohchohshau yauóntupai.
E.2.10 And a river went out of Eden to water the garden; and from thence it was parted, and became into four heads.

α.2.11 Neg[o]nogtag hettamun {Pison}, ne quanupishunk wame ohke[i]t Havilah, na ohtag gold.
E.2.11 The name of the first is Pison: that is it which compasseth the whole land of Havilah, where there is gold;

α.2.12 Kah ne ohkit wunnegen, ne ohteau Bdellium kah Onyx qussuk.
E.2.12 And the gold of that land is good: there is bdellium and the onyx stone.

α.2.13 Onk nahohtôe seip ussowétamun {Gihon} ne quanupishunk wame ohke Kush.
E.2.13 And the name of the second river is Gihon: the same is it that compasseth the whole land of Ethiopia.

α.2.14 Nashwinn[u]8k seip hettamun {Hiddekel}, ne aushunk wutchepw[â]ou Assyria, kah ya[u]unnú8k seip Euphrates.
E.2.14 And the name of the third river is Hiddekel: that is it which goeth toward the east of Assyria. And the fourth river is Euphrates.

α.2.15 Onk Jehovah Manit neemunau Adam, kah upponuh tanohketeonganit Eden, 8nteaúunat, kah wunnânauwéhteauunat.
E.2.15 And the LORD God took the man, and put him into the garden of Eden to dress it and to keep it.

α.2.16 Kah Jehovah Manit unnan8nau wosketompuh, n8wau, Nish$noh mahtug yeu tanogketeaonganit, woh meech8an kummeechin.
E.2.16 And the LORD God commanded the man, saying, Of every tree of the garden thou mayest freely eat:

α.2.17 Qut ne mahtug nashpe woh wahteómuk wanégik kah machuk, matta woh kummeech8un, newutche ne kesukok meech8an nupp8e pish kenup.
E.2.17 But of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thou shalt not eat of it: for in the day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die.

α.2.18 Onk Jehovah Manit n8wau, Matta wunnegenninno wosketomp wunn[o]ns[i]in, nutayimau aninnohs[ú]aènuh nagum ut anaquabit.
E.2.18 And the LORD God said, It is not good that the man should be alone; I will make him an help meet for him.

α.2.19 Onk wutche ohkekontu Jehovah Manit kenáiheau nish$noh pasuk puppinashimwoh ut ohteakonit, kah [n]ish$noh puppinsháus mamahchekesukqut, kah nag upp[a]udtaóunuh Adam, kodnaum utt[ô]h ahunont, kah Adam uttoh anont nish$noh ôáas uppomautamun, ne wuttissow[é]sin.
E.2.19 And out of the ground the LORD God formed every beast of the field, and every fowl of the air; and brought them unto Adam to see what he would call them: and whatsoever Adam called every living creature, that was the name thereof.

α.2.20 Onk Adam 8weseuonganuhkâou wame netasu, kah puppinsha[u]soh mamahchekesukqut, kah nish$noh puppinashim ut ohteakontu: qut n[ô] matta na [m]éheon anninohs[ú]aénin, woh anumungqutche Adam.
E.2.20 And Adam gave names to all cattle, and to the fowl of the air, and to every beast of the field; but for Adam there was not found an help meet for him.

α.2.21 Onk Jehovah Manit Adamwoh a[n]innumauau kussukkouéonk kah koueu, k[a]h wunneemunúmauuh pasuk wuhpét[e]og, kah wonk yeânunnum we[y]au[s] wonk nompe.
E.2.21 And the LORD God caused a deep sleep to fall upon Adam, and he slept: and he took one of his ribs, and closed up the flesh instead thereof;

α.2.22 Onk ne muhpeteog Jehovah Manit neemunuk wutch wosketompaut, 8tsheun mittumwossissoh, kah uppas8oh wosketompaut.
E.2.22 And the rib, which the LORD God had taken from man, made he a woman, and brought her unto the man.

α.2.23 Onk Adam n8wau, Yeuoh yeuyeu wusk[o]n wutch n8skon, kah wayaus wutch n8weyaus, pish henno[u] Ishah, newutche wuttinau wosketompaut,
E.2.23 And Adam said, This is now bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh: she shall be called Woman, because she was taken out of Man.

α.2.24 ne wajeh pish wosketomp nukonont 8shoh kah okasoh, kah pish weetomáu ummittumwussoh, kah nag pish pasukquinnú8 weyaus8.
E.2.24 Therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother, and shall cleave unto his wife: and they shall be one flesh.

α.2.25 Onk neeswe posk[is]suog wosketomp kah ummittumwossoh, kah matta akodchuog.
E.2.25 And they were both naked, the man and his wife, and were not ashamed.

α.3.1 WOnk ask8k m8cheke wunnompewussu onk neg wame puppinash[im]wog ohkekonit, neh Jehovah Manit kesheumpo[h], kah unnau mittamwossissoh, Nux, wusunneas God, matta woh kummeech8h nish$noh pasuk mahtug tanohketeaonganit?
E.3.1 Now the serpent was more subtil than any beast of the field which the LORD God had made. And he said unto the woman, Yea, hath God said, Ye shall not eat of every tree of the garden?

α.3.2 Onk mittumwossis unnau ask8koh, woh nummeechumun magtugque ummeechummuongash tanohketeaonganit.
E.3.2 And the woman said unto the serpent, We may eat of the fruit of the trees of the garden:

α.3.3 Qut ne mahtug ummeechummuonk noeu tanohketeaonganit, God unn8wop, matta woh kummeech8uneau, asuh woh mat kummissunnum8unneau ishkont kenupm8.
E.3.3 But of the fruit of the tree which is in the midst of the garden, God hath said, Ye shall not eat of it, neither shall ye touch it, lest ye die.

α.3.4 Onk ask8k unnau muttumwossissoh, Matta woh nupp8e kenupp8.
E.3.4 And the serpent said unto the woman, Ye shall not surely die:

α.3.5 Newutch God 8wahteoun, ne kesukok meechog, neit woh kuskesuk88ash wohweemoash: kah woh kenaau onatuh Manitt8og, wahteo[ú]un wanegik kah machuk.
E.3.5 For God doth know that in the day ye eat thereof, then your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as gods, knowing good and evil.

α.3.6 Neit mittumwossis nag* ne in wunnegen mahtug meechinnat, kah wunnegen nah en m[ô]neaumunneat, kah mahtug ukkodtantamunat ne waantamwáhikquit: neemunum ummeechummuonk, kah ummeechin: kah wonk wuttinnumaun wasukeh weeche, onk ummeechinin.
E.3.6 And when the woman saw that the tree was good for food, and that it was pleasant to the eyes, and a tree to be desired to make one wise, she took of the fruit thereof, and did eat, and gave also unto her husband with her; and he did eat.

α.3.7 Onk nag wuskesuk88ash neeswe woshweem8ash, kah wahteauog upposkiss8ongan8: kah momokukquómauwaog wuhhogkáuh figse wunnepogquosh, kah nish wutadtahwh[u]nu[n]ko[ú]onaoash wutch kuhhogkaoh.
E.3.7 And the eyes of them both were opened, and they knew that they were naked; and they sewed fig leaves together, and made themselves aprons.

α.3.8 Onk n8tamwog 8wadtauatongqussúonk Jehovah Manit pamwushadt tahohketeonganit t[oh]kokquok: neit Adam kah ummittumwussoh puttogquéog wutch anaquabit Jehovah Manit, ut kenugké mahtugk8kontu tanohketeaonganit.
E.3.8 And they heard the voice of the LORD God walking in the garden in the cool of the day: and Adam and his wife hid themselves from the presence of the LORD God amongst the trees of the garden.

α.3.9 Onk Jehovah Manit weekomau Adamoh, kah wuttinuh, toh kutapin.
E.3.9 And the LORD God called unto Adam, and said unto him, Where art thou?

α.3.10 Onk n8wa[u] n8tamo[n] k8wadtauatonkqussuonk ut tanohketeaonganit, neit n8wabesip, newutche nupposkis, kah nupputtogquem.
E.3.10 And he said, I heard thy voice in the garden, and I was afraid, because I was naked; and I hid myself.

α.3.11 Onk wuttinuh howan kummishamungqu[s] kupposkissuonk? sun kummeech m[e]htug[qu]e quohtinunump matta kummeech8unat?
E.3.11 And he said, Who told thee that thou wast naked? Hast thou eaten of the tree, whereof I commanded thee that thou shouldest not eat?

α.3.12 Onk wosketomp n8wau, Mittumwossis ne anumaiyean n8weetomunneat nuttin[namuk] m[e]htug, kah nummeechinap.
E.3.12 And the man said, The woman whom thou gavest to be with me, she gave me of the tree, and I did eat.

α.3.13 Onk Jehovah Manit unnau mittumwossissoh teaguas yeu asean? [K]ah mittumwossis n8wau, ask8k nutass8kekomuk, [kah] nummeechinap.
E.3.13 And the LORD God said unto the woman, What is this that thou hast done? And the woman said, The serpent beguiled me, and I did eat.

α.3.14 Onk Jehovah Manit unnau ask8koh, Newutche yeu kummahche usse[n], kutunkquánumug m8cheke onk wame neg neetasuog, kah m8cheke onk nish$noh puppinashim ohteakonit: kenogkis kuppomusho[n]tou, kah puppisi pish kummeech [ti]s[ó]hkepomantam.
E.3.14 And the LORD God said unto the serpent, Because thou hast done this, thou art cursed above all cattle, and above every beast of the field; upon thy belly shalt thou go, and dust shalt thou eat all the days of thy life:

α.3.15 Onk nupponam sekeneaittuonk nashaue ken, kah mittumwossis, kah nashauwe k8skannémunit, kah 8skannémunit: nagum pish sukqui[h]tham kuppuhkuk, kah pish kussukquttahhamau wogquan.
E.3.15 And I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed; it shall bruise thy head, and thou shalt bruise his heel.

α.3.16 Kah mittumwossissoh unnau, m8chekéhteoe numm8chekéhteóh kutonkquommomm8onk, kah k8wompequauonk: onkquommomwe pish keneecha[m]; kah pish kukkodtanum kasuk, kah pish kenanauwunuk.
E.3.16 Unto the woman he said, I will greatly multiply thy sorrow and thy conception; in sorrow thou shalt bring forth children; and thy desire shall be to thy husband, and he shall rule over thee.

α.3.17 Kah Adamwoh unnau, newutche kukk[é]iketam 8wadtauatonkqussuonk kummittumwussis, kah kummeech mahtug uttiyeu quohti[n]unomp, an[o]n, Matta woh meech8un: ohquoantamun ohke wutche ken, onkquommomwe pish kummeechin tisohkepomantaman.
E.3.17 And unto Adam he said, Because thou hast hearkened unto the voice of thy wife, and hast eaten of the tree, of which I commanded thee, saying, Thou shalt not eat of it: cursed is the ground for thy sake; in sorrow shalt thou eat of it all the days of thy life;

α.3.18 Kah asinekôsog, kah kogkôanogkohquohh8w[â]og pish ta[nn]etuog kuhhogkaut: kah pish kummeech mosket ohteakonit.
E.3.18 Thorns also and thistles shall it bring forth to thee; and thou shalt eat the herb of the field;

α.3.19 Kussittanumwe woh kummeech petukqunneg, nô paje quashkean ohkekontu: newutche nawutch k8te[ni]tte[à]nah, newutche nuppuppissiyeu, kah pish kukqushkem en puppissiyeuut.
E.3.19 In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread, till thou return unto the ground; for out of it wast thou taken: for dust thou art, and unto dust shalt thou return.

α.3.20 Onk Adam ussowénau ummittamwussoh Eve, newutche wame okasúoh pomantogig.
E.3.20 And Adam called his wife's name Eve; because she was the mother of all living.

α.3.21 Onk Jehovah Manit wutayimauoh hahk8nei hogk8unash Adam kah ummittumwus, kah wuth[ó]gquoanoh nahog.
E.3.21 Unto Adam also and to his wife did the LORD God make coats of skins, and clothed them.

α.3.22 Onk Jehovah Manit n8wau, Kusseh[.] wosketomp kuttinnungqun, wahteunk wanegik kah machik, kah yeuyeu ishkont summagunuk wunnutcheg, kah neemunuk pomantamoe mahtug, kah woh ummeechin, onk woh micheme pomantam.
E.3.22 And the LORD God said, Behold, the man is become as one of us, to know good and evil: and now, lest he put forth his hand, and take also of the tree of life, and eat, and live for ever:

α.3.23 Newutche Jehovah Manit, Wussohwohk[ô]nuh wutch tanohketeaonganit Eden, onk woh wonteau ohke, ne waj neemun[o]mukup.
E.3.23 Therefore the LORD God sent him forth from the garden of Eden, to till the ground from whence he was taken.

α.3.24 Nemehkuh soh8hkauau wosketompuh, onk upponau Cherubimsog nogqueu wutchepw[à]ou wutch tanohketeaonganit Eden, kah nashqunáeu togkodteg, ne nish$noh aum8, nanea[i]tetunk ummay pomantamóe mahtug.
E.3.24 So he drove out the man; and he placed at the east of the garden of Eden Cherubims, and a flaming sword which turned every way, to keep the way of the tree of life.

α.4.1 ONK Adam waheau Evoh ummittumwussoh, kah w[om]pequôou, kah neek[heau] Kainoh, kah n8wau, Nutattumun woskeetomp wutch Jehovahut.
E.4.1 And Adam knew Eve his wife; and she conceived, and bare Cain, and said, I have gotten a man from the LORD.

α.4.2 Kah wonk neekeau weematoh Abel, kah Abel assamau sheepsoh, kah Kain 8nehteaun ohke.
E.4.2 And she again bare his brother Abel. And Abel was a keeper of sheep, but Cain was a tiller of the ground.

α.4.3 Onk nôad n$n[i]h8p Kain paudto[ou] ummeechummuonk ohke ummagunat en Jehovahut.
E.4.3 And in process of time it came to pass, that Cain brought of the fruit of the ground an offering unto the LORD.

α.4.4 Kah Abel noh wonk pas8au ummohtommegitte8moh wunneetasáut, kah weeis [ne na] ohtag, kah Jehovah tapeneámaau Abel[o]h kah ne ummág8onk.
E.4.4 And Abel, he also brought of the firstlings of his flock and of the fat thereof. And the LORD had respect unto Abel and to his offering:

α.4.5 Qut matta tapeneauóou Kainoh, kah ne ummag8onk, kah Kain m8cheke musquantam, kah músquan[e]unkqussu.
E.4.5 But unto Cain and to his offering he had not respect. And Cain was very wroth, and his countenance fell.

α.4.6 Kah Jehovah unnau Kainoh, Tohwutch musquantaman? kah tohwutch musquaneunkqusséan?
E.4.6 And the LORD said unto Cain, Why art thou wroth? and why is thy countenance fallen?

α.4.7 Wunnesean, woh mo kuttapeneontóh? kah matta wunnesean, matcheseonk seepsin squoantamut: kah pish k8t8ánumuk, onk noh pish kenanawun.
E.4.7 If thou doest well, shalt thou not be accepted? and if thou doest not well, sin lieth at the door. And unto thee shall be his desire, and thou shalt rule over him.

α.4.8 Kah Kain keket8hkauau Abeloh weematoh, onk n$nih, [à]phettit ohteakonit, Kain neepauwéhtauau weematuh Abel, kah wunnushoh.
E.4.8 And Cain talked with Abel his brother: and it came to pass, when they were in the field, that Cain rose up against Abel his brother, and slew him.

α.4.9 Kah Jehovah unnau Kainoh, Uttiyeuoh Abel keemat? kah n8wau matta n8waheóh neen neemat woh n8wadchan?
E.4.9 And the LORD said unto Cain, Where is Abel thy brother? And he said, I know not: Am I my brother's keeper?

α.4.10 Kah n8wau, Toh kutussim? 8wadtauatonkqussuonk keemat 8sqhéonk nummauunnitteunk wutch ohkekontu.
E.4.10 And he said, What hast thou done? the voice of thy brother's blood crieth unto me from the ground.

α.4.11 Onk yeuyeu ken kutôhqua[n]umit wutch ohkekontu noh w[ô]hshinuk wutt8n attumunuk 8sqheonk keemat wutch kenutcheganit
E.4.11 And now art thou cursed from the earth, which hath opened her mouth to receive thy brother's blood from thy hand;

α.4.12 Wunnehteauan ohke yeu wutche onk yean, matta pish kittinn[u]munkou ummissetuonk, pish k8semewaénu, kah kukkogkeompaénu ut ohkeit.
E.4.12 When thou tillest the ground, it shall not henceforth yield unto thee her strength; a fugitive and a vagabond shalt thou be in the earth.

α.4.13 Onk Kain unnau Jehovahnoh, Nussasamatahwhutteaonk missi ánue onk ne woh wodskinum.
E.4.13 And Cain said unto the LORD, My punishment is greater than I can bear.

α.4.14 Kusseh, kussohh8kah yeu kesukok wutch woskeche ohkit, kah wutch kuskesukqut pish nutatt[a]shit, kah pish n8semewaénu kah nukkogkeompaénu ohkeit: onk pish n$nih nish$noh howan námhukqun pish nunnushik.
E.4.14 Behold, thou hast driven me out this day from the face of the earth; and from thy face shall I be hid; and I shall be a fugitive and a vagabond in the earth; and it shall come to pass, that every one that findeth me shall slay me.

α.4.15 Kah Jehovah wuttinuh, Newutche, howan nashont Kainoh, pish an8tauau nesausuk tahshit nompeu: kah Jehovah ponamauau kuhkinneasuonk Kainoh, ishkont naméheahettit, woh wunnushóuh.
E.4.15 And the LORD said unto him, Therefore whosoever slayeth Cain, vengeance shall be taken on him sevenfold. And the LORD set a mark upon Cain, lest any finding him should kill him.

α.4.16 Onk Kain sohham wutch anaquabit Jehovah, kah wutohtu ohkeit Nod wutchepwâou wutch Eden.
E.4.16 And Cain went out from the presence of the LORD, and dwelt in the land of Nod, on the east of Eden.

α.4.17 Onk Kain waheau ummittumwussoh, kah wompoquóou kah neechau Enoch kah ayim otan, kah ussowetam otan ne [á]sow[á]sunit wunnaumonuh Enoch.
E.4.17 And Cain knew his wife; and she conceived, and bare Enoch: and he builded a city, and called the name of the city, after the name of his son, Enoch.

α.4.18 Kah Enoch wunnaumonaeu Iradoh, kah Irad wunnaumónaeu Mahujael, kah Mahujael wunnaumonaeu Methusael, kah Methusael wunnaumonaeu Lamech.
E.4.18 And unto Enoch was born Irad: and Irad begat Mehujael: and Mehujael begat Methusael: and Methusael begat Lamech.

α.4.19 Onk Lamech nes8kau, pasuk ussowesu Adah, onkatuk ussowesu Zillah.
E.4.19 And Lamech took unto him two wives: the name of the one was Adah, and the name of the other Zillah.

α.4.20 Onk Adah nekheau Jabal, noh wut8shin neg wodóhkutcheg weetuómut, kah wunneetas[ú]m8wog.
E.4.20 And Adah bare Jabal: he was the father of such as dwell in tents, and of such as have cattle.

α.4.21 Onk weemat ussowenau Jubal: noh mo wut8shin neg nohtôepequ[a]cheg Harp kah Organ.
E.4.21 And his brother's name was Jubal: he was the father of all such as handle the harp and organ.

α.4.22 Kah Zillah neechau Tubal$kain kuhk8tomuhteaénin noh ayig wompú[h]shog, kah m8[ô]shog: kah ummussesoh Tubal-kain Naamah.
E.4.22 And Zillah, she also bare Tubalcain, an instructer of every artificer in brass and iron: and the sister of Tubalcain was Naamah.

α.4.23 Kah Lamech unnau ummittumwussoh Adah & Zillah, N8tam8k nuttinn8waonk, kenaau mittumwussoh Lamech, kukkéitam8k nukkeket8hkáonk, newutche nunnush wosketomp kodwoskehit, kah wuskenin toh kodnehit.
E.4.23 And Lamech said unto his wives, Adah and Zillah, Hear my voice; ye wives of Lamech, hearken unto my speech: for I have slain a man to my wounding, and a young man to my hurt.

α.4.24 Kain an8tauwut nesausuk tahshe[u] wunnamuhkut Lamech nesausuk tahshinchag tahsheu kah nesausuk.
E.4.24 If Cain shall be avenged sevenfold, truly Lamech seventy and sevenfold.

α.4.25 Kah Adam waheau wonk ummittumwussoh, kah neechau wunnaumonuh, kah wuttissowénuh Sheth, newutche God nuttinnumunk onkatogke wuskannem nompe Abelóut, Kain nohshompoh.
E.4.25 And Adam knew his wife again; and she bare a son, and called his name Seth: For God, said she, hath appointed me another seed instead of Abel, whom Cain slew.

α.4.26 Onk Sheth wunnaumonaeu, kah wuttissowenoh Enos, kah ne wutche kutche wosketompaog wehquetumwog 8wesuonk Jehovah.
E.4.26 And to Seth, to him also there was born a son; and he called his name Enos: then began men to call upon the name of the LORD.

α.5.1 YEu wussukwhongane uppometuongash Adam, ne kesukok God keṣheunt missinninnúh wuttinheuh wutogqunneunkqussinneat Godut.
E.5.1 This is the book of the generations of Adam. In the day that God created man, in the likeness of God made he him;

α.5.2 Wosketomp, kah mittumwossissoh ukkezheuh: kah 8nanumuh kah wuttissowénuh Adam, ne kesukok kezhit.
E.5.2 Male and female created he them; and blessed them, and called their name Adam, in the day when they were created.

α.5.3 Onk Adam nequt pasuk8we kah nishwinchag kodtumwohkog, wunnaumonáeu nehenwonche wutogqunneunkqussuongano, kah neánusit; kah wuttissowenuh Sheth.
E.5.3 And Adam lived an hundred and thirty years, and begat a son in his own likeness, and after his image; and called his name Seth:

α.5.4 Kah ukkesuk8ash Adam, mahche neekit Sheth, shwosuk tahshit pasuk8we kodtum8, kah neit wunnaumonaeu, kah wuttoneu.
E.5.4 And the days of Adam after he had begotten Seth were eight hundred years: and he begat sons and daughters:

α.5.5 Kah wame kesukodtash uppomantamóonk Adam, pasak8gun tahshit pasuk8we kodtumwáe, kah nabo shwinchag, kah ne wuttit nuppin.
E.5.5 And all the days that Adam lived were nine hundred and thirty years: and he died.

α.5.6 Kah Sheth pomantog nequt pasuk8we kodtumwae, kah napanna tahshit kodtummo, neit wunnaumonaeu Enosh.
E.5.6 And Seth lived an hundred and five years, and begat Enos:

α.5.7 Onk Sheth pomantam mahche neekit Enosh, shwosuk tahshit pasuk8we kodtumwáe, kah nesausuk tahshit kodtumwae, kah wunnaumonaeu, kah wuttôneu.
E.5.7 And Seth lived after he begat Enos eight hundred and seven years, and begat sons and daughters:

α.5.8 Onk wame kesukodtash uppomantamóonk Sheth, p[à]sak8gun tahshit pasuk8we kodtumwae, kah nabo neese kodtumwae neit nupp8.
E.5.8 And all the days of Seth were nine hundred and twelve years: and he died.

α.5.9 Onk Enosh pomantog pas[u]k8gun tahs[h]inchage ko[k]tumwae, neit wunnaumónaeu Kainan.
E.5.9 And Enos lived ninety years, and begat Cainan:

α.5.10 Onk Enosh pomantam mahche neekit Kaina[n] shwosuk tahshit pasuk8we kodtumwae, kah nabo napanna tahshit kodtumwae kah wunnaumonaeu kah wuttôneu.
E.5.10 And Enos lived after he begat Cainan eight hundred and fifteen years, and begat sons and daughters:

α.5.11 Onk wame kesukodtash uppomantamóonk Enosh pasuk8gun tahshit pasuk8we kodtumwae, kah napanna tahshit kodtumwae, neit nupp8.
E.5.11 And all the days of Enos were nine hundred and five years: and he died.

α.5.12 Onk Kainan pomantog nesausuk tahshinchage kodtumwae, neit wunnaumonaeu Mahalaleel.
E.5.12 And Cainan lived seventy years and begat Mahalaleel:

α.5.13 Onk Kainan pomantam mahche neekit Mahalaleel, shwosuk tahshit pasuk8we kodtumwae, kah yauonchage kodtumwae, kah wunnaumónaeu kah wuttôneu.
E.5.13 And Cainan lived after he begat Mahalaleel eight hundred and forty years, and begat sons and daughters:

α.5.14 Onk wame kesukodtash uppomantam[ò]onk Kainan pasak8gun tahshit pasuk8we kodtumwae, kah piukque kodtumwae, neit [u]upp8.
E.5.14 And all the days of Cainan were nine hundred and ten years: and he died.

α.5.15 Onk Mahalaleel pomantog nequtta tahshinchage kodtumwae kah napanna tahshit kodtumwae, kah wunnaumonaeu Jared.
E.5.15 And Mahalaleel lived sixty and five years, and begat Jared:

α.5.16 Onk Mahelaleel pomantam mahche neekit Jared, shwosuk tahshit pasuk8we kodtumwae, kah nishwinchage kodtumwae, kah wunnaumónaeu kah wuttôneu.
E.5.16 And Mahalaleel lived after he begat Jared eight hundred and thirty years, and begat sons and daughters:

α.5.17 Onk wame kesukodtash uppomantamóonk Mahalaleel shwosuk tahshit pasuk8we kodtumwae, kah pasak8gun tahshinchage kah napanna tahshit kodtumwae, neit nupp8.
E.5.17 And all the days of Mahalaleel were eight hundred ninety and five years: and he died.

α.5.18 Jared pomantog nequt pasuk8we kodtumwae, kah nequtta tahshinchage kah neese kodtumwae, neit wunnaumónaeu Enoch.
E.5.18 And Jared lived an hundred sixty and two years, and he begat Enoch:

α.5.19 Onk Jared pomantam mahche neekit Enoch shwosuk tahshit pasuk8we kodtumwae, kah wunnaumónaeu kah wuttôneu.
E.5.19 And Jared lived after he begat Enoch eight hundred years, and begat sons and daughters:

α.5.20 Onk wame kesukodtash uppomantamóonk Jared pasuk8gun tahshit pasuk8we kodtumwae nequtta tahshinchage kah neese kodtumwae, neit nupp8.
E.5.20 And all the days of Jared were nine hundred sixty and two years: and he died.

α.5.21 Onk Enoch pomantog nequtta tahshinchage kah napanna tahshit kodtumwae, neit wunnaumónaeu Methuselah.
E.5.21 And Enoch lived sixty and five years, and begat Methuselah:

α.5.22 Onk Enoch weeche pomushau God, mahche neekit Methuselah, nishwudt pasuk8we kodtumwae, kah wunnaumónaeu, kah wuttôneu.
E.5.22 And Enoch walked with God after he begat Methuselah three hundred years, and begat sons and daughters:

α.5.23 Kah wame kes[u]kodtash uppomantamóonk Enoch nishwudt pasuk8we kodtumwae, nequtta tahshinchage, kah napanna tahshit kodtumwae.
E.5.23 And all the days of Enoch were three hundred sixty and five years:

α.5.24 Kah Enoch weeche pomushaumau God: kah matta na wutápéin newutche God wunnemunoh.
E.5.24 And Enoch walked with God: and he was not; for God took him.

α.5.25 Kah Methuselah pomantog nequt pasuk8we kodtumwae, k[a]h shwosuk tahshinchage, kah nesausuk tahshit kodtumwae neit wunnaumonaeu Lamech.
E.5.25 And Methuselah lived an hundred eighty and seven years, and begat Lamech.

α.5.26 Ka[k] Methuselah pomantam mahche neekit Lamech nesausuk tahshit pasuk8we kodtumwae, shwosuk tahshinchag, kah neese kodtumwae, kah wunnaumónaeu, kah wuttôneu.
E.5.26 And Methuselah lived after he begat Lamech seven hundred eighty and two years, and begat sons and daughters:

α.5.27 Kah wame kesukodtash uppomantamóonk Methuselah pasak8gun tahshit pasuk8we kodtumwae, kah nequtta tahshinchag kah pasak8gun tahshit kodtumwae, neit nupp8.
E.5.27 And all the days of Methuselah were nine hundred sixty and nine years: and he died.

α.5.28 Onk Lamech pamantog nequt pasuk8we kodtumwae: shwosuk tahshinchag, kah neeswe kodtumwae, neit wunnaumónieu.
E.5.28 And Lamech lived an hundred eighty and two years, and begat a son:

α.5.29 Onk wuttissowenuh Noah, an8wadt, Yeuoh pish kittinne kuttaphukqun ne[á]unag kutanakausuonganun, kah wussáuanúm8ongan8 kenutcheganónog, newutche ne ohke Jehovah ohquánittóg-kup.
E.5.29 And he called his name Noah, saying, This same shall comfort us concerning our work and toil of our hands, because of the ground which the LORD hath cursed.

α.5.30 Onk Lamech pomantam mahche neekit Noah, napanna tahshit pasuk8we kodtumwae, pasak8gun tahshinchag, kah napanna tahshit kodtumwae, kah wunnaumónaeu, kah wuttôneu.
E.5.30 And Lamech lived after he begat Noah five hundred ninety and five years, and begat sons and daughters:

α.5.31 Kah wame kesukodtash uppomantamóonk Lamech, nesausuk tahshit pasuk8we, nesausuk tahshinchag, kah nesausuk tahshit kodtumwae, neit nupp8.
E.5.31 And all the days of Lamech were seven hundred seventy and seven years: and he died.

α.5.32 Kah Noah napanna tahshit pasuk8we kodtumwohkog, neit Noah wunnaumonaeu Shem, Ham, kah Japhet.
E.5.32 And Noah was five hundred years old: and Noah begat Shem, Ham, and Japheth.

α.6.1 ONK n$nih wosketompaog n8che monahettit ut woskeche ohkit, kah wutt[ô]nuog.
E.6.1 And it came to pass, when men began to multiply on the face of the earth, and daughters were born unto them,

α.6.2 Wunnaumonuh God nauáog wuttônuh wosketompaog wanétuog, kah 8weetáómóuh neh wame pepenahetticheh.
E.6.2 That the sons of God saw the daughters of men that they were fair; and they took them wives of all which they chose.

α.6.3 Onk Jehovah n8wau, Nunnashauanitt8m matta pish nagwutteáeu achú8hkôóog missinninnuh, newutche noh webe wonk weyausú8: qut ôhch ukkesukkodtumash pish nequt pasuk8we kah neesneechag kodtumwae.
E.6.3 And the LORD said, My spirit shall not always strive with man, for that he also is flesh: yet his days shall be an hundred and twenty years.

α.6.4 Na mô mágoskeetompóou ut ohkeit, onk yeuyeu: onk ompetak wunnaumon[u]h God weetoamáhettit wosketompaog wuttôn8oh onk neekeahettit neg masugkénuppanneg, n8adt ussowesupanneg, waeenómitcheg.
E.6.4 There were giants in the earth in those days; and also after that, when the sons of God came in unto the daughters of men, and they bare children to them, the same became mighty men which were of old, men of renown.

α.6.5 Onk Jehovah wunnaumun ummatcheseonk wosketomp missi ut ohkit, kah nish$noh missantam8e wuttenantamóonk, ut wuttahut, webe matchet ásekésukokish.
E.6.5 And God saw that the wickedness of man was great in the earth, and that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil continually.

α.6.6 Onk Jehovah aiuskoi[á]ntam ukkezheônuh wosketompuh ut ohket, kah neuantámup ut wuttahuh.
E.6.6 And it repented the LORD that he had made man on the earth, and it grieved him at his heart.

α.6.7 Kah Jehovah n8wop pish nuppagu[a]nóog missinninnúog, neg kezheagkuppanneg, wutch woskeche ohket: missinnin kah puppinashim, kah pohpomompakecheg, kah puppinshasog mamáchekesukqut, newutche nutaiuskoiantam nukkezheauaoh.
E.6.7 And the LORD said, I will destroy man whom I have created from the face of the earth; both man, and beast, and the creeping thing, and the fowls of the air; for it repenteth me that I have made them.

α.6.8 Qut Noah naméheau kitteamonteánittúonk anaquabit Jehovah.
E.6.8 But Noah found grace in the eyes of the LORD.

α.6.9 Yeush uppometuongash Noah: Noah sampweusseaen, kah pannuppu wunneetou ut uppometuonganit, Noah weeche pomushaumau God.
E.6.9 These are the generations of Noah: Noah was a just man and perfect in his generations, and Noah walked with God.

α.6.10 Kah Noah shwinnaumonáeu Shem, Ham, kah Japhet.
E.6.10 And Noah begat three sons, Shem, Ham, and Japheth.

α.6.11 Kah ohke anit ut anaquabit God: kah ohke numwohteau woskehuwaonk.
E.6.11 The earth also was corrupt before God, and the earth was filled with violence.

α.6.12 Kah God moneau ohke, kah kusseh anit newutche wame weyaus anisteou ummay ut ohkit.
E.6.12 And God looked upon the earth, and, behold, it was corrupt; for all flesh had corrupted his way upon the earth.

α.6.13 Kah God unnau Noahoh, 8wóhkukquóssu[ni]n wame weyaus peyaum8 anaquabeh, newutche ohke numwohteau woskenittuonk nashpe nagoh: kah kusseh, pish nuppaguanoog wutch ohkekontu.
E.6.13 And God said unto Noah, The end of all flesh is come before me; for the earth is filled with violence through them; and, behold, I will destroy them with the earth.

α.6.14 Ayimau kuhhog Ark, wutch Gopher mahtugquash woh kutayim âhâguiyeuash ut Arkut: kah pish kuppittukontamun wutch anomut, kah woskeche pittu.
E.6.14 Make thee an ark of gopher wood; rooms shalt thou make in the ark, and shalt pitch it within and without with pitch.

α.6.15 Onk yeu pish kuttinteauun: nissáhteag Ark pish nishwudt pasuk8we ishquonogkodt, kah neanóhkekiskag napannatashinchag ishquonogkodt, kah ne an8hquesp8ogkog shwinchag ishquonogkodt.
E.6.15 And this is the fashion which thou shalt make it of: The length of the ark shall be three hundred cubits, the breadth of it fifty cubits, and the height of it thirty cubits.

α.6.16 Pish kutayim kenogkonég in Arkut, kah ut nequt ishquonogkodt en woh[-] kummasuwayeu pish kukkesteoun: kah wusquoant ut Arkut pish uhquáe kupponamun, negonohtag ohg8nog, nahoht[ô]ohtah, kah nashwunná8g pish kutayim.
E.6.16 A window shalt thou make to the ark, and in a cubit shalt thou finish it above; and the door of the ark shalt thou set in the side thereof; with lower, second, and third stories shalt thou make it.

α.6.17 Kah kusseh neen, kusseh neen nuppaudtoh tomogkon ut ohket pagwatauunat wame weyaus, neg pomantamwe n[à]hnahshoncheg wutch agwe kesukqut: kah nish$noh teaug ne ohtag ohket pish nupp8.
E.6.17 And, behold, I, even I, do bring a flood of waters upon the earth, to destroy all flesh, wherein is the breath of life, from under heaven; and every thing that is in the earth shall die.

α.6.18 Qut ken kummenuhkehteoush n8n8waonk: kah pish kuppetutteaum ut Arkut, ken, kah kenaumonog, kah kummittumwos, kah kenaumonog ummittumwussúoh weeche ken.
E.6.18 But with thee will I establish my covenant; and thou shalt come into the ark, thou, and thy sons, and thy wife, and thy sons' wives with thee.

α.6.19 Kah nish$noh ôaas uppomantamu[n] wame weyaus, nish$noh neesuog woh kuppas8oog ut Arkut, onk woh kenanaiheoog uppomantamunnaoont weeche ken: pish nompaiyeu8, ka[b] squaiyeú8.
E.6.19 And of every living thing of all flesh, two of every sort shalt thou bring into the ark, to keep them alive with thee; they shall be male and female.

α.6.20 Puppinshasog neanussehettit, neetasuog neanussehettit, nish$noh pomompakit ut ohkekontu, neanusséhettit, nish$noh neesuog pish kuppeyauquok, kenanaihéóog, onk woh pomantamwog.
E.6.20 Of fowls after their kind, and of cattle after their kind, of every creeping thing of the earth after his kind, two of every sort shall come unto thee, to keep them alive.

α.6.21 Kah neemunush ken wame ne woh meechimuk, kah pish kummukkinn[ú]mun, kah pish meetsuonganú8 wutche ken kah noghog.
E.6.21 And take thou unto thee of all food that is eaten, and thou shalt gather it to thee; and it shall be for food for thee, and for them.

α.6.22 Kah ne wutussen Noah ne wame God anun8nomp, ne wutussen.
E.6.22 Thus did Noah; according to all that God commanded him, so did he.

α.7.1 ONK Jehovah unnau Noahoh peyaush ken, kah wame n[e]adtahshineog, en Arkut, newutche kenaush sampwesseaen ut anaquabeh, yeu pometuonkanit.
E.7.1 And the LORD said unto Noah, Come thou and all thy house into the ark; for thee have I seen righteous before me in this generation.

α.7.2 Nish$noh uppahkesin puppinashim pish keneemun nehnesausuk tahsheu, nompashim kah squashim: kah nish$noh matta uppakesein puppinashim, nehnees88og, nompashim kah squashim.
E.7.2 Of every clean beast thou shalt take to thee by sevens, the male and his female: and of beasts that are not clean by two, the male and his female.

α.7.3 Netatup puppinshasog mamachekesukqut, nesausuk [h]ettasú8og, nomp[u]hshas kah squashas, onk woh pomantam8m8 8skannemunnu et woskeche ohohket.
E.7.3 Of fowls also of the air by sevens, the male and the female; to keep seed alive upon the face of all the earth.

α.7.4 Newutche mahche nesausuk tahshikquinukok, sokanonteam ut ohkeit yauonchagkodtash kesukodtash kah yauonchagodtash nukonash: kah nish$noh oaas kezteagkup, nuppaguanoog wutch woskeche ohkeit.
E.7.4 For yet seven days, and I will cause it to rain upon the earth forty days and forty nights; and every living substance that I have made will I destroy from off the face of the earth.

α.7.5 Kah Noah wutussen wame ne anunn8nont God.
E.7.5 And Noah did according unto all that the LORD commanded him.

α.7.6 Kah Noah nequtta tahshit pasuk8we kodtumwohkom, tomogkog yeuut ohkit.
E.7.6 And Noah was six hundred years old when the flood of waters was upon the earth.

α.7.7 Kah Noah petutteau, kah wunnaumonuh, kah ummittumwussoh, kah wunnaumonuh ummittumwuss[u]oh weeche, en Arkut, newutche nuppe tomogkon.
E.7.7 And Noah went in, and his sons, and his wife, and his sons' wives with him, into the ark, because of the waters of the flood.

α.7.8 Uppahkesin puppinashim, kah matta uppahkesein puppinashim, puppinshaog, kah nish$noh oaas pomompagit woskeche ohkeit.
E.7.8 Of clean beasts, and of beasts that are not clean, and of fowls, and of every thing that creepeth upon the earth,

α.7.9 Neh neese petutteaog Noahut en arkut, nompaas kah squaas, neanunn8nop Noahoh God.
E.7.9 There went in two and two unto Noah into the ark, the male and the female, as God had commanded Noah.

α.7.10 Onk n$nih mahche nesausuk audtahshikquinukok neit nippe tomogkon ut woskeche [o]hket.
E.7.10 And it came to pass after seven days, that the waters of the flood were upon the earth.

α.7.11 Nequtta tahshit pasuk8we kodtumwáe, pomantog Noah, nahoht[ô]eu nep[á]uz, nabo nesausuk audtahshikquinohhog kes8sh, ne kesukok, tohkékomuash qu[o]gkononogkodtash pohquodchuwánash, kah tomogkonne squoantama[s]h kesukqut póhquaém8uk.
E.7.11 In the six hundredth year of Noah's life, in the second month, the seventeenth day of the month, the same day were all the fountains of the great deep broken up, and the windows of heaven were opened.

α.7.12 Kah sokanonup ohkeit, yauonchagkodtash kesukodtash kah yauonchagkodtash nukonash.
E.7.12 And the rain was upon the earth forty days and forty nights.

α.7.13 Ne kesukok Noah, Shem, kah Ham, kah Japhet, wunnaumonuh Noah, kah ummittumwossoh Noah, kah nishuoh ummittumwussoh wunnaumonuh weeche petutteaog en Arkut.
E.7.13 In the selfsame day entered Noah, and Shem, and Ham, and Japheth, the sons of Noah, and Noah's wife, and the three wives of his sons with them, into the ark;

α.7.14 Nag kah nish$noh wuttinnussin puppinashim, wame neetasuog wuttinussinneau, kah nish$noh pomomp[a]kecheg ut woskeche ohket neanussit, kah nish$nho puppinshas neanussit, kah nish$noh psuksesog wuttónequnnóneau.
E.7.14 They, and every beast after his kind, and all the cattle after their kind, and every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth after his kind, and every fowl after his kind, every bird of every sort.

α.7.15 Kah petukanóog Noahoh en Arkut, nehnees[u]og, kah ne[hn]ee[su]og, wame weyaus neg keteae nehnohsh[an]cheg.
E.7.15 And they went in unto Noah into the ark, two and two of all flesh, wherein is the breath of life.

α.7.16 Kah neg petutteacheg, petutteau nompaus, kah squaus, wame weyaus, nean[un]8nomp God: kah Jehovah ukkuppuhwhoh.
E.7.16 And they that went in, went in male and female of all flesh, as God had commanded him: and the LORD shut him in.

α.7.17 Onk tomogkon yau[o]nchatikqunnu ut woskeche ohket, nippe nano missi, onk tahs[h]eem8 Ark, kah waapem8 wutch ohkeit.
E.7.17 And the flood was forty days upon the earth; and the waters increased, and bare up the ark, and it was lift up above the earth.

α.7.18 Kah nippe moskehtek88, kah nano missi ut woskeche ohket: kah Ark pomushaum8 woskeche nippekontu.
E.7.18 And the waters prevailed, and were increased greatly upon the earth; and the ark went upon the face of the waters.

α.7.19 Kah nippe nano m8nôi mocheke ut woskeche ohket: kah wame kogsuhkôagish ut agwu wame kesukqut nehtippaash.
E.7.19 And the waters prevailed exceedingly upon the earth; and all the high hills, that were under the whole heaven, were covered.

α.7.20 Nabo napanna tashishquonogkot en w[o]hkúmeiye[u] naweequotteau nippe, kah wadchuash natippaash.
E.7.20 Fifteen cubits upward did the waters prevail; and the mountains were covered.

α.7.21 Kah wame weyaus nupp8m8, neg mamonche[c]heg ut woskeche ohkeit: puppinshaog, kah neetasuog, kah puppinashimwog, kah nish$noh pomompakecheg pomompakeog ut woskeche ohket, kah nish$noh wosketomp
E.7.21 And all flesh died that moved upon the earth, both of fowl, and of cattle, and of beast, and of every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth, and every man:

α.7.22 Nish$noh oaas wutch nohnohshon wutch[á]nit wutch pomantamoonk, wame nobohteaoúut, nupp8og.
E.7.22 All in whose nostrils was the breath of life, of all that was in the dry land, died.

α.7.23 Kah nish$noh pasuk oaas pamontog paguanoog, ut woskeche ohket, missinninnuog, kah neetasuog, kah pomompakecheg, kah puppinshasog mamahchekesukqut, kah paguanoog wutch ohkekontu: kah webe Noah na wutchippomantam, kah neg weechayeumoncheg ut Ark.
E.7.23 And every living substance was destroyed which was upon the face of the ground, both man, and cattle, and the creeping things, and the fowl of the heaven; and they were destroyed from the earth: and Noah only remained alive, and they that were with him in the ark.

α.7.24 Neit nuppe nohkúhkom ohke nequt pasuk8e quinne, kah napanna tahshinchag.
E.7.24 And the waters prevailed upon the earth an hundred and fifty days.

α.8.1 ONK God mehquanuma[u] Noahoh, kah nish$noh oass uppomantamun, kah wame neetasuog ne weechayéumukúhpuh ut Ark: kah God pamwusheaheau wabanoh ohket, kah qut[òm]8 nippe.
E.8.1 And God remembered Noah, and every living thing, and all the cattle that was with him in the ark: and God made a wind to pass over the earth, and the waters asswaged;

α.8.2 Kah tohkekomuash mônaiyéuut, kah kenogg[e]neganash kesukqui8k kuppuhh[à]suash, kah sokanon wutch kesukquiug mat sokemun8.
E.8.2 The fountains also of the deep and the windows of heaven were stopped, and the rain from heaven was restrained;

α.8.3 Kah nippe qushkem8 wutch ohkekontu nagwutteau: kah mahchem8ug nequt pasuk88 kah napanna tahshinchagkodtash kesukodtash, neit s[o]hkaém8ug nippe.
E.8.3 And the waters returned from off the earth continually: and after the end of the hundred and fifty days the waters were abated.

α.8.4 Kah Ark musséshin nesausuk audtahsúit nepáuz, nabo nesausuk aúdtahshikquiñahog nepâuz, wadchuash ut Ararat.
E.8.4 And the ark rested in the seventh month, on the seventeenth day of the month, upon the mountains of Ararat.

α.8.5 Kah nippeash nagwutteaeu qushkem8ash noh p[a]jeh piogqussúit nepâuz, piogqussuit nepáuz, neg[o]nne kesukok, neit wanáshquodti[am]ugish n[o]gquodtash.
E.8.5 And the waters decreased continually until the tenth month: in the tenth month, on the first day of the month, were the tops of the mountains seen.

α.8.6 Onk n$nih mahche yaunnéhcheadtequinokok Noah wohshinnum kenogkaneg ut Arkut, ne kezteunkup.
E.8.6 And it came to pass at the end of forty days, that Noah opened the window of the ark which he had made:

α.8.7 Kah an8nau kehchikonkontu, noh papomshad nó pajeh nippe nanohtag wutch ohkekontu.
E.8.7 And he sent forth a raven, which went forth to and fro, until the waters were dried up from off the earth.

α.8.8 Wonk an8nau wuskuhwhunnánoh wutch wuhhogkat, wunnaumunat nanábohteái en woskeche ohkekontu.
E.8.8 Also he sent forth a dove from him, to see if the waters were abated from off the face of the ground;

α.8.9 Qut wuskuhwhunnan mat namehteóou t[o]h woh ohtag wusseet, kah wonk ukqushketunkquoh ut Arkut: newutche nuppe ohteau woskeche wame ohkeit: neit summagunum wunnutcheg kah wunneemunoh, onk uppóṣheuh Arkut.
E.8.9 But the dove found no rest for the sole of her foot, and she returned unto him into the ark, for the waters were on the face of the whole earth: then he put forth his hand, and took her, and pulled her in unto him into the ark.

α.8.10 Kah pahto wonk nesausuk tahshikquinokod, neit wonk an8nau wuskuhwhunnánoh wutch Arkut.
E.8.10 And he stayed yet other seven days; and again he sent forth the dove out of the ark;

α.8.11 Kah wuskuhwhunnau uppéyaaunoh wanonk88k, kah kusseh kenadtam wunnépogque Olive, ne pashkodtog: nemehkuh Noah 8wahteoun sehteaémo nippe wutch ohkekontu.
E.8.11 And the dove came in to him in the evening; and, lo, in her mouth was an olive leaf pluckt off: so Noah knew that the waters were abated from off the earth.

α.8.12 Onk pahto wonk nesausuk tahshikquinukod, kah an8nau wuskuhwhunnanoh kah matta wonk ukqus[h]keaunuk8oh.
E.8.12 And he stayed yet other seven days; and sent forth the dove; which returned not again unto him any more.

α.8.13 Onk n$nih nequtta tahshit pasuk8we, kah na negonne kodtum88k negonne nepâuz, negonne kesukok, nippe nunnohtèau wutch ohkekontu: kah Noah nohhunnúnnum onkwhôsik Ark, kah natawómpu, kah kusseh, wosketohke nunnóhteau.
E.8.13 And it came to pass in the six hundredth and first year, in the first month, the first day of the month, the waters were dried up from off the earth: and Noah removed the covering of the ark, and looked, and, behold, the face of the ground was dry.

α.8.14 Onk nahohtôeu nep[â]uz, neesnechag nabo nesausuk audtahshikquináhhog nepáuz, neit nunnabohteái.
E.8.14 And in the second month, on the seven and twentieth day of the month, was the earth dried.

α.8.15 Kah God ken8nau Noahoh, n8wau.
E.8.15 And God spake unto Noah, saying,

α.8.16 Sohhash wutch Arkut, ken, kah kummittumwos, kenaumonog kah kenaumonog ummittumwussúoh weeche ken.
E.8.16 Go forth of the ark, thou, and thy wife, and thy sons, and thy sons' wives with thee.

α.8.17 Sohh8wush nish$noh oaas uppomantamun weechappémukquéaneg, wame weyaus, puppinshaog, puppinashimwussog, nish$noh pohpomompakécheg pomompakeog ohkekontu, onk woh neech[ú]og m8cheke ut ohkekontu.
E.8.17 Bring forth with thee every living thing that is with thee, of all flesh, both of fowl, and of cattle, and of every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth; that they may breed abundantly in the earth, and be fruitful, and multiply upon the earth.

α.8.18 Onk Noah sohham, kah wunnaumonuh, ummittumwossoh, kah wunnaumonuh ummittumwossúoh weeche nagum.
E.8.18 And Noah went forth, and his sons, and his wife, and his sons' wives with him:

α.8.19 Nish$noh puppinashim, nish$noh pohpomompakit nish$noh puppinshaas, nishnoh oaas uppomompagin ut ohkekontu ne anussehettit, sohhamwog wutch Arkut.
E.8.19 Every beast, every creeping thing, and every fowl, and whatsoever creepeth upon the earth, after their kinds, went forth out of the ark.

α.8.20 Kah Noah kesteauau Altaroh ut Jehovah, kah neemunau nish$noh pahke puppinashim, kah nish$noh pahke puppinshaas, kah wusséphamau chikohtáe sephausuongash ut Altar.
E.8.20 And Noah builded an altar unto the LORD; and took of every clean beast, and of every clean fowl, and offered burnt offerings on the altar.

α.8.21 Kah Jehovah 8weetemontamun, kah Jehovah n8wau ut wuttahut, matta wonk pish nummatchtoôuun ohke newutche wosketompaog, newutche wuttenantam8onk wosketomp wuttahut matchet wutch wuskenuunn[e]at kah matta nuttagkomoh nish$noh oaas uppomantamun, ne mahche usse[a]n.
E.8.21 And the LORD smelled a sweet savour; and the LORD said in his heart, I will not again curse the ground any more for man's sake; for the imagination of man's heart is evil from his youth; neither will I again smite any more every thing living, as I have done.

α.8.22 Nishohekohkék8k, ohkekonat, kah kepenumunát, tohkoi, kah ku[ssi]tteah, nepun kah popòn, kesukod kah nuhkon matta pish ahquohtan8.
E.8.22 While the earth remaineth, seedtime and harvest, and cold and heat, and summer and winter, and day and night shall not cease.

α.9.1 ONK God wun[n]ánumau N[ò]ahoh, kah wunnaumonoh, kah wuttinuh nahog, Mishummeechumegk, kah muttaan8gk, kah numwapegk ohke.
E.9.1 And God blessed Noah and his sons, and said unto them, Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth.

α.9.2 Kah k8wabesu[ò]nukk8óog, kah kukquishikouoog, nish$noh puppinashim ohket, kah nish$noh puppinshaas mamahchekesukqut, kah wame neg mamonchecheg ut ohkekontu, kah wame namohsog kehtahhannet, kittinumaununk ut kenutchegan8wout wame
E.9.2 And the fear of you and the dread of you shall be upon every beast of the earth, and upon every fowl of the air, upon all that moveth upon the earth, and upon all the fishes of the sea; into your hand are they delivered.

α.9.3 Nish$noh uppomompágin noh pomantog, noh pish k8meechumunneau, onatuh ahchippog, wame kittinnumauunash.
E.9.3 Every moving thing that liveth shall be meat for you; even as the green herb have I given you all things.

α.9.4 Qut weyaus keteaum8ug wusequeheunkanú8g, matta woh kummeech8uneau
E.9.4 But flesh with the life thereof, which is the blood thereof, shall ye not eat.

α.9.5 Kah wunnamuhkut 8squeheunk kuppomantam8ongan8 pish n8chitteamon: pish n8chitteamon ut nish$noh puppinashim, kah nish$noh wosketomp: kah nish$noh howan weematoh pish n8chumon ukketeaonk wosketomp.
E.9.5 And surely your blood of your lives will I require; at the hand of every beast will I require it, and at the hand of man; at the hand of every man's brother will I require the life of man.

α.9.6 Howan se[o]hhog 8sqheonk wosketomp 8skqheonk pish seohhamun nashpe wosketomp: newutche wutogq[u]nneungqunuonganit God kezheau wosketompuh.
E.9.6 Whoso sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed: for in the image of God made he man.

α.9.7 Kah kenaau mishummeechumegk, kah muttaan8gk kah neechântam8k m8cheke keit, kah na$ut mutaân8gk.
E.9.7 And you, be ye fruitful, and multiply; bring forth abundantly in the earth, and multiply therein.

α.9.8 Kah God ken8nau Noahoh, kah wunn[á]umonuh weeche, n8wau.
E.9.8 And God spake unto Noah, and to his sons with him, saying,

α.9.9 Kah neen, kusseh, neen kummenuhkehteauonumw8 n8n8waonk, kah k8skannemunneog nahohtôeu ken.
E.9.9 And I, behold, I establish my covenant with you, and with your seed after you;

α.9.10 Kah nish$noh uppomantamun oaas weechauyeumukquean, puppinshas, neetasuog, kah nish$noh puppinashim yeu ohket wéechauyeumukquean: wutche yeug waguppanneg wutche Arkut, onk neit wame puppinashimwog ohkeit.
E.9.10 And with every living creature that is with you, of the fowl, of the cattle, and of every beast of the earth with you; from all that go out of the ark, to every beast of the earth.

α.9.11 Kah kummenuhketeaúonúmw8 n8n8waonk, kah matta pish wonk wame weyaus paguanoon nashpe nippe togmogkon kah matta wonk tomogkonnuun8, onk matcheteauunat ohke.
E.9.11 And I will establish my covenant with you, neither shall all flesh be cut off any more by the waters of a flood; neither shall there any more be a flood to destroy the earth.

α.9.12 Kah God n8wau, yeu ukkukkinueasuonk k8n8waongan ne ayim nashauwee neen kah kenaau, kah nish$noh oaas uppomantamuh weechauyeumukquean wutche wame pometeongash.
E.9.12 And God said, This is the token of the covenant which I make between me and you and every living creature that is with you, for perpetual generations:

α.9.13 Nuppon nutáhtomp matokqsut, onk noh kukkineasuonganu8 wutche k8n8waonganun nashauwe neen kah ohke.
E.9.13 I do set my bow in the cloud, and it shall be for a token of a covenant between me and the earth.

α.9.14 Onk pish n$nih, matohkséhteaon matokqs yeu ohket, ahtomp pish nógqussu ut matokqsit.
E.9.14 And it shall come to pass, when I bring a cloud over the earth, that the bow shall be seen in the cloud:

α.9.15 Neit pish nummehquoantam k8n8waongan8 nashauwe neen kah kenaau, kah nish$noh oaas uppomantamun, wame weyaus: kah matta pish wonk nippe tomogkoninno, paguatoun wame weyaus.
E.9.15 And I will remember my covenant, which is between me and you and every living creature of all flesh; and the waters shall no more become a flood to destroy all flesh.

α.9.16 Kah ahtomp pish appu matokqsut, onk pish nummônneau onk woh nummehquoantam maché nohtag n8n8waonk, nashauwe [et] God kah nish$noh owaas uppomantaman, wame weyaus ohket.
E.9.16 And the bow shall be in the cloud; and I will look upon it, that I may remember the everlasting covenant between God and every living creature of all flesh that is upon the earth.

α.9.17 Kah God unnau Noahoh yeu kukkinneasuonk wutche 8n8waonk ne manuhkehteaun nanshauwe ut neen, kah wame weyaus ohket:
E.9.17 And God said unto Noah, This is the token of the covenant, which I have established between me and all flesh that is upon the earth.

α.9.18 Kah wunnaumonuh Noah waguppanneg Arkut, Shem, Ham, kah Japhet. Ham wut8shin ut Canaan.
E.9.18 And the sons of Noah, that went forth of the ark, were Shem, and Ham, and Japheth: and Ham is the father of Canaan.

α.9.19 Yeush shwewunnaumonuh Noah: kah nashpe naghog wame ohke [n]onkuhkausu.
E.9.19 These are the three sons of Noah: and of them was the whole earth overspread.

α.9.20 Kah Noah kitche ohkehteaenu8, kah ohkeateau weenominneohteuk.
E.9.20 And Noah began to be an husbandman, and he planted a vineyard:

α.9.21 Onk wuttattam ne wine, kah kogkéussippamo[u], kah poskinau ut weetuomut.
E.9.21 And he drank of the wine, and was drunken; and he was uncovered within his tent.

α.9.22 Kah Ham wut8shun Kainan naum upposkisuonk 8shoh, kah wuttinnon neswe weematoh ut poquadchit.
E.9.22 And Ham, the father of Canaan, saw the nakedness of his father, and told his two brethren without.

α.9.23 Neit Shem kah Japhet neemunum hogk8onk, kah upponamauon aehtaueu wuttugket, onk quinkáeog, kah puttaghumwog upposkisuonk 8shuoh: kah wuskesuk88ush ompamohtaash, kah matta naum8og 8shuoh uppóskissuonk.
E.9.23 And Shem and Japheth took a garment, and laid it upon both their shoulders, and went backward, and covered the nakedness of their father; and their faces were backward, and they saw not their father's nakedness.

α.9.24 Kah Noah t8keu wutch 8wineumut kah wahteau peississinutche wunnaumonuh neánhikq[ut].
E.9.24 And Noah awoke from his wine, and knew what his younger son had done unto him.

α.9.25 Na[h] n8wau Kanaan ohquanumunach 8tinninneumuneuh wutti[n]númo[h] weematoh.
E.9.25 And he said, Cursed be Canaan; a servant of servants shall he be unto his brethren.

α.9.26 Onk n8wau, 8nanumunach Jehovah ummanitt8moh Shem, kah Kainan pish 8tinninnumuneoh.
E.9.26 And he said, Blessed be the LORD God of Shem; and Canaan shall be his servant.

α.9.27 Manit pish nupwishunau Japhet, onk pish aye[ú]h wuttayeuonganit Shem, kah Kainan pish 8tinninnumunneoh.
E.9.27 God shall enlarge Japheth, and he shall dwell in the tents of Shem; and Canaan shall be his servant.

α.9.28 Onk Noah pomantam mahche tomogkog nishwudt pasuk8e kodtumwae, kah napanna tahshinchag.
E.9.28 And Noah lived after the flood three hundred and fifty years.

α.9.29 Onk wame ukkesukodtumash Noah pasak8gun tahshit pasuk8we kodtumwae kah napanna tahshinchag kodtumwae, neit nupp8,
E.9.29 And all the days of Noah were nine hundred and fifty years: and he died.

α.10.1 YEU pometuongan8 wunnaumonuh Noah, Shem, Ham kah Japhet, onk wunnaumonauh neetuoh mahche tomogkog
E.10.1 Now these are the generations of the sons of Noah, Shem, Ham, and Japheth: and unto them were sons born after the flood.

α.10.2 Wunnaumonuh J[á]phet, Gomer, kah Magog, kah Madai, kah Javan, kah Tubal, kah Meshek, kah Tiras.
E.10.2 The sons of Japheth; Gomer, and Magog, and Madai, and Javan, and Tubal, and Meshech, and Tiras.

α.10.3 Onk wunnaumonuh Gomer, Ashkenaz, kah Riphath, kah Tog[à]rma.
E.10.3 And the sons of Gomer; Ashkenaz, and Riphath, and Togarmah.

α.10.4 Onk wunnaumonuh Javan, Eisha, kah Tarshish, Kittim, kah Dodanim.
E.10.4 And the sons of Javan; Elishah, and Tarshish, Kittim, and Dodanim.

α.10.5 Nashpe nag chadchabenaog ummu[h]hanôm8wóash Gentiles ut wutohtuw[ó]ut, nishnoh howan neaunag wuttinnont8waonk nish$noh neaunag wutteashshinunneongan8 wutohtuout.
E.10.5 By these were the isles of the Gentiles divided in their lands; every one after his tongue, after their families, in their nations.

α.10.6 Onk wunnaumonuh Ham, Kush, kah Mizraim kah Phut Kanaa[n].
E.10.6 And the sons of Ham; Cush, and Mizraim, and Phut, and Canaan.

α.10.7 Kah wunnaumonuh Kush, Seba kah Havilah, kah Sabtah, kah Raamah, kah Sabtekah: kah wunnaumonuh Raamah, Sheba kah D[e]dan.
E.10.7 And the sons of Cush; Seba, and Havilah, and Sabtah, and Raamah, and Sabtechah: and the sons of Raamah; Sheba, and Dedan.

α.10.8 Onk Kush wunnaumonaeu Nimrod: noh n8che missugkenuk ut ohket.
E.10.8 And Cush begat Nimrod: he began to be a mighty one in the earth.

α.10.9 Missugken audchaen ut anaquabit Jehovah, newutche n8waog netatup Nimrod masugkenuk a[u]dch[a]én anaquabit Jehovah.
E.10.9 He was a mighty hunter before the LORD: wherefore it is said, Even as Nimrod the mighty hunter before the LORD.

α.10.10 Onk newaje kutchissik wuttahs8tamóonk Babel, kah Erech, kah Akkad, kah Kalne ut ohket Shinar.
E.10.10 And the beginning of his kingdom was Babel, and Erech, and Accad, and Calneh, in the land of Shinar.

α.10.11 Ashur sohham ne wutch ohket, kah tannikheteau Niniveh, kah keihtotan Rehoboth kah Kalah.
E.10.11 Out of that land went forth Asshur, and builded Nineveh, and the city Rehoboth, and Calah,

α.10.12 Onk [R]esen nashauwe Niniveh & Kalah yeu missi kei[h]totan.
E.10.12 And Resen between Nineveh and Calah: the same is a great city.

α.10.13 Onk Mizraim wunnaumonaeu Lúdim, kah Anamim, kah Lehabim, & Naphtuhim,
E.10.13 And Mizraim begat Ludim, and Anamim, and Lehabim, and Naphtuhim,

α.10.14 Onk Pathrusim, kah Ka[sl]uhim (newag 8sóhhamun Philistim) kah Kaphtorim.
E.10.14 And Pathrusim, and Casluhim, (out of whom came Philistim,) and Caphtorim.

α.10.15 Onk Kanaan wunnaumonieu Sidon umméhtammetúmoh, kah Heth.
E.10.15 And Canaan begat Sidon his first born, and Heth,

α.10.16 Onk Jebusitog kah Emoritog, kah Girgasitog.
E.10.16 And the Jebusite, and the Amorite, and the Girgasite,

α.10.17 Onk Hivitog, kah Arkitog, & Sinitog.
E.10.17 And the Hivite, and the Arkite, and the Sinite,

α.10.18 Onk Arvaditog, kah Zema[r]itog[,] kah Hamathitog: kah ompetake n[e]adtahshinnehettit Kananitog nanwiyeuog.
E.10.18 And the Arvadite, and the Zemarite, and the Hamathite: and afterward were the families of the Canaanites spread abroad.

α.10.19 Onk ukkuhkonnegon8h Kananitog wutch Sidon peyauan Gerar. Onk yean Gaza aóan Sodom kah Gomorah, Admah & Zeboim missaúmu[sh]au Lashah.
E.10.19 And the border of the Canaanites was from Sidon, as thou comest to Gerar, unto Gaza; as thou goest, unto Sodom, and Gomorrah, and Admah, and Zeboim, even unto Lasha.

α.10.20 Yeuh wunnaumonuh Ham, neadtahshinnehettit, ne unnont8wàhettit wutohtuóut, kah wutohtimoeuwout.
E.10.20 These are the sons of Ham, after their families, after their tongues, in their countries, and in their nations.

α.10.21 Onk na en Shemut 8shuoh wame wunnaumonuh Eber, weematoh Japhet mohtomméginit, wuttit neekinneau.
E.10.21 Unto Shem also, the father of all the children of Eber, the brother of Japheth the elder, even to him were children born.

α.10.22 Wunneechanoh Shem Elam & Ashur kah Arph[a]x[a]d, kah Lud, kah Aram.
E.10.22 The children of Shem; Elam, and Asshur, and Arphaxad, and Lud, and Aram.

α.10.23 Kah wunneechanoh Aram, U[r], kah Hul, kah Gether, kah Mash.
E.10.23 And the children of Aram; Uz, and Hul, and Gether, and Mash.

α.10.24 Onk [A]rphaxad wunnaumonaeu Salah, kah Salah wunnaumonaeu Eber.
E.10.24 And Arphaxad begat Salah; and Salah begat Eber.

α.10.25 Onk neesweekheau Eber, pasuk ussowésu Peleg, newutche noh pomontog ohke cha[c]hauben[à]usu: kah weematoh ussowesu Joktan.
E.10.25 And unto Eber were born two sons: the name of one was Peleg; for in his days was the earth divided; and his brother's name was Joktan.

α.10.26 Onk Joktan wunnaumonaeu Alm[o]dad kah Shele[s]h, kah Hazermaveth, kah Jerah.
E.10.26 And Joktan begat Almodad, and Sheleph, and Hazarmaveth, and Jerah,

α.10.27 Kah Hadoram, kah Uzal, & Diklah.
E.10.27 And Hadoram, and Uzal, and Diklah,

α.10.28 Kah Ob[a]l, kah Abimael, kah Sheba
E.10.28 And Obal, and Abimael, and Sheba,

α.10.29 Kah Ophir[,] kah Havilah, kah Jobab wame yeush wunnaumonoh Joktan.
E.10.29 And Ophir, and Havilah, and Jobab: all these were the sons of Joktan.

α.10.30 Kah neh wado[h]kehettit wutch Mesh[u]a nogqueu Shephar, wadchu wutchepwaou.
E.10.30 And their dwelling was from Mesha, as thou goest unto Sephar a mount of the east.

α.10.31 Yeuh wunnaumonuh Shem, nish$noh wutteatea[h]sheauyéuunneau, ne unnont8wahettit, wutohtu[o]ut, wutohtim[ó]euwóut.
E.10.31 These are the sons of Shem, after their families, after their tongues, in their lands, after their nations.

α.10.32 Yeuh wutteahteáhshaiyeuongan8 wunnaumonu[h] Noah, neaunag uppometuongân8 wutohtuout: kah nashpe yeug chachaubenúmun wutohtimoneash ohket, mahche tomogkog.
E.10.32 These are the families of the sons of Noah, after their generations, in their nations: and by these were the nations divided in the earth after the flood.

α.11.1 KAH wame ohke pasuk unnont8wáonk, kah pasuk hett8wonk.
E.11.1 And the whole earth was of one language, and of one speech.

α.11.2 Kah n$nih wámohettit chepwoáau, namehteaúog mukkoshqut wutohket Shinar, kah ne wutohkinne[u].
E.11.2 And it came to pass, as they journeyed from the east, that they found a plain in the land of Shinar; and they dwelt there.

α.11.3 Kah hettúog, hah, ayeuontuh man8nskog, kah pannuppu chikoswóntu: kah ahtoog man8nskoh wutch qussukquan, kah slime wutch saupae man8n[s]k.
E.11.3 And they said one to another, Go to, let us make brick, and burn them thoroughly. And they had brick for stone, and slime had they for morter.

α.11.4 Kah n8waog, hah ayimontuh keihtotan kah qunnukque kommuk, na woh masukom8mu8k kesuk: kah ayimontuh wesuonk ishkont kussiswaómun yeu ut wame ohkit.
E.11.4 And they said, Go to, let us build us a city and a tower, whose top may reach unto heaven; and let us make us a name, lest we be scattered abroad upon the face of the whole earth.

α.11.5 Kah Jehovah n8keu n8che naum keitotan kah qunnunkqui komuk. uttiyeu wosketomp wunnaumon[û]oh ayimmohettit.
E.11.5 And the LORD came down to see the city and the tower, which the children of men builded.

α.11.6 Kah Jehovah n8wau, kusseh missinninnúog pasuk88og, kah wame pasuk unnontt8waonk: kah yeu n8che ussenaous, kah yeuyeu matta woh wuttamhéoog ne ahcheweséhettit.
E.11.6 And the LORD said, Behold, the people is one, and they have all one language; and this they begin to do: and now nothing will be restrained from them, which they have imagined to do.

α.11.7 Hah n8kétuh pen8wehteúttuh unnont8waonk, onk woh mo wohtauuttéog.
E.11.7 Go to, let us go down, and there confound their language, that they may not understand one another's speech.

α.11.8 Nemehkuh Jehovah chachaubenuh na wutch ut woskeche wame ohket, onk wutahquete [uu]nneau ayimun keitotan.
E.11.8 So the LORD scattered them abroad from thence upon the face of all the earth: and they left off to build the city.

α.11.9 Newaje ussowetamuk Babel, newutche Jehovah na wuttitayimun papén8want8waonk wame ohket: kah na wutche Jehovah wunnanwiéhheun et woskeche wame ohket.
E.11.9 Therefore is the name of it called Babel; because the LORD did there confound the language of all the earth: and from thence did the LORD scatter them abroad upon the face of all the earth.

α.11.10 Yeush wutontseongash Shem, Shem nequt pasuk8we kodtumwohkog wunnaumonaeu Arphaxad neese k[o]dtumwae mahche tomogkog.
E.11.10 These are the generations of Shem: Shem was an hundred years old, and begat Arphaxad two years after the flood:

α.11.11 Kah Shem mahche wunnaumonâeu Arph[a]xad[u]h, napanna tahshit pasuk8we kodtumwohkomup: neit wunnaumonaeu kah wuttoneu.
E.11.11 And Shem lived after he begat Arphaxad five hundred years, and begat sons and daughters.

α.11.12 Kah Arphaxad pamontog shwinchage nabo napanna kodtumwae, neit wunnaumonaeu Salahhoh.
E.11.12 And Arphaxad lived five and thirty years, and begat Salah:

α.11.13 Kah Arphaxad mahche wunnaumonait Salahhoh, yauut pasuk8we kodtumwohkomup, kah nishwe kodtummo, neit wunnaumonau kah wuttôneu.
E.11.13 And Arphaxad lived after he begat Salah four hundred and three years, and begat sons and daughters.

α.11.14 Kah Salah pamontog shwinchage kodtumwae, neit wunnaumonaeu Eberoh.
E.11.14 And Salah lived thirty years, and begat Eber:

α.11.15 Kah Salah mahche wunnaumonait Eberoh, yauut pasuk8we kodtumwohkomup kah nishwe, neit wunnaumonaeu & wuttoneu
E.11.15 And Salah lived after he begat Eber four hundred and three years, and begat sons and daughters.

α.11.16 Kah Eber pam[on]tog shwin[c]hag nabo yau kodtumwae, neit wunnaumonaeu Pelegoh
E.11.16 And Eber lived four and thirty years, and begat Peleg:

α.11.17 Kah Eber mahche wunnaumonait Pelegoh, yauut pasuk8we kodtumwohkomup kah nabo shwinchage, neit wunnaumonaeu kah wuttôneu.
E.11.17 And Eber lived after he begat Peleg four hundred and thirty years, and begat sons and daughters.

α.11.18 Kah Peleg pomontog shwinchage kodtumwae neit wunnaumonaeu R[e]u[ho]h.
E.11.18 And Peleg lived thirty years, and begat Reu:

α.11.19 Kah Peleg mahche wunnaumonait Reuhoh, neese pasuk8we kodtumwohkomup, kah pasak8gun, neit wunnaumonaeu kah wuttôneu.
E.11.19 And Peleg lived after he begat Reu two hundred and nine years, and begat sons and daughters.

α.11.20 Kah Reu pamontog shwinchage kodtumwae kah nees, neit wunnaumonaeu Serugoh.
E.11.20 And Reu lived two and thirty years, and begat Serug:

α.11.21 Kah Reu mahche wunnaumonait Serugoh, neese pasuk8we kodtumwohkomup, kah nesausuk, neit wunnaumonaeu kah wuttôneu.
E.11.21 And Reu lived after he begat Serug two hundred and seven years, and begat sons and daughters.

α.11.22 Kah Serug pamontog shwinchage kodtumwáe, neit wunnaumonaeu Nahoroh.
E.11.22 And Serug lived thirty years, and begat Nahor:

α.11.23 Kah Serug mahche wunnaumonait Nahoroh, neese pasuk8we kodtúmwohkomup, neit wunnaumonaeu kah wuttôneu.
E.11.23 And Serug lived after he begat Nahor two hundred years, and begat sons and daughters.

α.11.24 Kah Nahor pamontog neesneechage kodtumwae nabo pask8gun neit wunnaumonaeu Terahoh.
E.11.24 And Nahor lived nine and twenty years, and begat Terah:

α.11.25 Kah Nahor mahche wunnaumonait Terahoh nequt pasuk8we kodtumwohkomup kah nabo pask8gun, neit wunnaumonaeu & wuttôneu.
E.11.25 And Nahor lived after he begat Terah an hundred and nineteen years, and begat sons and daughters.

α.11.26 Kah Terah pamontog nesausuk tahshinchage kodtumwae, neit wunnaumonaeu Abrahamwoh, Nahoroh, Haranoh.
E.11.26 And Terah lived seventy years, and begat Abram, Nahor, and Haran.

α.11.27 Kah yeush wutontseongash Terah, Terah wunnaumonaeu Abramoh, Nahoroh kah Haranoh, kah Haran wunnaumonaeu Lotuh,
E.11.27 Now these are the generations of Terah: Terah begat Abram, Nahor, and Haran; and Haran begat Lot.

α.11.28 Kah Haran nupup anaquabit 8shoh Terahoh, na ohke ut ne[e]teup, ut Ur ut Kaldes.
E.11.28 And Haran died before his father Terah in the land of his nativity, in Ur of the Chaldees.

α.11.29 Neit Abraham kah Nahor 8mittumwussissinneaoh: Abram [um]mittumwussoh ussowesu Sarai: kah Nahor ummittumwussoh ussowesu Milchah, wuttaunoh Haran, 8shoh milchah, 8shoh Ischah.
E.11.29 And Abram and Nahor took them wives: the name of Abram's wife was Sarai; and the name of Nahor's wife, Milcah, the daughter of Haran, the father of Milcah, and the father of Iscah.

α.11.30 Qut Sarai mehchéeu wanne wunneechaneu.
E.11.30 But Sarai was barren; she had no child.

α.11.31 Kah Terah neemunont Abramoh wunnaumonuh, kah Lot wunnaumonuh Haran, wunnaumonuh onk wunnaumonuh, kah Sarai ápenúache, wunnaumonuh Abram ummittumwussoh: kah weeche sohham8m8uh wutche Ur en Kaldes, onk woh auog ohke Kanaan kah paahettit Haran na wuttaiiñeau
E.11.31 And Terah took Abram his son, and Lot the son of Haran his son's son, and Sarai his daughter in law, his son Abram's wife; and they went forth with them from Ur of the Chaldees, to go into the land of Canaan; and they came unto Haran, and dwelt there.

α.11.32 Kah ukkesukodtumash Terah neese pasuk8we kodtumwáe, kah napanna, neit Terah nupp8 ut Haran.
E.11.32 And the days of Terah were two hundred and five years: and Terah died in Haran.

α.12.1 ONK Jehovah unnop Abramoh, sohhash ken wutch kutohket kah wutch kuttinonkumont, kah wutch k8sh weekit, en ohkeit ne woh kenahtinúnum.
E.12.1 Now the LORD had said unto Abram, Get thee out of thy country, and from thy kindred, and from thy father's house, unto a land that I will shew thee:

α.12.2 Kah kutayimoush missi wutôhtimóin, kah k8nánumush kah kummishteoush k8wésuonk, kah pish k8naneteaònit.
E.12.2 And I will make of thee a great nation, and I will bless thee, and make thy name great; and thou shalt be a blessing:

α.12.3 Kah pish n8nanumóog neg wanánumukquéaneg: kah pish nutohqu[a]num noh ohquanumukquean, kah ut kuhhogka[u] wame wutt8wadtuongash ohket pish wunnanumoog.
E.12.3 And I will bless them that bless thee, and curse him that curseth thee: and in thee shall all families of the earth be blessed.

α.12.4 Neit Abram sohham ne anont Jehovah, kah Lot 8weechauoh kah Abram nesausuk tahshinchage kodtumwohkum kah nabo napanna sohhag en Haran.
E.12.4 So Abram departed, as the LORD had spoken unto him; and Lot went with him: and Abram was seventy and five years old when he departed out of Haran.

α.12.5 Kah Abram neemunau Saraihoh ummittumwussoh, kah Lot weematoh wunnaumonuh, kah wame neadtahshekhettit nish magkunnumohettiche, kah neh keteahogk[o]unoh w[o]dtinó[n]che Har[a]n, kah sohhamwog, onk au[o]g ohke Kanaan, onk peyauog ohkeit Kanaan.
E.12.5 And Abram took Sarai his wife, and Lot his brother's son, and all their substance that they had gathered, and the souls that they had gotten in Haran; and they went forth to go into the land of Canaan; and into the land of Canaan they came.

α.12.6 Kah Abram uppanupwushón ohke, en ohket Sichem, ut pag[ô]ntimmúsasqut Moreh: kah Kanánitog neit ne ohkeit.
E.12.6 And Abram passed through the land unto the place of Sichem, unto the plain of Moreh. And the Canaanite was then in the land.

α.12.7 Neit Jehovah naéitau Abramoh, kah n8wau, k8skannemunn[e]og nuttinnumauónean yeu ohke: kah na wuttit ayimun Altar en Jehovah$ut, uttiyeuwoh naéitauwop.
E.12.7 And the LORD appeared unto Abram, and said, Unto thy seed will I give this land: and there builded he an altar unto the LORD, who appeared unto him.

α.12.8 Kah ne 8ch ontsinnun, en wadchuat wutchepwoóntuwae Bethel, kah ne pnamun week, Bethel wutchéksuau, kah Hai wutchepwóou, kah na$ut ayim Altar en Jehovahnit, kah weehquetum 8wesuonk Jehovah.
E.12.8 And he removed from thence unto a mountain on the east of Bethel, and pitched his tent, having Bethel on the west, and Hai on the east: and there he builded an altar unto the LORD, and called upon the name of the LORD.

α.12.9 Kah Abram nayaiyaiom en Sowanaiyeu
E.12.9 And Abram journeyed, going on still toward the south.

α.12.10 Kah na mahshagquodt ut ohket, kah Abram w8msu en Egipt, naw uttaiin, newutche mahshagquod wussaume ne ut ohkeit
E.12.10 And there was a famine in the land: and Abram went down into Egypt to sojourn there; for the famine was grievous in the land.

α.12.11 Kah n$nih paónt kishke Egipt, unna[u] Saraioh ummittumwussoh, kusseh yeuyeu k8wahush k8neet kummóneónte[á]nit.
E.12.11 And it came to pass, when he was come near to enter into Egypt, that he said unto Sarai his wife, Behold now, I know that thou art a fair woman to look upon:

α.12.12 Newutche pish n$nih Egiptiansog nogquean, n8waog yeuh ummittumwussoh kah woh nunushhukquog, qut kuketeáhukquog
E.12.12 Therefore it shall come to pass, when the Egyptians shall see thee, that they shall say, This is his wife: and they will kill me, but they will save thee alive.

α.12.13 K8wehquetumoush n8wash, neetompas, onk woh n8ni wutche ken: kah nukketeahogkou woh pomantam wutche ken.
E.12.13 Say, I pray thee, thou art my sister: that it may be well with me for thy sake; and my soul shall live because of thee.

α.12.14 Kah n$niyeup Abram paont Egipt, Egiptianog wunnau[ô]uh mittumwussis nikkóme wunneetu.
E.12.14 And it came to pass, that, when Abram was come into Egypt, the Egyptians beheld the woman that she was very fair.

α.12.15 Kah Wusontimósumoh Pharoh wunnauouh, kah woweenomóuh ut Pharaoh$ut: kah mittumwussis neemunop en Pharaoh wéekit.
E.12.15 The princes also of Pharaoh saw her, and commended her before Pharaoh: and the woman was taken into Pharaoh's house.

α.12.16 Kah wunadchanau Abramoh newutche nagum: kah wuttússhepsumeu, k[â]h wutoxenumeu, kah ukquohquohquánetauogkómeu nomposhimuk, kah wuttinnímu wosketompuh kah mittumwossissoh kah ukquóhquohquonetaúogkomeu usquoshimwo[h] kah Camelsoh.
E.12.16 And he entreated Abram well for her sake: and he had sheep, and oxen, and he asses, and menservants, and maidservants, and she asses, and camels.

α.12.17 Onk Jehovah onkquommómheuh Pharaoh, kah neh weekit, nashpe mishe onkquommom8ongash, newutche Sarai Abram ummittumwussoh.
E.12.17 And the LORD plagued Pharaoh and his house with great plagues because of Sarai Abram's wife.

α.12.18 Neit Pharaoh weekomau Abramoh, & wuttinuh, toh kittinh[e]h? tohwutch mat usséas yeuoh nummittumwus? 
E.12.18 And Pharaoh called Abram and said, What is this that thou hast done unto me? why didst thou not tell me that she was thy wife?

α.12.19 tohwutch n8waan ne[e]tompas ye[u]oh? ne n8che woh nukkod ummittumwussin, newutche yeuyeu kusseh, kummittumwus, nee[m]un kah monchish.
E.12.19 Why saidst thou, She is my sister? so I might have taken her to me to wife: now therefore behold thy wife, take her, and go thy way.

α.12.20 Onk Pharaoh unnau wuttinnúmoh wéoggeheahteóg; kah mon[c]heàheuh nagum, kah ummittumwussoh kah neadtahshekhettit.
E.12.20 And Pharaoh commanded his men concerning him: and they sent him away, and his wife, and all that he had.

α.13.1 NEIT Abram ogquodchuog wutch Egypt, nagum & ummittumwussoh, kah wame ne ahdtahshekit, kah Lot weeche, en Sowanayeu.
E.13.1 And Abram went up out of Egypt, he, and his wife, and all that he had, and Lot with him, into the south.

α.13.2 Onk Abram ahche weenauweeteup puppinashimwoh, Silver kah Gold.
E.13.2 And Abram was very rich in cattle, in silver, and in gold.

α.13.3 Onk neyaiyaiomp wutch Sowanayeu wehque Bethel, ne ohkeit weske wádt8tap nashauwe Bethel, kah nashauwe Hai.
E.13.3 And he went on his journeys from the south even to Bethel, unto the place where his tent had been at the beginning, between Bethel and Hai;

α.13.4 Ne adt áyikup Altar, ne ad negonne ayikup: kah [m]a ut Abram wehquetum 8wesuonk Jehovah.
E.13.4 Unto the place of the altar, which he had make there at the first: and there Abram called on the name of the LORD.

α.13.5 Lot wonk weechaúont Abramoh, papeississitcheg kah matukenukeg neetasuog wunóhteau, kah weekuwóash.
E.13.5 And Lot also, which went with Abram, had flocks, and herds, and tents.

α.13.6 Onk ohke mat tápenum8p wamunon náhoh, noh wuttin weechayeuwuttiñeaóont newutche wuttinneetuongan8 missi, & woh mat weechayeuwuttéog.
E.13.6 And the land was not able to bear them, that they might dwell together: for their substance was great, so that they could not dwell together.

α.13.7 Onk penuánittuonk nashauwe ohtop w[u]tassammuáenumoh wunnetasumoh Abram kah nashauwe wutassammuáenumoh wunneetasumoh Lot, kah Kananitog kah Perisitog neit ne 8tohkinneau.
E.13.7 And there was a strife between the herdmen of Abram's cattle and the herdmen of Lot's cattle: and the Canaanite and the Perizzite dwelled then in the land.

α.13.8 Onk Abram wuttinuh Lotuh, k8weequetumoush ahque penuanittuonk ohtaj nashauwe neen kah ken, kah nashauwe nutassamuaenumog k[á]h kutassammuaénumog, newutche k8weematittimun.
E.13.8 And Abram said unto Lot, Let there be no strife, I pray thee, between me and thee, and between my herdmen and thy herdmen; for we be brethren.

α.13.9 Sun mo wame ohkeno anaquabean? k8weequetumoush chipin kuhhog wutch neen, menadtuhteashean nen nuttinohteasheam, asuh aninnuhteashean nen nummenadteasheam.
E.13.9 Is not the whole land before thee? separate thyself, I pray thee, from me: if thou wilt take the left hand, then I will go to the right; or if thou depart to the right hand, then I will go to the left.

α.13.10 Neit Lot spadtawompu, kah moneam wame mukoshqut Jordan, nippe monat nish$noh$ut, asquam Jehovah paguato8gk Sodom kah Gomorrah: netatuppe wuttit tanohketeaonganit Jehovah, neane ohkit Egypt peyan nogque Zoar.
E.13.10 And Lot lifted up his eyes, and beheld all the plain of Jordan, that it was well watered every where, before the LORD destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah, even as the garden of the LORD, like the land of Egypt, as thou comest unto Zoar.

α.13.11 Neit Lot pepenam wame mukoshqut ut Jordan, kah Lot wutchepwaiyeu, kah chadchabeónittuog.
E.13.11 Then Lot chose him all the plain of Jordan; and Lot journeyed east: and they separated themselves the one from the other.

α.13.12 Kah Abram wutohteup wutohket Kanaan, kah Lot wutohteup keitotanash mukoshquttáut, kah weeteup kishke Sodom.
E.13.12 Abram dwelled in the land of Canaan, and Lot dwelled in the cities of the plain, and pitched his tent toward Sodom.

α.13.13 Qut wosketompaog Sodom matchetowog, kah matchenéhéaog Jehovah m8cheke.
E.13.13 But the men of Sodom were wicked and sinners before the LORD exceedingly.

α.13.14 Neit Jehovah unnau Abramoh mahche Lot chippeit wutch nahog: yeuyeu tohshinish kuskesukquash, kah wutuhquáish wutch uttoh [à]pean, nanumayeu, kah sowanayeu, kah wutchepwayeu, kah wutcheksúayeu.
E.13.14 And the LORD said unto Abram, after that Lot was separated from him, Lift up now thine eyes, and look from the place where thou art northward, and southward, and eastward, and westward:

α.13.15 Newutche wame ne ohke nauman kittinnumauunun, kah kuskannemunog micheme.
E.13.15 For all the land which thou seest, to thee will I give it, and to thy seed for ever.

α.13.16 K8skannemunog nuppon onatuh puppissiyeuut ohkeit, nemehkuh wosketomp woogkeetog puppissiyeuash ohkeit, neit woh woogkemau wonk k8skannemunneoh.
E.13.16 And I will make thy seed as the dust of the earth: so that if a man can number the dust of the earth, then shall thy seed also be numbered.

α.13.17 Omkish paspwushaush ohket nesahteag kah ne anukskag: newutche kittinnumaunnun.
E.13.17 Arise, walk through the land in the length of it and in the breadth of it; for I will give it unto thee.

α.13.18 Neit Abram ontattau wetu, kah paont na wuttaiin pagontimmusasqut Mamre, ut Hebron, kah na$ut ayim Altar wutch Jehovah.
E.13.18 Then Abram removed his tent, and came and dwelt in the plain of Mamre, which is in Hebron, and built there an altar unto the LORD.

α.14.1 ONk n$nihyeup pomantog Amraphel ketass8t Shinar, Ariok ketass8t Elassar, Chedorlaomer ketass8t Elam, kah Tidal ketass8t wutohtimoneash.
E.14.1 And it came to pass in the days of Amraphel king of Shinar, Arioch king of Ellasar, Chedorlaomer king of Elam, and Tidal king of nations;

α.14.2 Yeug ayikeg ayeuwuttuonk, ayeuuhkónittue Bera ketass8t Sodom, kah Birsha ketass8t Gomorrah, Shinab ketass8t Admah, kah Shemeber ketass8t Zeboiim, kah ketass8t Bela, ne Zoareu8.
E.14.2 That these made war with Bera king of Sodom, and with Birsha king of Gomorrah, Shinab king of Admah, and Shemeber king of Zeboiim, and the king of Bela, which is Zoar.

α.14.3 Wame yeug weechúhwuttúog wunnohteaiyeuut Siddim, ne salte kehtoh.
E.14.3 All these were joined together in the vale of Siddim, which is the salt sea.

α.14.4 Nabo neese kodtumwae, wuttinneúmoh Chedorlaomer, kah nabo nishwudt kodtum8g wutahquánumóuh.
E.14.4 Twelve years they served Chedorlaomer, and in the thirteenth year they rebelled.

α.14.5 Onk nabo yauut kodtum8k, Chedorlaomer peyau, kah tahs8timwoh neh weeche kah wuttinnetahwhóuh Rephaimsoh ut Ashteroth$Karnaim, kah Zuzimsoh ut Ham, kah Emimsoh ut Shaveth-Kiri[a]thaim:
E.14.5 And in the fourteenth year came Chedorlaomer, and the kings that were with him, and smote the Rephaims in Ashteroth Karnaim, and the Zuzims in Ham, and the Emins in Shaveh Kiriathaim,

α.14.6 Onk Horitsoh 8wadchum8wòut Seir, pajeh mukoshqut Paran; kishke touohkomuk:
E.14.6 And the Horites in their mount Seir, unto Elparan, which is by the wilderness.

α.14.7 Onk qushkeog kah peyaog ut Enmishpat ne Kadesheu8k, kah wuttinnetahwhouh wame wutohtuwoont Amalekiteog, kah wonk Amaritog wodohkitcheg Hazezon$Tamar.
E.14.7 And they returned, and came to Enmishpat, which is Kadesh, and smote all the country of the Amalekites, and also the Amorites, that dwelt in Hazezontamar.

α.14.8 Onk sohham ketass8t Sodom, kah ketass8t Gomorrae, kah ketass8t Admah kah ketass8t Zeboim, kah ketass8t Bela (ne Zoare[u]8) kah n[à]h 8weech8hwuttinneaoh 8nohkóoúut Siddim.
E.14.8 And there went out the king of Sodom, and the king of Gomorrah, and the king of Admah, and the king of Zeboiim, and the king of Bela (the same is Zoar;) and they joined battle with them in the vale of Siddim;

α.14.9 Ayeuuhkonetue Chedorlaomer ketass8t Elam, kah Tidal ketass8t wutohtimóneat, kah Amraphel ketass8t Shinar, kah Arioch ketass8t Ellasar, yauog Ketass8timwog, ayueuuhkonittue napanna.
E.14.9 With Chedorlaomer the king of Elam, and with Tidal king of nations, and Amraphel king of Shinar, and Arioch king of Ellasar; four kings with five.

α.14.10 Onk 8nóohkói Siddim numwohteau slime pussohtégamit, kah ketass8tamwog Sodom kah Gomorra wussemowog, kah na petshaog, kah nag ashqueneanutcheg ussishauog wadchuut.
E.14.10 And the vale of Siddim was full of slimepits; and the kings of Sodom and Gomorrah fled, and fell there; and they that remained fled to the mountain.

α.14.11 Onk wame neemunnumwog maumachiyeuash ut Sodom, kah Gomorra, kah wame meechum, kah moncheog.
E.14.11 And they took all the goods of Sodom and Gomorrah, and all their victuals, and went their way.

α.14.12 Kah tohqunáog Lotoh, Abram weematoh wunnaumonuh, wodohteup Sodom, kah ummaumatchiash, kah moncheog.
E.14.12 And they took Lot, Abram's brother's son, who dwelt in Sodom, and his goods, and departed.

α.14.13 Onk pasuk peyau pohquohhogkup, kah unnau Abramwoh wuttahebrew, newutche ayeu mukoshquttaut Mamre, Wutamórite, weematoh Eshkol, kah weematoh Aner, kah yeuh 8weetauwadtinuh Abram.
E.14.13 And there came one that had escaped, and told Abram the Hebrew; for he dwelt in the plain of Mamre the Amorite, brother of Eshcol, and brother of Aner: and these were confederate with Abram.

α.14.14 Onk n8tog Abram missinnówi keematti, wáâmunau ukquáquodtatteaumoh wuttinnumoh, at neekinitche nehenwonche weekit, nishwe pasuk88wog, kah neg nahshwosuk tahsuog, kah 8nomatuhkaóuh Dan weehque.
E.14.14 And when Abram heard that his brother was taken captive, he armed his trained servants, born in his own house, three hundred and eighteen, and pursued them unto Dan.

α.14.15 Onk chipwúnau wuhhogkuh ayeuuhkonónat nahog, nagum, kah wuttinnúmoh nukonaeu; onk wuttinnetahwhóuh nahog, kah 8namatuhkaóuh en Hoba, menadchéaniyeu Damaskus.
E.14.15 And he divided himself against them, he and his servants, by night, and smote them, and pursued them unto Hobah, which is on the left hand of Damascus.

α.14.16 Onk quhchuwuttau wame maumachiash, kah wonk pas8wau weematuh Lotuh, kah ummaumachiash, kah mittamwossissog, kah missinninnuh.
E.14.16 And he brought back all the goods, and also brought again his brother Lot, and his goods, and the women also, and the people.

α.14.17 Onk Ketass8t Sodom sohham wunnogskauoh, mahche qushkeit wutch aninnetáhwhaonganit Chedorlaomer kah Ketass8timwog weeche, ut 8n[ô]ohkoout Saveh, Ketass8t wut8nôohkôaiyeumut.
E.14.17 And the king of Sodom went out to meet him after his return from the slaughter of Chedorlaomer, and of the kings that were with him, at the valley of Shaveh, which is the king's dale.

α.14.18 Kah Melchizadeck Ketass8t Salem, sohwu[t]tau petukqunnunk kah wine, kah noh mo wussephausuaénumoh quanunkquappit God.
E.14.18 And Melchizedek king of Salem brought forth bread and wine: and he was the priest of the most high God.

α.14.19 Kah 8nanumuh, kah n8wau, 8nanumunaj Abra[m] nashpe quanunkquapit God, wadchanuk qunni kesuk kah ohke.
E.14.19 And he blessed him, and said, Blessed be Abram of the most high God, possessor of heaven and earth:

α.14.20 Kah 8nànumunaj quanukquapit God, noh ponont kummatwomoh ut kenutcheganit: kah wuttinnúmaoh piukque chippai wame teanteaquashinash.
E.14.20 And blessed be the most high God, which hath delivered thine enemies into thy hand. And he gave him tithes of all.

α.14.21 Kah ketass8t Sodom unnau Abramoh, aninnumah keteahogkon8wóog, kah ken neemun[i]sh maumachiash.
E.14.21 And the king of Sodom said unto Abram, Give me the persons, and take the goods to thyself.

α.14.22 Kah Abram unnau ketass8tamwoh Sodom, nutashinn[u]maomp nunnutcheg Jehovah quanunkquapit God, wadchanuk kesuk kah ohke:
E.14.22 And Abram said to the king of Sodom, I have lift up mine hand unto the LORD, the most high God, the possessor of heaven and earth,

α.14.23 Matta woh keneemunnúmm[ù]unn8h pèmunneat, asuh mattógqunap, kah matta woh neemunnúmo ne teaguas ne ahtoan, ishkont woh kussim n8we[e]n[a]ikeh Abram.
E.14.23 That I will not take from a thread even to a shoelatchet, and that I will not take any thing that is thine, lest thou shouldest say, I have made Abram rich:

α.14.24 Webe yeu meechhettit wuskenuog, kah wutchippiyeum8 neg wosketompaog weechogqueúhpanneg Aner, Eshkol & Mamre, neemunnum[o]hhettich wutchippiyeúm8.
E.14.24 Save only that which the young men have eaten, and the portion of the men which went with me, Aner, Eshcol, and Mamre; let them take their portion.

α.15.1 MAhche yeu n$nag, wuttinn8waonk Jehovah peyaanuk Abram ut monomansinneat, n8wau, ahque wabesish Abram, ne[n] kutogqunneg, kah ahche mishe kutonkquatunk.
E.15.1 After these things the word of the LORD came unto Abram in a vision, saying, Fear not, Abram: I am thy shield, and thy exceeding great reward.

α.15.2 Kah Abram n8wau, Lord Jehouah, teaguas kittinninnúm[a]h, michemwush[a]au matta wunneecháneunat, & piah[q]utuk ut neekit yeuoh Eleaz[e]r wut$Damaskus.
E.15.2 And Abram said, LORD God, what wilt thou give me, seeing I go childless, and the steward of my house is this Eliezer of Damascus?

α.15.3 Kah Abram n8wau, Kusseh, matta kittinnúmaiyeup wuskannem, kah kusseh noh neekhit ut neekit, noh wamahtunk nutahtauonk.
E.15.3 And Abram said, Behold, to me thou hast given no seed: and, lo, one born in my house is mine heir.

α.15.4 Kah kusseh wuttinn8waonk Jehovah en wuhhogkat n8wau, yeuoh matta pish wam[o]htoou kutahtauonk, qut noh nehenwonche wag kenogkussit, noh pish wamohtoau kutahtóonk.
E.15.4 And, behold, the word of the LORD came unto him, saying, This shall not be thine heir; but he that shall come forth out of thine own bowels shall be thine heir.

α.15.5 Onk uppas8woh poquadchik kah n8wau, yeuyeu natauwompish kesukquieu, kah [o]gkem anogqsog, woh wamogkemat: kah wuttinnuh, onk neyane pish k8skannémunog.
E.15.5 And he brought him forth abroad, and said, Look now toward heaven, and tell the stars, if thou be able to number them: and he said unto him, So shall thy seed be.

α.15.6 Onk wunnamptam en Jehovah$ut, kah wutogquanumoh sampweusseáeneuunneat.
E.15.6 And he believed in the LORD; and he counted it to him for righteousness.

α.15.7 Onk wuttinuh, neen Jehovah sohh8wunukquéop wutch Ur Kaldees, onk woh kittinnumaunun ne ohke, woh kut[a]htaunat.
E.15.7 And he said unto him, I am the LORD that brought thee out of Ur of the Chaldees, to give thee this land to inherit it.

α.15.8 Onk n8wau, Woi Manit Jehovah, ut$toh woh nuttinwahteauun nutahtouunat.
E.15.8 And he said, LORD God, whereby shall I know that I shall inherit it?

α.15.9 Onk wuttinnuh neemunnumwansheh kowashinem, nashwekodtumwohkog, & squoshimwe goat nashwekodtumohkog, kah ram nashwekodtumwohkog, kah turtle wuskuhwhunnan, kah wuskisham wuskuhwhunnan.
E.15.9 And he said unto him, Take me an heifer of three years old, and a she goat of three years old, and a ram of three years old, and a turtledove, and a young pigeon.

α.15.10 Kah yeuh 8wame neemunoh kah wutchadchabenuh ut nôeu, kah wuttattatuppissumoh, qut psuksésoh matta wutchadchabenoh.
E.15.10 And he took unto him all these, and divided them in the midst, and laid each piece one against another: but the birds divided he not.

α.15.11 Kah puppinshasog paahettit weyausut, Abram wutamahóhkaoh.
E.15.11 And when the fowls came down upon the carcases, Abram drove them away.

α.15.12 Kah waont mishekouéonk peyaaunuk Abram, kah kusseh mishepohkeni wabesuonk wunuhkukkongqun.
E.15.12 And when the sun was going down, a deep sleep fell upon Abram; and, lo, an horror of great darkness fell upon him.

α.15.13 Kah unnau Abramoh, wahteaue wahteaush k8skannemunog pish penuwohteaóog ohke matta wuttaihéou, kah pish 8tinninnúmunneauh, kah nag pish wutonkquomo[m]héouh yeuut pasuk8we kodtumwae.
E.15.13 And he said unto Abram, Know of a surety that thy seed shall be a stranger in a land that is not their's, and shall serve them; and they shall afflict them four hundred years;

α.15.14 Kah wonk ne wutohtimóin nag neh wadtinneúmhettiche pish n8summoog kah ompetak pish sohhamwog mishénaeetuonganit.
E.15.14 And also that nation, whom they shall serve, will I judge: and afterward shall they come out with great substance.

α.15.15 Onk pish kutom k8shut wunohteaeu, pish kuttit posukkinit ut k8nenukukquinneat.
E.15.15 And thou shalt go to thy fathers in peace; thou shalt be buried in a good old age.

α.15.16 Qut yauut pometuonganú8g pish wonk qushkeog, newutche ummatcheseongan8 Amoritsog asquam numwohtáno.
E.15.16 But in the fourth generation they shall come hither again: for the iniquity of the Amorites is not yet full.

α.15.17 Kah n$nih w[a]nt onk pohkenai, kah kusseh neahhuttannunnag pagutto[o]8k, kah wequánanteg chagohtag pa[n]nupshaum8 nashauwe chepaiyeuut.
E.15.17 And it came to pass, that, when the sun went down, and it was dark, behold a smoking furnace, and a burning lamp that passed between those pieces.

α.15.18 Ne kesukok Jehovah wuno8wau Abramoh, n8wau, en k8skannemunut nummagun yeu ohke wutch Egypt Sepuut, onk yeanke[h]teihtequt Euphrates.
E.15.18 In the same day the LORD made a covenant with Abram, saying, Unto thy seed have I given this land, from the river of Egypt unto the great river, the river Euphrates:

α.15.19 Ukkenit, Ukkenezit, U[k]kadmonit.
E.15.19 The Kenites, and the Kenizzites, and the Kadmonites,

α.15.20 Wuthittit, Upperisit, kah Rephaimog.
E.15.20 And the Hittites, and the Perizzites, and the Rephaims,

α.15.21 Kah Wutamorit, kah Ukkananit, kah Wkgirgasit, kah wut$Jebusit.
E.15.21 And the Amorites, and the Canaanites, and the Girgashites, and the Jebusites.

α.16.1 QUt Sarai Abram ummittamwussoh matta wunneekitteunk8oh; kah wuttinnúmu mittumwussissoh wutegiptionuh ussowesu Hagar.
E.16.1 Now Sarai Abram's wife bare him no children: and she had an handmaid, an Egyptian, whose name was Hagar.

α.16.2 Kah Sarai unnau Abramoh, kusseh yeu$yeu God numméchehúk k8wehquetumoush weet[u]am nuttinnum, mamiit woh n8nechā nashpe nagum: kah Abram wun8swetauoh ne an8wadt Sarai.
E.16.2 And Sarai said unto Abram, Behold now, the LORD hath restrained me from bearing: I pray thee, go in unto my maid; it may be that I may obtain children by her. And Abram hearkened to the voice of Sarai.

α.16.3 Neit Sarai ummittumwussoh Abram, nemunau Hagaroh wuttinnum wut$egiptianoh, mahche piukque kodtumwae wutohket Abram ohket Kanaan, kah wuttinnumauunoh wessukeh Abram 8mittumwississinneat.
E.16.3 And Sarai Abram's wife took Hagar her maid the Egyptian, after Abram had dwelt ten years in the land of Canaan, and gave her to her husband Abram to be his wife.

α.16.4 Kah petutteauóneau Hagaroh kah wompoquoouh, kah wahteunk 8wompoquauonk ummishonanumáu wussonksquaumoh, nehenwonche wuskesukqut.
E.16.4 And he went in unto Hagar, and she conceived: and when she saw that she had conceived, her mistress was despised in her eyes.

α.16.5 Kah Sarai unnau Abramoh, nuttinhetteáonk kuttinhin, kuttinnumanup nuttinnũ ut kuhpânôganit, kah nag 8wompwequauonk nummishananumit nehenwonche wuskesukqut, Jehovah wussittich nashauwe ken, kah nashauwe nen.
E.16.5 And Sarai said unto Abram, My wrong be upon thee: I have given my maid into thy bosom; and when she saw that she had conceived, I was despised in her eyes: the LORD judge between me and thee.

α.16.6 Kah Abram únnau Saraihoh, kusseh kittinnum kenutcheganit appu, unneh uttô[h] en wunegik ut kuskesukqut: kah Sarai onkapunanont, 8semoetunkquoh wutch anaquabit.
E.16.6 But Abram said unto Sarai, Behold, thy maid is in thine hand; do to her as it pleaseth thee. And when Sarai dealt hardly with her, she fled from her face.

α.16.7 Kah wunnamheuh wutangelsumoh God ut kishke tohekomu ut touohkomukqut, kishke tohkekomuut ut mayut Shur.
E.16.7 And the angel of the LORD found her by a fountain of water in the wilderness, by the fountain in the way to Shur.

α.16.8 Kah n8wau, Hagar wuttinnúmoh Sarai tunoh k8m, kah tunoh kuttoh, kah n8wau, n8chepuhh8wam wuskesukqut nussonksquom Sarai.
E.16.8 And he said, Hagar, Sarai's maid, whence camest thou? and whither wilt thou go? And she said, I flee from the face of my mistress Sarai.

α.16.9 Onk wutangelsumoh J[o]hovah wuttinuh qushkeshe[n] kussonksqomut, kah hopush ut agwu wunnutcheganit.
E.16.9 And the angel of the LORD said unto her, Return to thy mistress, and submit thyself under her hands.

α.16.10 Onk wutangelsumoh Jehovah wuttinuh muttaanhennon nummuttaáneh k8skannemunog m8cheke, matta pish waogkemoóg, newutche monaog.
E.16.10 And the angel of the LORD said unto her, I will multiply thy seed exceedingly, that it shall not be numbered for multitude.

α.16.11 Kah wutangelsumoh God wuttinuh kusseh k8wompequau, pish k8naumoni, kah pish kuttissowen Ishmael, newutche n8tam God kutohquanum[ó]onk.
E.16.11 And the angel of the LORD said unto her, Behold, thou art with child and shalt bear a son, and shalt call his name Ishmael; because the LORD hath heard thy affliction.

α.16.12 Kah pish touohkomukquoshimweninnú8, wunnutcheg ayeuuhkoneau nish$noh wosketomp, & nish$noh wosketomp wunnutcheg ayeuwohkonuk: kah pish ayeu anaquabenit wame weematoh.
E.16.12 And he will be a wild man; his hand will be against every man, and every man's hand against him; and he shall dwell in the presence of all his brethren.

α.16.13 Onk wutti[s]sowenon Manit ne an8wop ken Manit kenaeh, newutche n8wau sun nunnatinneah noh nógqueh?
E.16.13 And she called the name of the LORD that spake unto her, Thou God seest me: for she said, Have I also here looked after him that seeth me?

α.16.14 Newutche wuttohhamuk ussowétamun Beerlahairoi, kusseh nashauwe Kadesh kah Bered ohteau.
E.16.14 Wherefore the well was called Beerlahairoi; behold, it is between Kadesh and Bered.

α.16.15 Onk Hagar neechau wunnaumonuh Abram, kah Abram wuttissowenon wunnaumonuh Hagar neechaje[h], Ishmael.
E.16.15 And Hagar bare Abram a son: and Abram called his son's name, which Hagar bare, Ishmael.

α.16.16 Kah Abram shwòsuk tahshinchag kódtumwohkomup kah nequtta, Hagar neechad Ishameloh wutch Abramoh.
E.16.16 And Abram was fourscore and six years old, when Hagar bare Ishmael to Abram.

α.17.1 KAH abram pask8gun audtashinchage kodtumwohkog ka[h] pask8gun, Jehovah nae[i]hte[á]u Abramoh, kah wuttinuh, nen Manit wame manuhkésee, pompomushaush anaquabeh kah pannuppe wunneetush.
E.17.1 And when Abram was ninety years old and nine, the LORD appeared to Abram, and said unto him, I am the Almighty God; walk before me, and be thou perfect.

α.17.2 Kah nutayim n8n8waonk nashauwe nen kah ken, kah kummuttaanhesh m8cheke m8cheke.
E.17.2 And I will make my covenant between me and thee, and will multiply thee exceedingly.

α.17.3 Kah Abram sukoshk[o]dtassun, kah God ukken8nun, n8wau.
E.17.3 And Abram fell on his face: and God talked with him, saying,

α.17.4 Papaume nen, kusseh n8n8wáonk k8weetomuk, kah ken pish wut8shin monagish wutohtimóneash.
E.17.4 As for me, behold, my covenant is with thee, and thou shalt be a father of many nations.

α.17.5 Kah matta pish wonk kuttehinnit[$]eóh Abram, qut pish kuttissowis Abraham, newutche katayimoush 8t8shin monagish wutohtimóneash. 
E.17.5 Neither shall thy name any more be called Abram, but thy name shall be Abraham; for a father of many nations have I made thee.

α.17.6 Kah kummuttaanhesh m8cheke m8cheke, kah kutayimoush wutohtimoneash, kah ketass8tamwog pish 8mwog kuhhogkat.
E.17.6 And I will make thee exceeding fruitful, and I will make nations of thee, and kings shall come out of thee.

α.17.7 Kah nummenuhketeuh n8n8waonk nashauwe nen kah ken, kah k8skannemunn[e]og nahohtóeu ken, ut uppométuongan8wout, wutch machemohtag wunn8waonk, kah woh neen kummanitt8m, onk k8skannemunneog nahohtôeu ken.
E.17.7 And I will establish my covenant between me and thee and thy seed after thee in their generations for an everlasting covenant, to be a God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee.

α.17.8 Kah kittinnumaush kah k8skannemunneog nahoht[ô]eu ken ohke neadt pen8wehteayeap, wame ohke Kanaan, machemohtag ohtoonk, kah nen n$nag** ummanitt8m8oh.
E.17.8 And I will give unto thee, and to thy seed after thee, the land wherein thou art a stranger, all the land of Canaan, for an everlasting possession; and I will be their God.

α.17.9 Kah wuttinuh God Abrahamoh, kah pish kenanaeihteóh n8n8waonk, ken kah k8skannemunneog nahoht[ó]eu ken uppometuongan8óut.
E.17.9 And God said unto Abraham, Thou shalt keep my covenant therefore, thou, and thy seed after thee in their generations.

α.17.10 Yeu n8n8waonk uttoh pish nanauwéhteauóg ut nashauwe nen kah ken & k8skannemunog na[h]ohtoeu ken, nishnoh pasuk wosketomp pish quoshqusausu.
E.17.10 This is my covenant, which ye shall keep, between me and you and thy seed after thee; Every man child among you shall be circumcised.

α.17.11 Kah pish kukquôshqussumumw8 ut uhquáeu k8weyaus8, kah yeu pish kukkinneasuonk wutche wunn8waonk nashauwe ut nen kah kenaau.
E.17.11 And ye shall circumcise the flesh of your foreskin; and it shall be a token of the covenant betwixt me and you.

α.17.12 Kah noh shwosuk audtahshikqun apit, pish quoshqusausu [k]enugkeu kenaau, nish$noh wosketomp ut kuppometuongan8wóut, noh ut neekit weetuomut, kah noh tapwhut howane penuwot wutche teauguash, uttiyeuoh mat wánaumóneyéan.
E.17.12 And he that is eight days old shall be circumcised among you, every man child in your generations, he that is born in the house, or bought with money of any stranger, which is not of thy seed.

α.17.13 Noh ut neekhit keekit, kah n$noh adtoáop teauguash, noh mos wunnamuhkut quoshqusausu, kah n8n8w[a]onk pish ohteau keyausut, wutche machemohtag wunn8waonk.
E.17.13 He that is born in thy house, and he that is bought with thy money, must needs be circumcised: and my covenant shall be in your flesh for an everlasting covenant.

α.17.14 Kah matta quoshqusauseg wosketomp, 8weyaus ut uhquáeu matta quoshqusaussu8k, n$noh kéteahogkou pish tumwuswau wutch ummissinninnút[u], n$noh p[ó]qunnu[m] n8n8waonk.
E.17.14 And the uncircumcised man child whose flesh of his foreskin is not circumcised, that soul shall be cut off from his people; he hath broken my covenant.

α.17.15 Kah wuttnih God Abrahamoh, papaume Sarai ummittamwussoh, matta pish kittehhenoh Sarai, qut pish ussowesu Sarah.
E.17.15 And God said unto Abraham, As for Sarai thy wife, thou shalt not call her name Sarai, but Sarah shall her name be.

α.17.16 Kah pish n8nanum, kah kittinnumaush wunnaumonuh nashpe nagum kah n8nanum, kah noh pish wutohtimowonganu8, ukketass8tamóm8oh missinninnúog pish 8mwog wutch wuhhogkat.
E.17.16 And I will bless her, and give thee a son also of her: yea, I will bless her, and she shall be a mother of nations; kings of people shall be of her.

α.17.17 Neit Abraham sukoshkodtassun, kah hahanou, kah n8wau ut wuttahut, sun woh n8neecha[n], nequt pasuk8we kodtumwohkomon, kah Sarah pasak8gun tashinchage kodtumwohkog, sun pish neechau?
E.17.17 Then Abraham fell upon his face, and laughed, and said in his heart, Shall a child be born unto him that is an hundred years old? and shall Sarah, that is ninety years old, bear?

α.17.18 Onk Abraham unnau Goduh, Woi onk woh Ishmael pomantam ut anaquabean.
E.17.18 And Abraham said unto God, O that Ishmael might live before thee!

α.17.19 Kah God n8wau, Sarah kummittumwos wunnamuhkut pish k8ch wunnaumoni, kah pish kuttissowen Isaak, kah pish nummenuhkehteau n8n8waonk wutche machemohtag wunn8waonk, kah wuskannemunneoh nahohtóeu.
E.17.19 And God said, Sarah thy wife shall bear thee a son indeed; and thou shalt call his name Isaac: and I will establish my covenant with him for an everlasting covenant, and with his seed after him.

α.17.20 Kah papaume Ishmael ken8taush, kusseh n8nanum, nummishummeechumeh kah nummuttaáneh m8cheke m8cheke, pish nabonees88woh santimoh, onk nummishteoh wutohtim.
E.17.20 And as for Ishmael, I have heard thee: Behold, I have blessed him, and will make him fruitful, and will multiply him exceedingly; twelve princes shall he beget, and I will make him a great nation.

α.17.21 Qut n8n8waonk nummenuhkehteauo[u] Isaak, uttoh woh Sarah neechadche wutche ken ne wonk aquompak kodtum8k.
E.17.21 But my covenant will I establish with Isaac, which Sarah shall bear unto thee at this set time in the next year.

α.17.22 Kah ahque keket8kauont, kah God ashpet wutch Abrahamut.
E.17.22 And he left off talking with him, and God went up from Abraham.

α.17.23 Neit Abram neemunau Ishmaeloh wunnaumonuh, kah wame neekinutche ut weekit, & wame adtoadcheh wutche tea[u]gash nish$noh pasuk wosketomp, kenugke wosketompáog weekit Abraham, onk quoshqussum weyaus ut uhquae, ne kesukok ne àn8wop God.
E.17.23 And Abraham took Ishmael his son, and all that were born in his house, and all that were bought with his money, every male among the men of Abraham's house; and circumcised the flesh of their foreskin in the selfsame day, as God had said unto him.

α.17.24 Kah Abraham pask8gun tahshinchage kodtumwohkom, kah pask8gun, ne quoshqusuk 8weyaus ut uhqua[e].
E.17.24 And Abraham was ninety years old and nine, when he was circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin.

α.17.25 Kah Ishmael wunnaumonh nabo nishwe kodtumwohkumoh ne quoshqussuk 8weyaus ut uhquae.
E.17.25 And Ishmael his son was thirteen years old, when he was circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin.

α.17.26 Ne keṣukok quoshqusausu Abraham kah Ishmael wunnaumonuh.
E.17.26 In the selfsame day was Abraham circumcised, and Ishmael his son.

α.17.27 Kah wame wosketompaog ut weekit, neekinutcheh ut weekit, kah adtoohpoh wutche teauguas penuwohteuh 8weeche quoshqusau[ssun]euh.
E.17.27 And all the men of his house, born in the house, and bought with money of the stranger, were circumcised with him.

α.18.1 ONk Jehovah naeihtaau ut pagontimusasqut Mamre, kah appu wusquoantamut weekit kâsittag.
E.18.1 And the LORD appeared unto him in the plains of Mamre: and he sat in the tent door in the heat of the day;

α.18.2 Kah ashpuhquait natawompu kah kusseh, nishuoh wosketompuh weechekompaumuk, kah nauont quogqúeu wutch squoantamut weekit, kah wunnogskauwoh, kah mauwaeu en ohkekontu.
E.18.2 And he lift up his eyes and looked, and, lo, three men stood by him: and when he saw them, he ran to meet them from the tent door, and bowed himself toward the ground,

α.18.3 Nah n8wau nusontimom, namehteaúnon kitteamonteànittuonk ut anaquabean, ahque paumushaush k8wehquetumoush wutch kittinninnúmut.
E.18.3 And said, My LORD, if now I have found favour in thy sight, pass not away, I pray thee, from thy servant:

α.18.4 Neemskomunach nippeémes k8wehquetumoush, kah kutchessittau8k kusseet8woash kah anwôsinn8k ut kishkunk.
E.18.4 Let a little water, I pray you, be fetched, and wash your feet, and rest yourselves under the tree:

α.18.5 Kah neemskom kodchuhkoi petukqunneg, neemóunúhkun kuttahh8wóog, mahche ne nag woh kummonchem8, newutche yeuwadj payauónat kittinnum, onk nag n8wáog ussish ne án8wáan.
E.18.5 And I will fetch a morsel of bread, and comfort ye your hearts; after that ye shall pass on: for therefore are ye come to your servant. And they said, So do, as thou hast said.

α.18.6 Kah Abraham kenupshau en wetuomut en Sarahut, kah n8wau, teanuk nanashwunush shwe peksú8 nanohkinn[ô]hsik n8khik, tuttouhpunash, petukqunnunganéhtaash ut n8tau a[n]otag.
E.18.6 And Abraham hastened into the tent unto Sarah, and said, Make ready quickly three measures of fine meal, knead it, and make cakes upon the hearth.

α.18.7 Kah Abraham ussishau wunneetasumut, kah nôs8au Kalfoh n8hkésu kah weekun, kah uppaudtaonuh wuskénuh, kah teanuk ukkesoh.
E.18.7 And Abraham ran unto the herd, and fetcht a calf tender and good, and gave it unto a young man; and he hasted to dress it.

α.18.8 Kah nemunum butter kah sogkodtunk, Kalfoh ne kesiswoncheh, kah upponuh anaquabenit nahoh, kah noh kishke neepau ut kishkunk onk meetsuog.
E.18.8 And he took butter, and milk, and the calf which he had dressed, and set it before them; and he stood by them under the tree, and they did eat.

α.18.9 Kah wuttinnóuh, uttoh woh Sarah kummittamwus? kah n8wau kusseh weetuomut.
E.18.9 And they said unto him, Where is Sarah thy wife? And he said, Behold, in the tent.

α.18.10 Onk n8wau, qushkeon nukqushkem en kuhhogkaáau, ne adt8che pomantam8wonganú8k, kah kusseh Sarah kummittumwussis pish wunnaumonaieu, kah Sarah n8tam ut weetuomut, squontamut, ut uppusquanuwóut.
E.18.10 And he said, I will certainly return unto thee according to the time of life; and, lo, Sarah thy wife shall have a son. And Sarah heard it in the tent door, which was behind him.

α.18.11 Kah Abraham kah Sarah mohtantam88og, kah sepepomantamwog, kah Sarah wutahquenaiin neyane mittumwussissog.
E.18.11 Now Abraham and Sarah were old and well stricken in age; and it ceased to be with Sarah after the manner of women.

α.18.12 Newutche Sarah kemeu hahanu, kah n8wau mohtántamon woh n8weekontam8ongan, kah nussontimom wonk mohta[n]tog?
E.18.12 Therefore Sarah laughed within herself, saying, After I am waxed old shall I have pleasure, my lord being old also?

α.18.13 Kah Jehovah unnau Abrahamoh, tohwhutch Sarah hahanit? an8wadt, sun wunnamuhkut woh neecham mohtantamon?
E.18.13 And the LORD said unto Abraham, Wherefore did Sarah laugh, saying, Shall I of a surety bear a child, which am old?

α.18.14 Woh wussiog-gehukqun Jehovah[?] neádt8che kuhk8wámuk pish nukqushkem en kuhhogkat, neádt8che pomantamowonganu8k, kah Sarah pish wunnaumónieu.
E.18.14 Is any thing too hard for the LORD? At the time appointed I will return unto thee, according to the time of life, and Sarah shall have a son.

α.18.15 Neit Sarah quen8wau, n8wau, matta nutahánu, newutche wabesu; onk n8wau matchaog, qut kutahánup.
E.18.15 Then Sarah denied, saying, I laughed not; for she was afraid. And he said, Nay; but thou didst laugh.

α.18.16 Kah wosketompaog neepoog nawutch, onk nuhquaéog Sodom: kah Abraham 8weechauuh, ummonchanuh en mayut.
E.18.16 And the men rose up from thence, and looked toward Sodom: and Abraham went with them to bring them on the way.

α.18.17 Onk Jehovah n8wau, sun woh nutáhtuttáuon Abraham, ne kodnéhheog?
E.18.17 And the LORD said, Shall I hide from Abraham that thing which I do;

α.18.18 Newutche Abraham wunnamuhkut pish 8tohtimóin missi kah menuhkoi, kah wame wutohtimóneash ohkeit pish 8nanumoog ut nagum.
E.18.18 Seeing that Abraham shall surely become a great and mighty nation, and all the nations of the earth shall be blessed in him?

α.18.19 Newutche n8wáeh, noh woh piahtimau wunneechanoh, kah weechininnúmonche nahohtôeu, kah pish nanaihteaog ummay Jehovah, ussen sampwagk, kah wussittumôonk, onk woh Jehovah uppaudtauon Abrahamoh ne anomp.
E.18.19 For I know him, that he will command his children and his household after him, and they shall keep the way of the LORD, to do justice and judgment; that the LORD may bring upon Abraham that which he hath spoken of him.

α.18.20 Kah Jehovah n8wau, newutche missi ummauunitteauáonk Sodom, kah Gomorrah, kah newutche ummatchéseonganooash ahche uhqunneunkquodtash.
E.18.20 And the LORD said, Because the cry of Sodom and Gomorrah is great, and because their sin is very grievous;

α.18.21 Nunn8kem yeuyeu, kah nunnaum toh wuttin usseneau neyan8wómuk, ne paôónukqueh qut matta n$nán8g, onk nukkodwahteoun:
E.18.21 I will go down now, and see whether they have done altogether according to the cry of it, which is come unto me; and if not, I will know.

α.18.22 Kah w[e]sketompaog qushkeog na$wutch, kah auog nogque Sodom$ut, qut Abraham ash neepau anaquabit Jehovah.
E.18.22 And the men turned their faces from thence, and went toward Sodom: but Abraham stood yet before the LORD.

α.18.23 Onk Abraham uppas8sukauoh, kah n8wau, Sun kuppagwun sampwesecheg weeche matchet8wog?
E.18.23 And Abraham drew near, and said, Wilt thou also destroy the righteous with the wicked?

α.18.24 Paguodcheh napannatashinchagodtog sampwesecheg ut keiht8tanit, sun woh kuppagw[u]n, kah matta woh k8wadchanum8h ne ayeuonk, newutche napannatahshinchagodtog sampwesecheg na apitcheg?
E.18.24 Peradventure there be fifty righteous within the city: wilt thou also destroy and not spare the place for the fifty righteous that are therein?

α.18.25 Na8sukash ne ussen, nushon sampweussécheg weeche matcheet8woh: kah sampwesecheg neyan[e]yeuunát matcheet8ut, na8sukash, noh wussituk wame muttaok, sun mat sampwesu?
E.18.25 That be far from thee to do after this manner, to slay the righteous with the wicked: and that the righteous should be as the wicked, that be far from thee: Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right?

α.18.26 Kah Jehovah n8wau n[à]méheog napannatahshinchagodtog sampweusseáenúog ut Sodom, ennom8tani, neit nukketeahôog wame neg noh apitcheg newutche nág.
E.18.26 And the LORD said, If I find in Sodom fifty righteous within the city, then I will spare all the place for their sakes.

α.18.27 Neit Abraham wunnamp8hamaúoh, kah n8wau, kusseh yeuyeu, wo[û]s nutapshom ken8non Jehovah, qut nen webe puppisai kah pukque.
E.18.27 And Abraham answered and said, Behold now, I have taken upon me to speak unto the LORD, which am but dust and ashes:

α.18.28 Paguodche matta wutappéineau napannatahsuog sampwesecheg, neh woh napanna wutteáshinéhchagsinneau, sun kuppáguadtoh wame ke[i]htotan ukquenassinneaóut napanna tahsuog? kah n8wau, naut nameheoh yauonchagkodtog kah napanna tahsuog, matta nuppaguadtaónun.
E.18.28 Peradventure there shall lack five of the fifty righteous: wilt thou destroy all the city for lack of five? And he said, If I find there forty and five, I will not destroy it.

α.18.29 Kah wonk ukken8nuh & n8wau paguodche woh naut kenameh yauonchagkodtog kah n8wau matta woh nutussen newutche yauonchagodtog.
E.18.29 And he spake unto him yet again, and said, Peradventure there shall be forty found there. And he said, I will not do it for forty's sake.

α.18.30 Kah wuttinuh wóiyikisseuh k8wehquetumoush ahque musquantaj God, kah nukket8k[a]m, paguadche naut kenameh shwinchagodtog kah n8wau matta woh nutussen naut nameheog shwinchagodtog.
E.18.30 And he said unto him, Oh let not the LORD be angry, and I will speak: Peradventure there shall thirty be found there. And he said, I will not do it, if I find thirty there.

α.18.31 Kah n8wau, kusseh yeuyeu wôus ne nuttinne ken8non God, paguodche woh nesneechagkodtog kenameh naut, kah n8wau matta woh nuppaguanoog wutche neesneechagodtoh.
E.18.31 And he said, Behold now, I have taken upon me to speak unto the LORD: Peradventure there shall be twenty found there. And he said, I will not destroy it for twenty's sake.

α.18.32 Kah n8wau woiyikisseuh k8wehquetumoush ahque musquantaj God, kah webe majish pasukqut nukkeket8kam, paguodche woh kenameh piukqussuog: kah n8wau, matta woh nuppaguanoog piukqusséhettit.
E.18.32 And he said, Oh let not the LORD be angry, and I will speak yet but this once: Peradventure ten shall be found there. And he said, I will not destroy it for ten's sake.

α.18.33 Neit Jehovah monchu quenau mahche ken8nont Abraham, onk Abraham au wutohket.
E.18.33 And the LORD went his way, as soon as he had left communing with Abraham: and Abraham returned unto his place.

α.19.1 ONk neesuog Angelsog peyauog Sodom, wannongk88k kah Lot áppu 8squoantamut Sodom, n[â]ont, neepau onk woh wunnogskauoh, kah nau[aé]mo wuskesuk en ohkekontu.
E.19.1 And there came two angels to Sodom at even; and Lot sat in the gate of Sodom: and Lot seeing them rose up to meet them; and he bowed himself with his face toward the ground;

α.19.2 Kah n8wau kusseh yeuyeu nussontimomog quinnupp[e]gk k[o]wéquetumauúnnumw8 weekit kuttinninnúmw8, kah nequttaqunohteagk, kah kutchessittau8k kusseet8woash, onk nompoáeu omohkeóg pish kummonchemw8 kuttâongan8w[ó]ut, kah n8waog matta, qut nutapimun poquadchik wompanu
E.19.2 And he said, Behold now, my lords, turn in, I pray you, into your servant's house, and tarry all night, and wash your feet, and ye shall rise up early, and go on your ways. And they said, Nay; but we will abide in the street all night.

α.19.3 Kah m8cheke ummenuhke na[t]umpassúmuh nahog, kah qunnuppeog, petutteaog weekit, onk ummishadtupweheuh, kah apwau weekog petukqunnuk, kah meesuog.
E.19.3 And he pressed upon them greatly; and they turned in unto him, and entered into his house; and he made them a feast, and did bake unleavened bread, and they did eat.

α.19.4 Qut asquam kaéhetteg wosketompaog ne Keiht8tanat, wosketompaog Sodom, weenuhkomog wetu, wuskenuog kah kutchisog, wame missinninnúog waéenu Otan.
E.19.4 But before they lay down, the men of the city, even the men of Sodom, compassed the house round, both old and young, all the people from every quarter:

α.19.5 Kah wehkomóog Lotuh, kah wuttinóuh, uttiyeug wosketompaog pétakunkqueáneg yeu nohk[o]g? sohwhutaiinnean, onk woh n8wahéonnónog.
E.19.5 And they called unto Lot, and said unto him, Where are the men which came in to thee this night? bring them out unto us, that we may know them.

α.19.6 Onk Lot sohham wutch squoantamut, kah yeánittánum nahohtôeu.
E.19.6 And Lot went out at the door unto them, and shut the door after him,

α.19.7 Kah n8wau k8wehquetumaunumw8 neematog ahque ne en matchesegk.
E.19.7 And said, I pray you, brethren, do not so wickedly.

α.19.8 Kusseh yeuyeu nesuog nuttânog, matta waheunkeg wosketompuh, k8wehquetumauuñumw8 nag kuppaudtaunnaóont kenaau, kah unnehhuk nag ut$toh en tapeneamóg ut[-] kuskesukkouóut, webe yeug wosketompaog ahque toh unn[é]heuk, newutche yeu waj peyaog ut agwe onkouohtáut neekit.
E.19.8 Behold now, I have two daughters which have not known man; let me, I pray you, bring them out unto you, and do ye to them as is good in your eyes: only unto these men do nothing; for therefore came they under the shadow of my roof.

α.19.9 Kah n8waog amakompau, wonk n8waog yeuoh pasuk wuttinneapeyon, kah kodwussittum, yeuyeu kumm8chéke kummatchenehennumun onk nagoh, onk ukquentauóuh wosketompuh Lotuh m8cheke, onk pas8tshaog kod pohquanumwog squoant.
E.19.9 And they said, Stand back. And they said again, This one fellow came in to sojourn, and he will needs be a judge: now will we deal worse with thee, than with them. And they pressed sore upon the man, even Lot, and came near to break the door.

α.19.10 Qut wosketompaog s[o]nkhenchaiéog, kah pethennaog Lotuh wetuómut, en wuhhogkaoont, onk yeanittânumwog.
E.19.10 But the men put forth their hand, and pulled Lot into the house to them, and shut to the door.

α.19.11 Kah wuttogkomouh wosketompuh pogkenumoonk, neg apitcheg squoantamut, papeissitcheg kah matikénukeg, onk sauanumwog ummiskomunnaout squoant.
E.19.11 And they smote the men that were at the door of the house with blindness, both small and great: so that they wearied themselves to find the door.

α.19.12 Kah wosketompaog unnaog Lotuh, sun yeu wuttapinneau onkatoganeg, asuh waseenumukqueaneg, kah kenaumonog kah kuttânog, kah nish$noh teag ahtôan yeuut otanit, yeu$wutch sohh8us yeu wutch ayeuonganit.
E.19.12 And the men said unto Lot, Hast thou here any besides? son in law, and thy sons, and thy daughters, and whatsoever thou hast in the city, bring them out of this place:

α.19.13 Newutche nuppaguatauunn[a]n yeu ayeuonk, newutche ummishont8waongan8 nano missi ut anaquabit Jehovah, kah Jehovah nuttann8nukqun nuppaguatauunnanonat.
E.19.13 For we will destroy this place, because the cry of them is waxen great before the face of the LORD; and the LORD hath sent us to destroy it.

α.19.14 Onk Lot sohham, ken8nau wasenumukqutcheh, uttoh weetauomunutcheh wutt[ô]noh, kah n8wau, neepau8k, sohham8k yeu wutche ayeuonganit, newutche Jehovah yeu uppaguatauun otan: qut ut wuskesukqut wasenumukqutcheh neyane ohk8wau mamúskeyimuk.
E.19.14 And Lot went out, and spake unto his sons in law, which married his daughters, and said, Up, get you out of this place; for the LORD will destroy this city. But he seemed as one that mocked unto his sons in law.

α.19.15 Kah nompoáeu Angelsog wahwápimàog Lotuh, n8waog, omkish, nee[m]un kummittumwos kah neeswe kuttânog, yeu apitcheg, ishkont kummahtus, otan ut umm[a]tches[e]onganit.
E.19.15 And when the morning arose, then the angels hastened Lot, saying, Arise, take thy wife, and thy two daughters, which are here; lest thou be consumed in the iniquity of the city.

α.19.16 Kah padjeh n$naiyit, wosketompaog ukkogken[ô]un wunnutcheg, kah wunnutcheg ummittumwussoh, kah wunnutcheganoash neswe wutt[ô]nuh Jehovah k[o]dtumonteanumōt) kah wussohh8un[o]uh & upponouh poquadch8tanit.
E.19.16 And while he lingered, the men laid hold upon his hand, and upon the hand of his wife, and upon the hand of his two daughters; the LORD being merciful unto him: and they brought him forth, and set him without the city.

α.19.17 Onk n$nih pas8wahettit poquadchit n8wau pohquohwutaush kuppomantamóonk, ahqúe ompamuhquash, asuh ahque apsh wame mukoshquttáut, pohquohush en wadchuut, ishkont kutushk[o]mehit.
E.19.17 And it came to pass, when they had brought them forth abroad, that he said, Escape for thy life; look not behind thee, neither stay thou in all the plain; escape to the mountain, lest thou be consumed.

α.19.18 Kah Lot wuttinuh náhoh woi ahquye n$naj nussontimom.
E.19.18 And Lot said unto them, Oh, not so, my LORD:

α.19.19 Kusseh yeuyeu kittinnum miskom kitteamonteaneteaonk ut anaquabean & kummishteaun kummonaneteaonk neasé[a]nshean, wadchanumo[n] nuppomantamoonk matta woh teanuk nuppohquonum8 en wadchuut ishkont wosketuonk nunnahtwunuk kah woh nunnup.
E.19.19 Behold now, thy servant hath found grace in thy sight, and thou hast magnified thy mercy, which thou hast shewed unto me in saving my life; and I cannot escape to the mountain, lest some evil take me, and I die:

α.19.20 Kusseh yeuyeu, yeu otan páhs8 woh nútusishonat, kah pe[a]sin, woh na p[à]udshonti (matta peasininn8?) & pish nukketeahogkou pomantam.
E.19.20 Behold now, this city is near to flee unto, and it is a little one: Oh, let me escape thither, (is it not a little one?) and my soul shall live.

α.19.21 Onk wuttinuh kusseh kutapeneaumaunun yeu$wutche, kah matta woh nukkepuhtea[ù] yeu Otan, ne wéhquetamaean.
E.19.21 And he said unto him, See, I have accepted thee concerning this thing also, that I will not overthrow this city, for the which thou hast spoken.

α.19.22 Kenupsash ná ussishash newutche matta woh toh nutussúh, toh woh na kuppeasin, newajeh hettamuk Otan Zoar.
E.19.22 Haste thee, escape thither; for I cannot do anything till thou be come thither. Therefore the name of the city was called Zoar.

α.19.23 Nepàus paspishop ut ohkeit, Lot petutte[á]dt Zoar,
E.19.23 The sun was risen upon the earth when Lot entered into Zoar.

α.19.24 Neit Jehovah sokanum ut Sodom & ut Gomorra brimstone, kah n8tau wutche Jehovah wutche kesukquiug.
E.19.24 Then the LORD rained upon Sodom and upon Gomorrah brimstone and fire from the LORD out of heaven;

α.19.25 Kah ukkepuhonash yeush Keihtotanash kah wamemukoshqut kah wame neg noh apitcheg Otanatash & ne noh adtanegik ohkekontu.
E.19.25 And he overthrew those cities, and all the plain, and all the inhabitants of the cities, and that which grew upon the ground.

α.19.26 Qut ummit[t]umwussoh ompámuhquaéoh wutch uppusquanit, kah ayeuau pogkomu[h]quonkanu salt.
E.19.26 But his wife looked back from behind him, and she became a pillar of salt.

α.19.27 Kah Abraham t8keu nompo[a]éu en na neepokup ut anaquabit Jehovah.
E.19.27 And Abraham gat up early in the morning to the place where he stood before the LORD:

α.19.28 Kah unnohquaeu nogqueu Sodom kah Gomorra, kah nogqueu wame ne ohkit mukoshqutaut kah umm[o]neneamun, kah kusseh puku[t]aou [o]hket onatuh ahhut sabasumuk áhu[n]nupukutáig.
E.19.28 And he looked toward Sodom and Gomorrah, and toward all the land of the plain, and beheld, and, lo, the smoke of the country went up as the smoke of a furnace.

α.19.29 Onk n$nih God paguatunk otanash mukoshquttaut, God mehquanumau Abraham, kah sohh8waunau Lotuh, wutch noeu kepuhkonittuongunit, ne kepuht[é]adt otanash ne wadohkit Lot.
E.19.29 And it came to pass, when God destroyed the cities of the plain, that God remembered Abraham, and sent Lot out of the midst of the overthrow, when he overthrew the cities in the which Lot dwelt.

α.19.30 Kah Lot sohh[á]m wutch Zoar onk ayeu wàdchuut, kah neswe wutt[à]unoh weeche: newutche wabesu ayin Zoar, kah weetu hassun$nekit nagum kah neswe wuttaunoh.
E.19.30 And Lot went up out of Zoar, and dwelt in the mountain, and his two daughters with him; for he feared to dwell in Zoar: and he dwelt in a cave, he and his two daughters.

α.19.31 Kah mohtomegit unnau weesumussoh K8shun kutchaiyeu8, kah matta woh toh wosketompaun8 yeu ohket kuppetakonukqunnanonut, ne asehettit wame muttaohkéog.
E.19.31 And the firstborn said unto the younger, Our father is old, and there is not a man in the earth to come in unto us after the manner of all the earth:

α.19.32 Hah wuttàttamwéheuntuh K8shin wine, onk woh keneesinan onk woh k8wadchanumauom[ún] 8skanemoneuh K8shin.
E.19.32 Come, let us make our father drink wine, and we will lie with him, that we may preserve seed of our father.

α.19.33 Onk wuttattamweheaog 8shuoh wine ne nohkog, onk mohtomegit petutteau, onk neesin 8shoh, kah matta wahteáu ne seepsuk kah omohkeit.
E.19.33 And they made their father drink wine that night: and the firstborn went in, and lay with her father; and he perceived not when she lay down, nor when she arose.

α.19.34 Onk n$nih nompuhkeit, mohtomegit unnau wesumussoh, kusseh neennup n8sh wanongk8k: wonk wuttattamweheuntuh wine yeu nohkog, kah petutteash, kah neesin onk woh k8wadchanumauómun 8skannemeneuh K8shin
E.19.34 And it came to pass on the morrow, that the firstborn said unto the younger, Behold, I lay yesternight with my father: let us make him drink wine this night also; and go thou in, and lie with him, that we may preserve seed of our father.

α.19.35 Kah wonk 8tattamweheóuh 8sh8oh wine ne nohkog, kah peississit nepau kah wūnesinuh, kah matta wahteau ne seepsuk kah ne omohkeit.
E.19.35 And they made their father drink wine that night also: and the younger arose, and lay with him; and he perceived not when she lay down, nor when she arose.

α.19.36 Nemehkuh neeswe wuttônuh Lot wompequ[a]uog wutche 8sh8oh.
E.19.36 Thus were both the daughters of Lot with child by their father.

α.19.37 Kah mohtomegit wunnaumonieu, kah wuttissowenuh Moab, yeuoh 8sh8oh Moabitog yeu pajeh kesukok.
E.19.37 And the first born bare a son, and called his name Moab: the same is the father of the Moabites unto this day.

α.19.38 Kah wesumussoh wonk wunnaumonieu kah wuttissowenuh Be[n]m[a]mi: yeuoh 8sh8oh wunnechanoh Ammon yeu pajeh kesukok.
E.19.38 And the younger, she also bare a son, and called his name Benammi: the same is the father of the children of Ammon unto this day.

α.20.1 ONK Abraham na 8mun sowanohkomukqut kah wutohtu nashauwe Kadesh kah Shur, kah namshpeyau ut Gerar.
E.20.1 And Abraham journeyed from thence toward the south country, and dwelled between Kadesh and Shur, and sojourned in Gerar.

α.20.2 Kah Abraham n8wau papaume Sarah úmmittumwussoh yeuoh nummissis kah Abimelek ketass8t ut Gerar an8team8 kah wunnemunoh Sarah.
E.20.2 And Abraham said of Sarah his wife, She is my sister: and Abimelech king of Gerar sent, and took Sarah.

α.20.3 Qtu God peyaonau Abimelechuh ut kouénat kah wuttinuh, kusseh ken kenup newutch[e] na mittumwussis neemunadt, newutche noh wussoh.
E.20.3 But God came to Abimelech in a dream by night, and said to him, Behold, thou art but a dead man, for the woman which thou hast taken; for she is a man's wife.

α.20.4 Qut Abimeléch asquam pas8sukauonk & n8wau, Lord, wonk kenéhtoh sampweseae wutohtimoin.
E.20.4 But Abimelech had not come near her: and he said, LORD, wilt thou slay also a righteous nation?

α.20.5 Sunnummatta nuttugk8us yeuoh nummissis & nagum nux nagum nehenwonche n8wop yeuoh nuttonugqus: ut nussampwetea[n]aonganit, & [ma]tta woskehuwomun8ut nunnutcheg y[e]u nutussen.
E.20.5 Said he not unto me, She is my sister? and she, even she herself said, He is my brother: in the integrity of my heart and innocency of my hands have I done this.

α.20.6 Onk God wuttinuh ut kouenat, nux n8wahteoun yeu kutussen k8ssampwet[e]ah[a]onganit, newutche kutchekénu[n]up wutch kummatcheneheneat, newutche matta kitt[in]na numunoh mussin.
E.20.6 And God said unto him in a dream, Yea, I know that thou didst this in the integrity of thy heart; for I also withheld thee from sinning against me: therefore suffered I thee not to touch her.

α.20.7 Kah yeuyeu qushkenumau wosketomp u[m]mittamwussoh, newutche noh Manittowompaenin onk pish kuppeantam wanshhuk, kah pish kuppomant[a]m kah matta qushkenumauoa[d]t, wahteaush pish wunnamuhkut kenup ken kah wame neahtauan.
E.20.7 Now therefore restore the man his wife; for he is a prophet, and he shall pray for thee, and thou shalt live: and if thou restore her not, know thou that thou shalt surely die, thou, and all that are thine.

α.20.8 Newajeh Abimeléch omohku nompoaeu, kah wekomau wame wuttinnumoh, kah yeush kuttw8ongash wuttininnonash wam[u] ut wuttauogk8wóut. onk wosketompaog m8cheke wabesuog.
E.20.8 Therefore Abimelech rose early in the morning, and called all his servants, and told all these things in their ears: and the men were sore afraid.

α.20.9 Neit Abimelech wehkomau Abrahamoh kah wuttinnuh. toh kittinheimûn? kah toh kittinne wuttamhish onk woh kuppaudtah kah nutass8timóonk ummishe matchesenat? kuttinhenneash nish matta woh aséonsh.
E.20.9 Then Abimelech called Abraham, and said unto him, What hast thou done unto us? and what have I offended thee, that thou hast brought on me and on my kingdom a great sin? thou hast done deeds unto me that ought not to be done.

α.20.10 Kah Abimelech unnau Abrahamoh, teaguas kenaum yeu waj ussean?
E.20.10 And Abimelech said unto Abraham, What sawest thou, that thou hast done this thing?

α.20.11 Kah Abraham n8wau, newutche nuttenantamup wunnamuhkut, qushaonk God matta yeu ayeuonganit ohtano, onk woh [n]unnushhukquog newutche nummittumwussoh.
E.20.11 And Abraham said, Because I thought, Surely the fear of God is not in this place; and they will slay me for my wife's sake.

α.20.12 Qut wunnamuhkut noh nummissis, ne wuttónoh n8sh, qut matta wutônuh no-kas, onk n8mittum wussissin.
E.20.12 And yet indeed she is my sister; she is the daughter of my father, but not the daughter of my mother; and she became my wife.

α.20.13 Onk n$nih God ayimungquean nanwúsho[n] wutch weekit n8sh, nuttinóp, yeu k8womoausuonk pish ánhean nish$noh ut uttôh paôog, n8wash papaume neen nunnohtónugqus.
E.20.13 And it came to pass, when God caused me to wander from my father's house, that I said unto her, This is thy kindness which thou shalt shew unto me; at every place whither we shall come, say of me, He is my brother.

α.20.14 Kah Abimelech neemunau shepsoh, kah oxinoh kah wosketompae wuttinnúmoh, kah mittumwussisse wuttinnumoh, kah wuttinnumaunuh Abrahamoh, & ukqushkenumauuh wonk Sarahhoh ummittumwussoh.
E.20.14 And Abimelech took sheep, and oxen, and menservants, and womenservants, and gave them unto Abraham, and restored him Sarah his wife.

α.20.15 Kah Abimelech n8wau kusseh, nutohke ohteau anaquabean, wutohkish uttoh wekeneaman.
E.20.15 And Abimelech said, Behold, my land is before thee: dwell where it pleaseth thee.

α.20.16 Onk Sarah unnau, kusseh nuttinnumau kenohtonugqus nequt muttanonganogkodtash silver: kusseh yeuoh kuttungquequohhou, k8wutche neg weetomukqueaneg, kah wame, yeu unáushkomunàh.
E.20.16 And unto Sarah he said, Behold, I have given thy brother a thousand pieces of silver: behold, he is to thee a covering of the eyes, unto all that are with thee, and with all other: thus she was reproved.

α.20.17 Neit Abraham peantamauau Goduh: onk God neetskeheau Abimelechuh, kah ummittumwussoh, kah mittumwussisse wuttinnúmoh, & neecháog.
E.20.17 So Abraham prayed unto God: and God healed Abimelech, and his wife, and his maidservants; and they bare children.

α.20.18 Newutche God kuppohham wame wuttóontómuk8m8uh ut weekit Abimelech, newutche Sarah ummittumwussoh Abraham
E.20.18 For the LORD had fast closed up all the wombs of the house of Abimelech, because of Sarah Abraham's wife.

α.21.1 ONK Jehovah nátawóhhau Saraihoh ne án8wop, kah Jehovah wuttinhuh Sarahoh ne anomp.
E.21.1 And the LORD visited Sarah as he had said, and the LORD did unto Sarah as he had spoken.

α.21.2 Kah Sarah wompoquau, & neechanishau Abraham wunnaumonuh, ut ukkeechiyeuunneat, ut utt8che neán ukkehtimop God.
E.21.2 For Sarah conceived, and bare Abraham a son in his old age, at the set time of which God had spoken to him.

α.21.3 Onk Abraham wuttussowenuh wunnaumonuh neh neekitteawunche, Sarah neekitteáw[o]nche, Isaak.
E.21.3 And Abraham called the name of his son that was born unto him, whom Sarah bare to him, Isaac.

α.21.4 Onk Abraham quóshquswau wunnaumonuh Isaakoh nishwosuk audtashshikquinápinit, God ne anunn8nop,
E.21.4 And Abraham circumcised his son Isaac being eight days old, as God had commanded him.

α.21.5 Kah Abraham nequt pasuk8e kodtumwohkom neekitteawudt wunnaumonuh Isaakoh.
E.21.5 And Abraham was an hundred years old, when his son Isaac was born unto him.

α.21.6 Onk Sarah n8wau, God nutahánhik, wame n8togig n8weetanum8mukquog.
E.21.6 And Sarah said, God hath made me to laugh, so that all that hear will laugh with me.

α.21.7 Onk n8wau howan woh ánont Abrahamoh, Sarah woh n8s[ó]oh mukiesoh? newutche nunnechanush wunnaumonuh nean kechisuut.
E.21.7 And she said, Who would have said unto Abraham, that Sarah should have given children suck? for I have born him a son in his old age.

α.21.8 Onk mukkies kenuppétu, kah 8cheninnop: & Abraham mishenukissu ne kesukkok Isaak 8chenin[á]t.
E.21.8 And the child grew, and was weaned: and Abraham made a great feast the same day that Isaac was weaned.

α.21.9 Onk Sarah naau wunnaumonuh Hagar Wutegyptianú8 neekiteauompuh Abrahamoh, momontauont.
E.21.9 And Sarah saw the son of Hagar the Egyptian, which she had born unto Abraham, mocking.

α.21.10 Newutche unnau Abrahamoh, pogkes yeuoh missinnóe mittumwussis kah wunnaumonuh, newutche wunnaumonuh yeuoh missinoe mittumwussis, matta pish nómpanunk8 weeche nunnaumonuh, weeche Isaak.
E.21.10 Wherefore she said unto Abraham, Cast out this bondwoman and her son: for the son of this bondwoman shall not be heir with my son, even with Isaac.

α.21.11 Onk yeu 8saume 8tamanatamhukqun ut anaquabit Abraham newutche wunnaumonuh.
E.21.11 And the thing was very grievous in Abraham's sight because of his son.

α.21.12 Onk unnah Go[h] Abrahamoh, ahque 8tamanatamhukqush ut anaquabean newutche wusken, kah newutche kummissinnóe mittumwussis: wame ne an8wadt Sarah n8tamweussish wuttinn8waonk: newutche ut Isaak k8skannémuneog pish henneog.
E.21.12 And God said unto Abraham, Let it not be grievous in thy sight because of the lad, and because of thy bondwoman; in all that Sarah hath said unto thee, hearken unto her voice; for in Isaac shall thy seed be called.

α.21.13 Kah wonk wunnaumonuh missinnomittumwussis pish nutayimau wutohtimoin newutche noh k8skannem.
E.21.13 And also of the son of the bondwoman will I make a nation, because he is thy seed.

α.21.14 Kah Abraham nompoaeu omohku, neemun petukqunnunk, kah wisquad numwohta nuppe, kah wutt[ó]nnumaun Hagaroh, (wunnayéutunon) & wusken, kah moncheaheuh: & monchu, kah nanwushau touohkomukqut Beersheba.
E.21.14 And Abraham rose up early in the morning, and took bread, and a bottle of water, and gave it unto Hagar, putting it on her shoulder, and the child, and sent her away: and she departed, and wandered in the wilderness of Beersheba.

α.21.15 Kah nippe mahtshau wishquadt: onk ponau mukkiesoh agwu poshquodchuut.
E.21.15 And the water was spent in the bottle, and she cast the child under one of the shrubs.

α.21.16 Kah monchu, kah nummatappu uppiuhsukukauou, n[o]asu, woh p[a]udohtamuk, newutche n8wau ahque naumutti wunnupp8onk wusken, kah uppiuhsukukauouh kah wuttauatongqussu kah mau,
E.21.16 And she went, and sat her down over against him a good way off, as it were a bow shot: for she said, Let me not see the death of the child. And she sat over against him, and lift up her voice, and wept.

α.21.17 Kah God n8tam wuttauatonkqussuōk wusken, kah wutangelumoh God wehkomau Hag[à]roh wutche kesukquiug, kah wuttinuh tohspinau Hagar? ahque wabesish, newutche n8tam God wuttauatónkqussuonk wusken uttôh apit.
E.21.17 And God heard the voice of the lad; and the angel of God called to Hagar out of heaven, and said unto her, What aileth thee, Hagar? fear not; for God hath heard the voice of the lad where he is.

α.21.18 Neepaush waapin wusken, kenàmwi[n] kenutcheganit: newutche nutayimau missi wutohtimoin.
E.21.18 Arise, lift up the lad, and hold him in thine hand; for I will make him a great nation.

α.21.19 Kah God w[ô]shwunum wuskesukquash kah naum wutahhamonk, kah monchu, kah numwôhpágunau wishquau nippe, kah wuttattumweheuh wuskenuh.
E.21.19 And God opened her eyes, and she saw a well of water; and she went, and filled the bottle with water, and gave the lad drink.

α.21.20 Kah God weetomau wuskenuh, kah kenuppétu kah weekitam touohkomuk, kah sasompwohtau.
E.21.20 And God was with the lad; and he grew, and dwelt in the wilderness, and became an archer.

α.21.21 Kah ayeu touohkomukqut Haran, kah okasa nemunau mittumwu[s]soh wutch ohkit Egypt.
E.21.21 And he dwelt in the wilderness of Paran: and his mother took him a wife out of the land of Egypt.

α.21.22 Onk n$nih, ne ahquompak Abimelech kah Phikol kehchimugquomp wutayeuteomuh ken8n[à]og Abrahamoh, n8waog, God k8weetomuk nish$noh kutussen.
E.21.22 And it came to pass at that time, that Abimelech and Phichol the chief captain of his host spake unto Abraham, saying, God is with thee in all that thou doest:

α.21.23 Newutche yeuyeu chadchekéemeh yeu nashpeu God, onk matta woh kuppann8wáenéhu, asuh mat nunnàumon, asuh nat nunnaumon wunnaumonuh, netatúpe womoausuonk ne anhen, ne pish kuttinhen & ne ut ohket uttoh anea[u]peyoan.
E.21.23 Now therefore swear unto me here by God that thou wilt not deal falsely with me, nor with my son, nor with my son's son: but according to the kindness that I have done unto thee, thou shalt do unto me, and to the land wherein thou hast sojourned.

α.21.24 Kah Abraham n8wau nutchadchekéyeuam.
E.21.24 And Abraham said, I will swear.

α.21.25 Onk Abraham áushkomau Abimelechuh newutche wuttáhamonk, uttiyeu Abimelech wuttin[u]úmoh chekeeu nemunumohettit.
E.21.25 And Abraham reproved Abimelech because of a well of water, which Abimelech's servants had violently taken away.

α.21.26 Kah Abimelech n8wau, matta n8wá[o]n howan yeu asit, asuh matta kutuss8unah, asuh matta n8tam8unah, qut yeu kesukok.
E.21.26 And Abimelech said, I wot not who hath done this thing; neither didst thou tell me, neither yet heard I of it, but to day.

α.21.27 Kah Abraham neemunau sheepsoh, kah oxenoh, & wuttinnumáuunuh Abimelechuh onk neeswe wunn8wàog.
E.21.27 And Abraham took sheep and oxen, and gave them unto Abimelech; and both of them made a covenant.

α.21.28 Onk Abraham chippúnau nesausuk tahsuoh sqoshimwoh shepwussémesog wutch shepsehtu.
E.21.28 And Abraham set seven ewe lambs of the flock by themselves.

α.21.29 Onk Abimelech unnau Abrahamoh, toh nauwuttam88 yeug nesausuk tahsuog sqoshimwog shipwussémesog neg chaupunàcheg.
E.21.29 And Abimelech said unto Abraham, What mean these seven ewe lambs which thou hast set by themselves?

α.21.30 Onk n8wau, newutche yeug nesausuk tahsuog squoshimwog shepsemesog k8tnôòg nunnutcheganit, neg woh n8wauwaónukquog, yeu nukkuthamunah yeu wuttahamonk.
E.21.30 And he said, For these seven ewe lambs shalt thou take of my hand, that they may be a witness unto me, that I have digged this well.

α.21.31 Newutche wuttehéttamun ne ohke Beersheba: newutche nag neeswe wutchadchekéyeuwónittuog.
E.21.31 Wherefore he called that place Beersheba; because there they sware both of them.

α.21.32 Nemehkuh wunn8waog ut Beersheba neit Abimelech neepau & Phikol kechemugquomp wutayeuwehtéomut, & qushkeog en wutohtuout Philistiansog.
E.21.32 Thus they made a covenant at Beersheba: then Abimelech rose up, and Phichol the chief captain of his host, and they returned into the land of the Philistines.

α.21.33 Onk ohketeau matugquemesash ut Beersheba, kah na$ut wéhquetum 8wesuonk Jehovah micheme pomantamoe Manit.
E.21.33 And Abraham planted a grove in Beersheba, and called there on the name of the LORD, the everlasting God.

α.21.34 Kah Abraham wuttineapeyón wutohtuout Philistins m8chetikqunne.
E.21.34 And Abraham sojourned in the Philistines' land many days.

α.22.1 ONK n$nih, mahche n$nag, God qutcheheau Abrahamoh, onk wuttinuh, Abraham, kah n8wau neen yeu.
E.22.1 And it came to pass after these things, that God did tempt Abraham, and said unto him, Abraham: and he said, Behold, here I am.

α.22.2 Kah n8wau neemun yeuyeu kenaumon kenukquetegheàe Isaak noh womonadt, kah aush ohkit Moriah, kah naut sephaush chikóhsue sephausuonk ut pasuk wadchuut uttiyeu máshamauun.
E.22.2 And he said, Take now thy son, thine only son Isaac, whom thou lovest, and get thee into the land of Moriah; and offer him there for a burnt offering upon one of the mountains which I will tell thee of.

α.22.3 Onk Abraham nompoaeu omohkeu, kah appápuwenehteaú wuttassimoh, onk weechâau neesuo[h] 8skenumoh, kah Isaakoh wunnaumonuh, & papassetaham wuttuhqunash wutche chikohsue sephausuonk, kah neepau kah au ayeuonganit ne anómp God.
E.22.3 And Abraham rose up early in the morning, and saddled his ass, and took two of his young men with him, and Isaac his son, and clave the wood for the burnt offering, and rose up, and went unto the place of which God had told him.

α.22.4 Neit nashikquinukok Abraham spuhquaiau kah naum ayeuonk n8adtut.
E.22.4 Then on the third day Abraham lifted up his eyes, and saw the place afar off.

α.22.5 Kah Abraham unnau 8skenumoh, yeu appek weeche asse, kah neen kah nunkomp y[ó] nuttónan, kah n8wowussumómun, kah wonk hô kuppeyéaunúmun.
E.22.5 And Abraham said unto his young men, Abide ye here with the ass; and I and the lad will go yonder and worship, and come again to you.

α.22.6 Kah Abraham neemunum sephausuwae wuttuhqunash, kah upponamunash Isaakait wunnaumonat, kah neemunum n8teau wunnutcheganit, kah chohquog, kah neeshauog.
E.22.6 And Abraham took the wood of the burnt offering, and laid it upon Isaac his son; and he took the fire in his hand, and a knife; and they went both of them together.

α.22.7 Kah Isaak ken8nau Abrahamoh 8shoh kah n8wau, N8sh, kah n8wau, neen yeu nunnaumon, kah n8wau, kusseh, n8tau, kah wuttuhqunash, qut uttiyeuoh shepsemes, wutch chikohsue sephausuonk;
E.22.7 And Isaac spake unto Abraham his father, and said, My father: and he said, Here am I, my son. And he said, Behold the fire and the wood: but where is the lamb for a burnt offering?

α.22.8 Kah Abraham n8wau[:] nunnaumon, God pish quoshaéiteau wuhhogkuh shepsemésoh wutche chikohtae sephausuonk, kah neeshauog.
E.22.8 And Abraham said, My son, God will provide himself a lamb for a burnt offering: so they went both of them together.

α.22.9 Kah peyaog ayeuonganit ne maṣhamaomp God, kah Abraham na wuttit ayimun Altar, kah wunishitteau wuttuhqunash, kah tahtogkuppunau Isaakoh wunnaumonuh, & upponuh woskeche Altar woskeche wuttuhqunit.
E.22.9 And they came to the place which God had told him of; and Abraham built an altar there, and laid the wood in order, and bound Isaac his son, and laid him on the altar upon the wood.

α.22.10 Kah Abraham summagunum wunnutcheg neemunum chohquog, onk woh nushau wunnaumonuh.
E.22.10 And Abraham stretched forth his hand, and took the knife to slay his son.

α.22.11 Kah wutangelumoh Jehovah 8wekomuh wutch Kesukqut kah n8wau, Abraham Abraham, kah n8wau neen yeu.
E.22.11 And the angel of the LORD called unto him out of heaven, and said, Abraham, Abraham: and he said, Here am I.

α.22.12 Kah n8wau, ahque ponsh kenutcheg nunkompaut, asuh ahque toh$henne, newutche n8wahteoun yeuyeu kukqush God, newutche mutta kukkishpadtamien kenaumon.
E.22.12 And he said, Lay not thine hand upon the lad, neither do thou any thing unto him: for now I know that thou fearest God, seeing thou hast not withheld thy son, thine only son from me.

α.22.13 Kah Abraham spuhquaeu, kah natauwompu, kah kusseh, uppushquanit shepse nomposhim sadtúwunnadchin kuppahtu: kah Abraham naau kah neemunau shepsoh nomposhimwoh, kah wussephâusinuh, wutche ch[i]ohhtae sephausuonk nompu ut wunnaumonuh.
E.22.13 And Abraham lifted up his eyes, and looked, and behold behind him a ram caught in a thicket by his horns: and Abraham went and took the ram, and offered him up for a burnt offering in the stead of his son.

α.22.14 Kah Abraham ne ayeuonk wuttissowetamun, Je[k]ovah$jireh, ne an8womuk ne pajeh yeu kesukok, 8wadchumut Jehovah pish naumun.
E.22.14 And Abraham called the name of that place Jehovahjireh: as it is said to this day, In the mount of the LORD it shall be seen.

α.22.15 Kah wutangelumoh Jehovah weekomau Abrahamoh wutch kesukqut nahoht[ô]eu.
E.22.15 And the angel of the LORD called unto Abraham out of heaven the second time,

α.22.16 Kah n8wau, nashpeu nehenwonche neen nutchadchekeyeuwam, n8wau Jehovah newutche yeu kutussen, kah matta kukkishpadtamieu kenaumon kenukquttegheáe.
E.22.16 And said, By myself have I sworn, saith the LORD, for because thou hast done this thing, and hast not withheld thy son, thine only son:

α.22.17 Wunanitteaon k8nanumoush, Kah m8chekehuwaon numm8chekeh k8skannemeneog, onatuh anogqsog kesukqut, kah onatuh nogayeu keechepam kehtahhennit, kah k8skannemunneog pish ohtóog 8squontam8 ummatwom8oh.
E.22.17 That in blessing I will bless thee, and in multiplying I will multiply thy seed as the stars of the heaven, and as the sand which is upon the sea shore; and thy seed shall possess the gate of his enemies;

α.22.18 Kah ut k8skannemunut wame wutohtimoneash ut ohkit pish wunnanetamunash, newutche kenosweetam nuttiñ8waonk.
E.22.18 And in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed; because thou hast obeyed my voice.

α.22.19 Neit Abraham qushkeu en 8skenúmut kah neepauog, kah weech[à]ittuog en Beersheba, kah Abraham wutohtu ut Beersheba.
E.22.19 So Abraham returned unto his young men, and they rose up and went together to Beersheba; and Abraham dwelt at Beersheba.

α.22.20 Kah n$nah, mahche n$nag, unnonah Abraham, n8wau, kusseh Milcah nagum wonk neechauau keematoh Nahor.
E.22.20 And it came to pass after these things, that it was told Abraham, saying, Behold, Milcah, she hath also born children unto thy brother Nahor;

α.22.21 Huz mohtommeginitcheh kah Buz weematoh. Kah Kemuel 8shoh Aram,
E.22.21 Huz his firstborn, and Buz his brother, and Kemuel the father of Aram,

α.22.22 kah Chesed, kah Hazo, kah Pildash, kah Jidlaph, kah Bethuel.
E.22.22 And Chesed, and Hazo, and Pildash, and Jidlaph, and Bethuel.

α.22.23 Kah Bethuel wuttoneu Rebeckah: yeuoh shwosuk tahsuoh Milk[œ]h wunnechanshonuh Nahoroh weematah Abraham.
E.22.23 And Bethuel begat Rebekah: these eight Milcah did bear to Nahor, Abraham's brother.

α.22.24 Kah nees8kauonche ussowesu Reumah neechau wonk Teba & Taham & Thahash & Maachah.
E.22.24 And his concubine, whose name was Reumah, she bare also Tebah, and Gaham, and Thahash, and Maachah.

α.23.1 KAH Sarah nequt pasak8we kodtumwohkom, & neesneechag & nesausuk yeush ukkodtum8ash uppomantamôonk Sarah.
E.23.1 And Sarah was an hundred and seven and twenty years old: these were the years of the life of Sarah.

α.23.2 Kah Sarah ut nupp8 ut Kirjatharba, ne Hebron ohkeit Kanaan, kah ummauunnitteaaunshuh.
E.23.2 And Sarah died in Kirjatharba; the same is Hebron in the land of Canaan: and Abraham came to mourn for Sarah, and to weep for her.

α.23.3 Kah Abraham neepau wutch anaquábit wunnup8moh, & ken8nau wunnaumonuh Heth, n8wau.
E.23.3 And Abraham stood up from before his dead, and spake unto the sons of Heth, saying,

α.23.4 Neen nuppenuwohteau, kah nuttinneapeyon weeche kenaau, aninnumaiegk ohtauunat posekinittuae ohke, onk woh nupposekin nunnup8m wutch anaquabeh.
E.23.4 I am a stranger and a sojourner with you: give me a possession of a buryingplace with you, that I may bury my dead out of my sight.

α.23.5 Kah wunnechanoh Heth namp8hamauaog Abrahamoh, wuttinouh.
E.23.5 And the children of Heth answered Abraham, saying unto him,

α.23.6 N8taiinnean nussontimom ken manittoe Sontim k8wutche neenawun, toh weekeneaman n8weenohkeinônit posekin kenup8m: matta hawan neenawun woh k8wohquoantamàuun8mun n8wenohkéinónash wutche ken, qut woh kupposekin kenap8m.
E.23.6 Hear us, my lord: thou art a mighty prince among us: in the choice of our sepulchres bury thy dead; none of us shall withhold from thee his sepulchre, but that thou mayest bury thy dead.

α.23.7 Kah Abraham neepau kah náuaeihtauau missininnuh ne wadohkinutcheh, anaquabhettit wunneechanuh Heth.
E.23.7 And Abraham stood up, and bowed himself to the people of the land, even to the children of Heth.

α.23.8 Kah ukken8nuh nahog, n8wau, unnà[n]tàm[ó]g nuppposekinon nup8m wutch anaquabeh, n8tiegk, kah nanompasittumaiegk Ephron wunnaumonuh Zohar.
E.23.8 And he communed with them, saying, If it be your mind that I should bury my dead out of my sight; hear me, and intreat for me to Ephron the son of Zohar,

α.23.9 Onk woh nuttinumunk wuthassunnegk Màchpelah, ne ohtunk 8quahtikonit, uttoh án8adtik woh n8ch aninumungqun wutch ahtaunat posekinatue ohke.
E.23.9 That he may give me the cave of Machpelah, which he hath, which is in the end of his field; for as much money as it is worth he shall give it me for a possession of a buryingplace amongst you.

α.23.10 Kah Ephron weetomau wunneechanoh Heth: kah Ephron wuthittite namp8hamauau Abrahamoh n8tau[a]hettit wunnech[a]noh Heth, wame neg petuteacheg squoantamut wut8tant, n8wau.
E.23.10 And Ephron dwelt among the children of Heth: and Ephron the Hittite answered Abraham in the audience of the children of Heth, even of all that went in at the gate of his city, saying,

α.23.11 Matta nussontimom, n8tah, kuttinumaúunun ohteuk, kah hassunnegk ne na ohtag kittinnumaúunun, anaquabhettit wunnaumon8h nummissinninnumog kuttinnumauunun, posekin kenup8m.
E.23.11 Nay, my lord, hear me: the field give I thee, and the cave that is therein, I give it thee; in the presence of the sons of my people give I it thee: bury thy dead.

α.23.12 Kah Abraham nauaeu ut anaquabhettit missinninnuog ne wadtohkitcheg.
E.23.12 And Abraham bowed down himself before the people of the land.

α.23.13 Kah ken8nau Ephronuh, n8tamohettit missinninnuog neg na apitcheg, n8wau, qut tapeneaumau k8wehquetumoush n8tah kittinnumaush teauguash wutch ohke, nohtinnumah onk hô na nupposekinnon nupp8m.
E.23.13 And he spake unto Ephron in the audience of the people of the land, saying, But if thou wilt give it, I pray thee, hear me: I will give thee money for the field; take it of me, and I will bury my dead there.

α.23.14 Kah Ephron wunnamp8hamauoh Abrahamoh wuttinuh.
E.23.14 And Ephron answered Abraham, saying unto him,

α.23.15 Nussontimom n8tah, ohke nôadtu yauudt paduk88ash shekelsash Silver, ne ne teaguas ut nashauwe nen kah ken? newutche posekin kenup8m.
E.23.15 My lord, hearken unto me: the land is worth four hundred shekels of silver; what is that betwixt me and thee? bury therefore thy dead.

α.23.16 Kah Abraham 8namptauau Ephronuh, kah Abraham quttahhamauau Ephronuh silver né mashamungqut, n8tamohettit wunnaumonuh Heth, yauut pasuk8oash shekelsash silver wanegegkish ut kenugke kodtauwompasuenuog.
E.23.16 And Abraham hearkened unto Ephron; and Abraham weighed to Ephron the silver, which he had named in the audience of the sons of Heth, four hundred shekels of silver, current money with the merchant.

α.23.17 Kah wutohteuk Ephron ohteuk ut Machpal[a]h anaquohtag Mamre, ohteuk kah h[u]ssunnegk ne na ohtag, & wame matugquash ne ohteakonit, 8taht8onganin.
E.23.17 And the field of Ephron which was in Machpelah, which was before Mamre, the field, and the cave which was therein, and all the trees that were in the field, that were in all the borders round about, were made sure

α.23.18 En Abrahamut wutohthuonk anaquabhettit wunnaumonuh Heth, k8wutche wame petutteacheg 8squoantamut wut8tan.
E.23.18 Unto Abraham for a possession in the presence of the children of Heth, before all that went in at the gate of his city.

α.23.19 Yeu mahche n$nag[?] Abraham posekinau Sarahoh ummittumwussoh ha[ss]unnekit ohteakonit Machpel[e]h anaquohtag Mamre ne Hebron ut ohkit Kanaan.
E.23.19 And after this, Abraham buried Sarah his wife in the cave of the field of Machpelah before Mamre: the same is Hebron in the land of Canaan.

α.23.20 Kah ohteuk kah [h]assunnek ne na ohtag ayimu[n] wunnamuhkut wutohti[n] ut Abrahā wutche ohtauun posekinittuae ohke ut kishke wunnaumomuh Heth.
E.23.20 And the field, and the cave that is therein, were made sure unto Abraham for a possession of a buryingplace by the sons of Heth.

α.24.1 ONK Abraham kutchisu8, kah sepepomantam, kah Jehvoah mahche wunnanumuh Abraham wutch wame teanteaguashinish.
E.24.1 And Abraham was old, and well stricken in age: and the LORD had blessed Abraham in all things.

α.24.2 Kah Abraham unnau masugkenutche wuttinnumoh ut wekit nanawunnumúnit wame ne adtashadch[á]suadt, ponsh k8wehquetumoush kenutcheg agwu neehquaut.
E.24.2 And Abraham said unto his eldest servant of his house, that ruled over all that he had, Put, I pray thee, thy hand under my thigh:

α.24.3 Kah kutchadchekeyeuwahush nashpeu Jehovah Keitannit kesukqut, kah Keihtannit ut muttaohket, onk woh m[a]t keneemunoh ummittamwussoh nunnaumon, wuttâun8[ô]h Kananitog neg weetomukuppanneg.
E.24.3 And I will make thee swear by the LORD, the God of heaven, and the God of the earth, that thou shalt not take a wife unto my son of the daughters of the Canaanites, among whom I dwell:

α.24.4 Qut woh kuttôm nehenwonche nutohket, kah nutti[nón]kumòhtu kah neemun ummittumwussoh nunnaumon Isaak.
E.24.4 But thou shalt go unto my country, and to my kindred, and take a wife unto my son Isaac.

α.24.5 Kah wuttinnúmun wuttinuh, paguodche mittamwossis matta weekontam8h yeu pajeh weechógqunat yeu ohket: neit wonk hô nuppasou kenaumon ohkei[t] ne w[ó]mop.
E.24.5 And the servant said unto him, Peradventure the woman will not be willing to follow me unto this land: must I needs bring thy son again unto the land from whence thou camest?

α.24.6 [Onk] Abraham wuttinuh, ahque pas8 na wonk nunnaumon.
E.24.6 And Abraham said unto him, Beware thou that thou bring not my son thither again.

α.24.7 Jehovah Keihta[nn]it ut kesukqut, noh neemunit wutch weekit n8sh, onk wutch ohkit nuttino[n]kumóut, onk noh kan8shop, kah noh chadchekeimip, n8wau, Yeu kittinnumáunun ohke wutch k8skannemunneut, noh pish an8nau wutangelumoh ut anaquaushaan, kah na pish k8tnon ummittamwussoh nunnaumon.
E.24.7 The LORD God of heaven, which took me from my father's house, and from the land of my kindred, and which spake unto me, and that sware unto me, saying, Unto thy seed will I give this land; he shall send his angel before thee, and thou shalt take a wife unto my son from thence.

α.24.8 Kah mittamwossis matta weekontam8g kutasukongqunat, neit woh kuppahkhit yeu wutch nutchadchekeyeuaonganit, webe ahque pas8 nunnaumon na$ut.
E.24.8 And if the woman will not be willing to follow thee, then thou shalt be clear from this my oath: only bring not my son thither again.

α.24.9 Kah wutt[i]númun wunnutcheg ponam Abraham wussontimomut agwu weehquaut, kah wutchadchekeimoh papaume nish aunaksh.
E.24.9 And the servant put his hand under the thigh of Abraham his master, and sware to him concerning that matter.

α.24.10 Kah wuttinnúmun neemunau piukqussuoh Kamelsoh, wussontimom Ukkamelsoh, kah monchu (newutche wame ummaumachiash wussontimomuh,[,] wunnutcheganit ohtaash) kah neepau, kah monchu en Mesopotamia wut8tanit Nahor.
E.24.10 And the servant took ten camels of the camels of his master, and departed; for all the goods of his master were in his hand: and he arose, and went to Mesopotamia, unto the city of Nahor.

α.24.11 Kah ukkamelsumoh uppesitúkqussumheuh ut poquadchu 8tanit, kishke wuttahhamonganit, wanonk88k, mittumwussisog ât8chu sohamohettit wutáhapahettit.
E.24.11 And he made his camels to kneel down without the city by a well of water at the time of the evening, even the time that women go out to draw water.

α.24.12 Kah n8wau, Woi Jehovah Ummanitt8moh nussontimom Abraham, k8wehquetumoush aninnumah wunne pomushaonk yeu kesukok, kah womóausuaineh nussontimom Abraham.
E.24.12 And he said O LORD God of my master Abraham, I pray thee, send me good speed this day, and shew kindness unto my master Abraham.

α.24.13 Kusseh, yeu nunneepauun kishke wuttahamong[a]nit, kah wuttâun8oh wosketompaog 8tanit, sohhamóhettit wadhupahettit.
E.24.13 Behold, I stand here by the well of water; and the daughters of the men of the city come out to draw water:

α.24.14 Onk n$nag nunksqua noh woh anog, ponsh kupp8thansh onk woh n8tattam, kah n8wadt, wuttattash, kah wonk n8tattamweh kukkamelsog, n$noh 8wutch ânadcheh kittinnúm Isaak: kah neit woh n8wahteóh k8womausuneheaonk nussontimom.
E.24.14 And let it come to pass, that the damsel to whom I shall say, Let down thy pitcher, I pray thee, that I may drink; and she shall say, Drink, and I will give thy camels drink also: let the same be she that thou hast appointed for thy servant Isaac; and thereby shall I know that thou hast shewed kindness unto my master.

α.24.15 Kah n$nih, asq maht8og, kusseh, Rebeckeh soham noh neeteup ut Bethuel, wunnaumonuh Milchah ummittumwussoh Nahor, weematoh Abraham: upp8thansh ohteau wuttugkeit.
E.24.15 And it came to pass, before he had done speaking, that, behold, Rebekah came out, who was born to Bethuel, son of Milcah, the wife of Nahor, Abraham's brother, with her pitcher upon her shoulder.

α.24.16 Onk nunksquau wunneetu m8cheke móneaúunat penomp matta wosketomp 8waheuh: onk n8keu ut wutta[h]amonganit kah numwôquom upp8thonch8mut, kah kadchu.
E.24.16 And the damsel was very fair to look upon, a virgin, neither had any man known her: and she went down to the well, and filled her pitcher, and came up.

α.24.17 Kah wuttinnúmun quogqueu wunnogskauoh, kah n8wau, Wuttattamwuhhe k8weehquetumoush ohguhsemese nippe ut p8thonch[ú]ut.
E.24.17 And the servant ran to meet her, and said, Let me, I pray thee, drink a little water of thy pitcher.

α.24.18 Kah n8wau wuttattash Nussontimom kah kenuppesen, kah n8kinum upp8thonchu ut wunnutcheganit kah 8tattamehuh.
E.24.18 And she said, Drink, my lord: and she hasted, and let down her pitcher upon her hand, and gave him drink.

α.24.19 Kah mahche wuttattamweheunt, n8wau, kah wonk n8thupau Kukkamelsog, onk mahts[i]pamhettit.
E.24.19 And when she had done giving him drink, she said, I will draw water for thy camels also, until they have done drinking.

α.24.20 Kah ukkénuppeússen, sokunum upp8thansh ut neetasuog 8tattamwaech8wont, kah quogqueu en wutahamonganit wuttóhupau, wutóhupauau wame ukkmelsumoh.
E.24.20 And she hasted, and emptied her pitcher into the trough, and ran again unto the well to draw water, and drew for all his camels.

α.24.21 Kah wosketomp monchantog chequnikompau, uttoh wuttin Jeh[o]vah wunnantamun uppomushaonk asuh matta.
E.24.21 And the man wondering at her held his peace, to wit whether the LORD had made his journey prosperous or not.

α.24.22 Onk n$nih Kamelsog mahche pissumwóhettit, woskeetomp neemunum Golde sogussóhou unatohkéquan paushe shekel, kah neenash kehtiputénapeash wutch wunnutchegash, unatóhkéqunash piukqutash shekelsash gold.
E.24.22 And it came to pass, as the camels had done drinking, that the man took a golden earring of half a shekel weight, and two bracelets for her hands of ten shekels weight of gold;

α.24.23 Kah n8wau howan wuttaunoh ken? missohamah k8wehquetumoush, mohchoi K8sh week toh woh apéog?
E.24.23 And said, Whose daughter art thou? tell me, I pray thee: is there room in thy father's house for us to lodge in?

α.24.24 Kah wuttinuh, neen wuttaunoh Bethuel, wunnaumonuh Milchah nekitteauwómpuh Nahoroh.
E.24.24 And she said unto him, I am the daughter of Bethuel the son of Milcah, which she bare unto Nahor.

α.24.25 Wonk wuttinuh n8wadchanumumun sekupoghungash & weatchiminneash wamut kah toh woh kaemuk.
E.24.25 She said moreover unto him, We have both straw and provender enough, and room to lodge in.

α.24.26 Onk wosketomp nauwaémo uppuhkuk onk wowussumau Jehovah.
E.24.26 And the man bowed down his head, and worshipped the LORD.

α.24.27 Kah n8wau 8nanumunaj Jehovah ummánitt8moh nussontimómoh tohneadt ummonaneteaonk, kah 8nomway[e]uonk pomushàon mayut, Jéhovah nutuss8wúnuk weekit nussontimom waweematutog.
E.24.27 And he said, Blessed be the LORD God of my master Abraham, who hath not left destitute my master of his mercy and his truth: I being in the way, the LORD led me to the house of my master's brethren.

α.24.28 Kah nunksquau monchashau, kah wuttinonash yeushoh neg noh àpitcheg weekit okasoh.
E.24.28 And the damsel ran, and told them of her mother's house these things.

α.24.29 Kah Rebekah wunohtónukqussu, kah ussowenau Laban, kah Laban sohwushau ussishau wosketompaut wutahamonganit.
E.24.29 And Rebekah had a brother, and his name was Laban: and Laban ran out unto the man, unto the well.

α.24.30 Onk n$nih, nag* wussagsóhou, kah kehtúpittenàpeash ut wunnutcheganit ummissisoh, an8wadt, yeu nuttugqun wosketomp, onk peyaónau wosketomp[u]h, kah kusseh, neepau kishke Kamelsut, kishke wutahamonganit.
E.24.30 And it came to pass, when he saw the earring and bracelets upon his sister's hands, and when he heard the words of Rebekah his sister, saying, Thus spake the man unto me; that he came unto the man; and, behold, he stood by the camels at the well.

α.24.31 Kah n8wau, pétutteash ken k8nanumuk Jehovah, tohwutch neepaiyean poquadchit? newutche nummahche quaquashweetam wetu, kah ayeuonk toh aphettit Kamelsog.
E.24.31 And he said, Come in, thou blessed of the LORD; wherefore standest thou without? for I have prepared the house, and room for the camels.

α.24.32 Onk wosketomp petutteau wetuómut, kah ómpineau ukkamelsoh, kah wuttinnumáup sekuppoghungash kah weatchiminneash wutche kamelsog, kah nippe kutchessittauun wussetash, kah wussetoash wosketompaog wechógqutcheh.
E.24.32 And the man came into the house: and he ungirded his camels, and gave straw and provender for the camels, and water to wash his feet, and the men's feet that were with him.

α.24.33 Kah upponamauóoh mechum anaquabenit, n8wau, mátta nummetsúh, onk m[a]hche éyon nuttinshàonk, kah n8wau, keket8kash.
E.24.33 And there was set meat before him to eat: but he said, I will not eat, until I have told mine errand. And he said, Speak on.

α.24.34 Kah n8wau, nen Abraham wuttinnúmoh.
E.24.34 And he said, I am Abraham's servant.

α.24.35 Onk Jehovah misheu wunnanumau nussontimomoh, kah ummishheuh, kah wuttinnúmauh flocksog kah heardsog, silver kah gold, wuttinnúmoh wosketompuh: kah mittumwossissoh, kamelsoh kah assesoh.
E.24.35 And the LORD hath blessed my master greatly; and he is become great: and he hath given him flocks, and herds, and silver, and gold, and menservants, and maidservants, and camels, and asses.

α.24.36 Kah Sarah ummittumwussoh nussontimom 8chekitau[ó]panuh wunnaumonuh nussontimomuh kahchisqo8ut: kah wuttinnumauonash wame wuta[h]toongash.
E.24.36 And Sarah my master's wife bare a son to my master when she was old: and unto him hath he given all that he hath.

α.24.37 Kah nussontimom nutchadchekeyeuwàhuk, n8wau, matta keneemunóh ummittumwussoh nunnaúmon wutaun8oh Kananite[o]g uttiyeu ohke wadohkéomp.
E.24.37 And my master made me swear, saying, Thou shalt not take a wife to my son of the daughters of the Canaanites, in whose land I dwell:

α.24.38 Qut woh kuttôm n8sh weekit, kah nuttinauwomôuhtu, kah neemun ummittumwussoh nunnaumon.
E.24.38 But thou shalt go unto my father's house, and to my kindred, and take a wife unto my son.

α.24.39 Kah nuttinop nussontimom, paguodche mittamwussis matta nutasukunk8.
E.24.39 And I said unto my master, Peradventure the woman will not follow me.

α.24.40 Kah nuttinuk, Jeho[u]ah noh anaquabit nuppomusham, noh pish k8weecháhtinug wutangelsumoh, kah k8[n]teunk kummay, kah pish keneemun ummittumwssuoh nunnaumon wutch nutauwamôtu, kah n8sh wekit. 
E.24.40 And he said unto me, The LORD, before whom I walk, will send his angel with thee, and prosper thy way; and thou shalt take a wife for my son of my kindred, and of my father's house:

α.24.41 Neit pish kuppahkeh kuhhog wutch nutchadchekeyeuwaonk peyôan nutauwamóhtu, kah mat eninnumungk8an, pish kuppahke kuhhog wutche nutchadchekeyeuwaonganit.
E.24.41 Then shalt thou be clear from this my oath, when thou comest to my kindred; and if they give not thee one, thou shalt be clear from my oath.

α.24.42 Kah nuppeyam yeu kesukok wutahamonganit, kah nussip, woi Jehovah um-manitt8moh nussontimom Abraham, wunnehteauan nummay uttôh àyoi.
E.24.42 And I came this day unto the well, and said, O LORD God of my master Abraham, if now thou do prosper my way which I go:

α.24.43 Kusseh nunneepóh kishke wutahamonganit, kah woh n$nih, nunksqua paont wuttúhhupau, kah unog, aninnumah k8wehquetumoush nippemes wutch kupp8th[o]nchúut, woh n8tattam.
E.24.43 Behold, I stand by the well of water; and it shall come to pass, that when the virgin cometh forth to draw water, and I say to her, Give me, I pray thee, a little water of thy pitcher to drink;

α.24.44 Onk unugquéan, wuttattash ken, kah wonk n8thupau kukkamelsog: n$noh 8wutch ne[h] Jehovah an8wóhpah wunnaumonuh nussontimom.
E.24.44 And she say to me, Both drink thou, and I will also draw for thy camels: let the same be the woman whom the LORD hath appointed out for my master's son.

α.24.45 Kah asq maht8aon ut nuttàhut, kusseh, Rebekah sohham kah uppothonchúm wuttogkit ohteau, kah w[ô]msu en wutahamonganit, kah wuttuhhuppau, kah nuttinôp wuttattam[ó]heh k8wehquetumoush.
E.24.45 And before I had done speaking in mine heart, behold, Rebekah came forth with her pitcher on her shoulder; and she went down unto the well, and drew water: and I said unto her, Let me drink, I pray thee.

α.24.46 Kah ukkenuppesen, kah unn8kinumun upp8thonchúm wutch wuhhogkat, kah n8wau, wuttattash, kah wonk n8tattamweh kukkamelsog, kah n8t[a]ttamup kah wonk wuttattamweheau kamelsoh.
E.24.46 And she made haste, and let down her pitcher from her shoulder, and said, Drink, and I will give thy camels drink also: so I drank, and she made the camels drink also.

α.24.47 Kah nunnat8tom[a]u[o]p, kah nussip howan wuttaunoh ken? kah n8wau wuttaunoh Bethuel, wunnaumonuh Nahor, noh Milchah nekitteauompuh: Kah nupponumau sogkuss[o]hou wuskesukqut kah keteuputenàp[e]ash ut wunnutcheganit.
E.24.47 And I asked her, and said, Whose daughter art thou? And she said, the daughter of Bethuel, Nahor's son, whom Milcah bare unto him: and I put the earring upon her face, and the bracelets upon her hands.

α.24.48 Kah nunn[a]aunum nuppuhkuk, kah n8wowussumup Jehovah, kah nuttabuttantamau God ummanitt8moh nussontimom Abraham, noh pas8gk8h en sampwe mayut neemunon nussontimom weematoh wuttaunoh wutch wunnaumonuh.
E.24.48 And I bowed down my head, and worshipped the LORD, and blessed the LORD God of my master Abraham, which had led me in the right way to take my master's brother's daughter unto his son.

α.24.49 Onk yeuyeu, womonetuáeu unnehheòg, kah sampwe[n]eheog, nussontimom, ussegq, asuh matta, ussegq, onk woh nukqushkem menadchéanit assuh nuttinohkôunit.
E.24.49 And now if ye will deal kindly and truly with my master, tell me: and if not, tell me; that I may turn to the right hand, or to the left.

α.24.50 Neit Laban kah Bethuel wunnamp8hamauoh, kah n8waog: yeu 8m88 Jehovah$ut, matta woh kittinninn8mun màchuk asuh wunnegik.
E.24.50 Then Laban and Bethuel answered and said, The thing proceedeth from the LORD: we cannot speak unto thee bad or good.

α.24.51 Kusseh Rebekah ut anaquabean, neemun, kah monchish, kah kussontimom wunnaumonuh ummittumwossisitch, nean8wop Jehovah.
E.24.51 Behold, Rebekah is before thee, take her, and go, and let her be thy master's son's wife, as the LORD hath spoken.

α.24.52 Onk n$nih Abraham wuttinnúmoh n8tog ukkuttw8ongash woussumau Jehovah en ohkeau.
E.24.52 And it came to pass, that, when Abraham's servant heard their words, he worshipped the LORD, bowing himself to the earth.

α.24.53 Onk wuttinnúmun sohwhunum nompakouunash silver, nompakouunash gold kah hogk8wongash, kah wuttinnumaunash Rebekah: kah aninnumauau wunohtonugqussoh, kah okasoh waanegugish.
E.24.53 And the servant brought forth jewels of silver, and jewels of gold, and raiment, and gave them to Rebekah: he gave also to her brother and to her mother precious things.

α.24.54 Kah nag meetsuog, kah wuttattamwog, nagum, kah wosketompuh neh weetomukqutcheh, kah 8wampanohkon, kah omohkéog mohtompog, kah n8wau, monche[à]heh en nussontimomut.
E.24.54 And they did eat and drink, he and the men that were with him, and tarried all night; and they rose up in the morning, and he said, Send me away unto my master.

α.24.55 Kah wunohtónugqussoh kah okasoh n8w[à]og, nunksqua n8wetómukqunan ogguhse quinne yean piukkukquinne, mahche ne nag pish monchu.
E.24.55 And her brother and her mother said, Let the damsel abide with us a few days, at the least ten; after that she shall go.

α.24.56 Kah wuttinuh nahog, ahque wuttamhegq, Jehovah wunnehteunk nummay, moncheahegq onk woh nuttom nussontimomut,
E.24.56 And he said unto them, Hinder me not, seeing the LORD hath prospered my way; send me away that I may go to my master.

α.24.57 Onk n8waog, nowehkomómun nunksquau, onk nat8tomauóun ut wutt8nut.
E.24.57 And they said, We will call the damsel, and enquire at her mouth.

α.24.58 Kah weekomáog Rebekah, kah wuttinouh, yeuoh woh k8wechau wosketomp? kah n8wau, n8weechau:
E.24.58 And they called Rebekah, and said unto her, Wilt thou go with this man? And she said, I will go.

α.24.59 Onk wuttinánumóuh monchek Rebekah ummisses8oh, kah nonomukqutche kah wuttinnúmoh Abraham kah 8wosketompomoh.
E.24.59 And they sent away Rebekah their sister, and her nurse, and Abraham's servant, and his men.

α.24.60 Onk wunnanumáog Rebekah, kah wuttinóuh ken nummissesin, ken muttanonganúush piukque muttanonganog kussuog, kah k8skannemuneog ahtauhettich 8squoantam8ash nag sekeneauóncheg.
E.24.60 And they blessed Rebekah, and said unto her, Thou art our sister, be thou the mother of thousands of millions, and let thy seed possess the gate of those which hate them.

α.24.61 Kah Rebekah neepau, kah wunnunksquomoh, kah nai8mukquog kamelsoh, kah asukauóog wosketompuh: kah wuttinnúmun, neemunau Rebekah kah monchu.
E.24.61 And Rebekah arose, and her damsels, and they rode upon the camels, and followed the man: and the servant took Rebekah, and went his way.

α.24.62 Kah Isaak om mayut wutahamonganit Lahairoi, newutche wutohtu sowan ohkit.
E.24.62 And Isaac came from the way of the well Lahairoi; for he dwelt in the south country.

α.24.63 Onk Isaak sohham en ohteakonit wunnonkquáe natwontame peantamunat, kah aspuhquait, naau, kah kusseh kamelsoh pey[á]og.
E.24.63 And Isaac went out to meditate in the field at the eventide: and he lifted up his eyes, and saw, and, behold, the camels were coming.

α.24.64 Kah Rebekah spuhqu[a]eu, kah nauont Isaakoh, n8keu wutch kamelsut.
E.24.64 And Rebekah lifted up her eyes, and when she saw Isaac, she lighted off the camel.

α.24.65 Newutche unnop wuttinnúmu[nu]h, howan yeuoh wosketomp pamushadt ohteakonit kenogskunkqun? onk wuttinnúmun n8wau nussontimom, newutche neemunoh yán[e]qu[o]h[h8], weyánequawhun.
E.24.65 For she had said unto the servant, What man is this that walketh in the field to meet us? And the servant had said, It is my master: therefore she took a vail, and covered herself.

α.24.66 Kah wuttinnumun wuttinnon Isaakuh wame ne asit.
E.24.66 And the servant told Isaac all things that he had done.

α.24.67 Onk Isaak uppas8oh okasa Sarahoh wekit, kah nemunnau Rebekah kah 8mittumwussissinneuh, kah 8womonuh: onk Isaak wekontamwaheau mahche nupinit okasa.
E.24.67 And Isaac brought her into his mother Sarah's tent, and took Rebekah, and she became his wife; and he loved her: and Isaac was comforted after his mother's death.

α.25.1 NEit wonk Abraham ummittumwussu, kah ussowesu Ketura.
E.25.1 Then again Abraham took a wife, and her name was Keturah.

α.25.2 Kah wunnekitteunkquoh Zimram, kah Jokshan, kah Medan, kah Midian, kah Ishbak, kah Shuah.
E.25.2 And she bare him Zimran, and Jokshan, and Medan, and Midian, and Ishbak, and Shuah.

α.25.3 Kah Jokshan wunnaumonaeu Sheba kah Dedan, kah wunnaumonuh Dedan Ashurun, kah Letushim, kah Leumim.
E.25.3 And Jokshan begat Sheba, and Dedan. And the sons of Dedan were Asshurim, and Letushim, and Leummim.

α.25.4 Kah wunnaumonuh Midiah, Epha, kah Epher, kah Hanoch, kah Abida, kah Eldaah, wame yeuh wunneechanoh Ketura.
E.25.4 And the sons of Midian; Ephah, and Epher, and Hanoch, and Abidah, and Eldaah. All these were the children of Keturah.

α.25.5 Onk Abraham aninnumauau wame wutahtuonk Isaakuh.
E.25.5 And Abraham gave all that he had unto Isaac.

α.25.6 Qut wunnaumonáuh 8wisquinneunk wutch Abraham, Abraham wuttinnumauh aninnumoadtuongash, kah ummoncheàheuh en wutchepwoou, wutch Isaak wunnaumonat (as pomantog) en wutchepwoóhket.
E.25.6 But unto the sons of the concubines, which Abraham had, Abraham gave gifts, and sent them away from Isaac his son, while he yet lived, eastward, unto the east country.

α.25.7 Kah yeush ukkesukodtumash kodtumoàsh Abraham uppomantamóonk ne pamontog, nequt pasuk8we kodtumo, kah nesausuk tahshinchag kodtumo, kah nabo napanna tahshit kodtumwae. 
E.25.7 And these are the days of the years of Abraham's life which he lived, an hundred threescore and fifteen years.

α.25.8 Neit Abraham nashauwonau wunnashauanitt8moh, kah nupp8 ut wunne kutchisúunneat mahtauntam, kah sepepomantam, kah mukinàu en ummissinninnúmehtu.
E.25.8 Then Abraham gave up the ghost, and died in a good old age, an old man, and full of years; and was gathered to his people.

α.25.9 Kah wunnaumonuh Isa[a]k kah Ishmael nag upposekinóuh, ut hassunnekit Machpelah, wutohteakonit Ephron wunnaumonuh Zohar wuttahittit, anaquohtag Mamre.
E.25.9 And his sons Isaac and Ishmael buried him in the cave of Machpelah, in the field of Ephron the son of Zohar the Hittite, which is before Mamre;

α.25.10 Ne ohteuk âdt omop Abraham wunnaumonuh Heth, na Abraham posakinon, kah Sarah ummittumwussoh.
E.25.10 The field which Abraham purchased of the sons of Heth: there was Abraham buried, and Sarah his wife.

α.25.11 Onk n$nih mahche nupuk Abraham, God wunnanumau wunnaumonuh Isaak, kah Isaak wutohtu kishke wutahamonganit Lahairoi.
E.25.11 And it came to pass after the death of Abraham, that God blessed his son Isaac; and Isaac dwelt by the well Lahairoi.

α.25.12 Kah yeush wutontseongash Ishmael wunnaumonuh Abraham, noh Hagar wut-egyptian, ummaidumoh Sarah neechauompuh Abrahamoh.
E.25.12 Now these are the generations of Ishmael, Abraham's son, whom Hagar the Egyptian, Sarah's handmaid, bare unto Abraham:

α.25.13 Kah yeush 8wesuongash wunnaumonuh Ishmael nashpeu 8wesuongan88ash, neyaunag uppometeuonganú8ash, mohtomekheonche Ishmael, Nebajoth, kah K[e]dar, kah Adbeel, kah Mibsam[.]
E.25.13 And these are the names of the sons of Ishmael, by their names, according to their generations: the firstborn of Ishmael, Nebajoth; and Kedar, and Adbeel, and Mibsam,

α.25.14 Kah Mishma, kah Dumah, kah Massa.
E.25.14 And Mishma, and Dumah, and Massa,

α.25.15 H[á]dar kah Tema, Jetur, kah Naphish, kah Kedemah[.]
E.25.15 Hadar, and Tema, Jetur, Naphish, and Kedemah:

α.25.16 Yeuh wunnaumonuh Ishmael kah yeush wuttissow[e]suongan88ash, neyaunag wut8tenáoash kah 8wonkon8sin88ash: nabo neesuog sontimóog, neyaunag wutohtimôn8woash.
E.25.16 These are the sons of Ishmael, and these are their names, by their towns, and by their castles; twelve princes according to their nations.

α.25.17 Kah yeush kodtum8ash uppomantamóonk Ishmael, nequt pasuk8e kodtumo, shwinchag kodtumo, kah nesausuk tashit kodtumwae, kah nashauwoneau wunnashauanitt8moh, kah nupp8, kah mukinau en ummissinninnúmehtu.
E.25.17 And these are the years of the life of Ishmael, an hundred and thirty and seven years: and he gave up the ghost and died; and was gathered unto his people.

α.25.18 Onk wutohtuog wutch Havilah onk yean Shur, ne ohteau anaquohtag Egypt, nogquein Assyria: kah nupp8 anaquabenit weematoh.
E.25.18 And they dwelt from Havilah unto Shur, that is before Egypt, as thou goest toward Assyria: and he died in the presence of all his brethren.

α.25.19 Kah yeush wutontseongash Isaak, wunnaumonuh Abraham, Abraham wunnaumoneau Isa[a]k.
E.25.19 And these are the generations of Isaac, Abraham's son: Abraham begat Isaac:

α.25.20 Kah Isaak yauunchage kodtumwohkom womittumwussissit Rebekah wuttaunoh Bethuel wussyrian, Uppadan-Aram, ummississoh Laban Wussyrian.
E.25.20 And Isaac was forty years old when he took Rebekah to wife, the daughter of Bethuel the Syrian of Padanaram, the sister to Laban the Syrian.

α.25.21 Onk Isaak wehquetumauau Jehovah wutche ummittumwussoh, newutche mehchéyeu, onk Jehovah ukkittumonkutaúoh, kah Rebekah ne ummittumwussoh wompoquauoh.
E.25.21 And Isaac intreated the LORD for his wife, because she was barren: and the LORD was intreated of him, and Rebekah his wife conceived.

α.25.22 Kah mukkiésog wogkóuineánittuog ut wuttinnomhogkat, kah n8wau, wunnamuhkut n$nag, tohwutc yeu spinai? onk monchu onk woh nat8tomauau Jehovah.
E.25.22 And the children struggled together within her; and she said, If it be so, why am I thus? And she went to enquire of the LORD.

α.25.23 Kah Jehovah wuttinuh: neesinash wutohtimóineash ohtáash ut kutôontómukkomut: kah neese chippissuog missinninnúog pish chippeog wutch kenogkus[s]it: kah nequt chippissuog missinninnúog pish wutanuwunuhkésumóuh onkatoge missinninnúh, kah masugkenuk pish 8tinnúmuneu[h] peississit.
E.25.23 And the LORD said unto her, Two nations are in thy womb, and two manner of people shall be separated from thy bowels; and the one people shall be stronger than the other people; and the elder shall serve the younger.

α.25.24 Onk mahche tahshikquinógoh ne woh adt nee[c]hadt, kusseh ogquo[h]s[ú]8og ut wutôontómukkomut. 
E.25.24 And when her days to be delivered were fulfilled, behold, there were twins in her womb.

α.25.25 Kah negonnu sohhog musquesu, wame ut woskeche, onatuh mashquoshiàmuk, kah wuttissowenuh Esau.
E.25.25 And the first came out red, all over like an hairy garment; and they called his name Esau.

α.25.26 Kah mahche n$nag weematoh sohweeoh, kah wunnutcheg kogk[ô]unum Esau wogqu[an] kah 8wesuonk hettamun Jakob, kah Isaak nequtta tohshinchage kodtumwohkom nekitteaùut.
E.25.26 And after that came his brother out, and his hand took hold on Esau's heel; and his name was called Jacob: and Isaac was threescore years old when she bare them.

α.25.27 Onk mukitchogqussuog kenuppétuog, kah Esau [àn]adchau wosketomp ut ohteakonit: onk Jakob unninnanum8, apeu weetuómut.
E.25.27 And the boys grew: and Esau was a cunning hunter, a man of the field; and Jacob was a plain man, dwelling in tents.

α.25.28 Kah Isaak wómoneau Esauoh, newutch meechwoh 8weyausum, qut Rebekah womonau Jakoboh.
E.25.28 And Isaac loved Esau, because he did eat of his venison: but Rebekah loved Jacob.

α.25.29 Kah Jakob neepatau sôbàhég: kah Esau 8m ohteakonit kah sauunum.
E.25.29 And Jacob sod pottage: and Esau came from the field, and he was faint:

α.25.30 Kah Esau unnau Jakoboh, ne moshqu[a]g unnanumeh quompatash ne moshquag k8wehquetumoush newutche nussauunum newadche hennit Edom.
E.25.30 And Esau said to Jacob, Feed me, I pray thee, with that same red pottage; for I am faint: therefore was his name called Edom.

α.25.31 Kah Jakob n8wau, eyeu kesukok enninnumah kummohtomegitteàowonk.
E.25.31 And Jacob said, Sell me this day thy birthright.

α.25.32 Kah Esau n8wau, kusseh neen nahen n$nup, kah toh woh nuttin wunnenéhukqun yeu mohtommégitteaeuwonk?
E.25.32 And Esau said, Behold, I am at the point to die: and what profit shall this birthright do to me?

α.25.33 Kah Jakob n8wau, chadchekeimeh yeu kesukok, kah wutchadchekéimuh, káh aninumauau ummohtommégittauoonk Jakoboh.
E.25.33 And Jacob said, Swear to me this day; and he sware unto him: and he sold his birthright unto Jacob.

α.25.34 Neit Jakob assamau Esauoh petukqunneg, kah sabaheg tuttuppuhquamash, kah meetsu, kah wuttattam, kah neepau, kah monchu kah Esau umishanóntamuh ummohtommegittauoonk.
E.25.34 Then Jacob gave Esau bread and pottage of lentiles; and he did eat and drink, and rose up, and went his way: thus Esau despised his birthright.

α.26.1 ONk mo mahshagquodt ohkit, matta negonne mahshogquodt ut ukkesukodtumut Abraham qut onkatuk, kah Isaak au Abimelekait ketass8timwe Philisti[m]s, ut Gerar.
E.26.1 And there was a famine in the land, beside the first famine that was in the days of Abraham. And Isaac went unto Abimelech king of the Philistines unto Gerar.

α.26.2 Kah Jehovah wunnaéihtauoh, kah n8wau, ahque w8msish en Egypt, wutohkish en ohkit uttiyeu ànon.
E.26.2 And the LORD appeared unto him, and said, Go not down into Egypt; dwell in the land which I shall tell thee of:

α.26.3 Enneápeyaush yeu ohke, kah k8weetomush, kah k8nanumush, newutche kittinnumàunash ken & k8skannémunneog wame yeush ohkeash, kah nutussen chadchekéimaonk ne chadchekéimogkup Abraham k8sh.
E.26.3 Sojourn in this land, and I will be with thee, and will bless thee; for unto thee, and unto thy seed, I will give all these countries, and I will perform the oath which I sware unto Abraham thy father;

α.26.4 Kah k8skannemuneog nummuttaanhéaog onatuh anogqsog kesukqut, kah nuttinnumau k8skannémuneog wame yeush ohkeash: kah wame wutohtim[ó]neash pish wunnàntamunash ut k8skannemuneut.
E.26.4 And I will make thy seed to multiply as the stars of heaven, and will give unto thy seed all these countries; and in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed;

α.26.5 Newutche Abraham noswetamup n8wadtauatonkqussuonk kah nanahteaop nummeechuméhteaonk, nuttinn8waongash, nukkúhk8waongash, kah nuttinnaumatuongash.
E.26.5 Because that Abraham obeyed my voice, and kept my charge, my commandments, my statutes, and my laws.

α.26.6 Kah Isaak wutohtu Gerar.
E.26.6 And Isaac dwelt in Gerar:

α.26.7 Onk neg nah wodohkitcheg wunnat8tomauôuh papaume ummittumwussoh, kah n8wau yeuoh nummissisis: newutche wabesu n8wadt yeuoh nummittumwoh, ishkont neg ne wodohkitcheg nunnushhukquog wutche Rebekah, newutche noh wunneetu en moneauwóneat.
E.26.7 And the men of the place asked him of his wife; and he said, She is my sister: for he feared to say, She is my wife; lest, said he, the men of the place should kill me for Rebekah; because she was fair to look upon.

α.26.8 Onk n$nih noh sepohteadt: Abimelek ketass8t Philistims sonk8hquaeu wutch k[e]nogkenéganit kah naau, kah kusseh, Isaak pompuog Rebekahoh ummittamwussoh.
E.26.8 And it came to pass, when he had been there a long time, that Abimelech king of the Philistines looked out at a window, and saw, and, behold, Isaac was sporting with Rebekah his wife.

α.26.9 Onk Abimelek ken8nau Isaakoh, kah n8wau; kusseh, wunnamuhkut noh kummittamwus onk toh k8che n8wam, yeuoh nummissis? kah Isaak wuttinuh, newutche nussip, ishkont nunnup newutche nagum.
E.26.9 And Abimelech called Isaac, and said, Behold, of a surety she is thy wife; and how saidst thou, She is my sister? And Isaac said unto him, Because I said, Lest I die for her.

α.26.10 Kah Abimelek teaguas yeu anéhog? paguodcheh woh howan wunneesinuh kummittumwussoh, onk woh kenogskunk8wahukqun matcheseonk.
E.26.10 And Abimelech said, What is this thou hast done unto us? one of the people might lightly have lien with thy wife, and thou shouldest have brought guiltiness upon us.

α.26.11 Onk Abimelek meechumehkónau wame ummissinninnúmoh, n8wau, howan noh masunónt yeu wosketomp asuh ummittumwussoh, pish nushau.
E.26.11 And Abimelech charged all his people, saying, He that toucheth this man or his wife shall surely be put to death.

α.26.12 Neit Isaak ohkehteau ne ut ohkit, kah attamunnum ne kodtumuk nequt pasúk8e tahskéganit, kah Jehovah 8nanumúh.
E.26.12 Then Isaac sowed in that land, and received in the same year an hundredfold: and the LORD blessed him.

α.26.13 Onk wosketomp nano missugken, onk nano monchu, onk nano monat, onk yean masugkenuk.
E.26.13 And the man waxed great, and went forward, and grew until he became very great:

α.26.14 Newutche wadchanau flocksog kah hersog, kah monàoh wuttinnúmoh, kah Philistiansog wutiskôunóuh.
E.26.14 For he had possession of flocks, and possession of herds, and great store of servants: and the Philistines envied him.

α.26.15 Newutche wame wutahamongash 8shoh wuttinnumoh 8wónuhkonápash pomantog Abraham 8shoh, Philistiansog ukkuphamunáash, kah wunnumwohtinau ohke.
E.26.15 For all the wells which his father's servants had digged in the days of Abraham his father, the Philistines had stopped them, and filled them with earth.

α.26.16 Onk Abimelek unnau Isaakoh, nukâsinan, newutche m8cheke ken kummissugken onk neenawun. 
E.26.16 And Abimelech said unto Isaac, Go from us; for thou art much mightier than we.

α.26.17 Onk Isaak na 8mun, kah ut weekiteau 8nâúkôanout Geràr, kah na 8tohkin.
E.26.17 And Isaac departed thence, and pitched his tent in the valley of Gerar, and dwelt there.

α.26.18 Kah Isaak qushkeit, kut[á]ham wutahamongash nish kodhamukupash pomantog Abrahamoh 8shoh, newutche Philistiansog ukkuphamonaoash mahche nukup Abraham, kah wuttissowetamunash, 8shoh ne âs8wétogkup.
E.26.18 And Isaac digged again the wells of water, which they had digged in the days of Abraham his father; for the Philistines had stopped them after the death of Abraham: and he called their names after the names by which his father had called them.

α.26.19 Kah wuttinnúmoh Isaak wônéteaog 8neuhkôi, kah na wunnampteauunneau tohkékomue wutahamonk.
E.26.19 And Isaac's servants digged in the valley, and found there a well of springing water.

α.26.20 Kah assamoncheg netasu wutch Gerar kéketehtôadtuog Isaak assamónutcheh wunnetasúmoh, n8waog, nippe nutaihen, kah wuttissowetamun wutahamonk Ezek, newutche uppenuanumóuh.
E.26.20 And the herdmen of Gerar did strive with Isaac's herdmen, saying, The water is ours: and he called the name of the well Esek; because they strove with him.

α.26.21 Kah ketahamwog onkatuk wutahamonk, kah ne wutch wonk penuanumóneau, kah wuttiss[ô]wetamun Sitnah.
E.26.21 And they digged another well, and strove for that also: and he called the name of it Sitnah.

α.26.22 Kah na 8ch ont8tan, kah kutaham onkatuk wutahamonk kah ne mat penuanuttinneau, kah wuttissowetamun Rehoboth: kah n8wau newutche yeuyeu God kutayimungqun wamut appuonk, kah pish kummishummeechumimun yeu ohkit.
E.26.22 And he removed from thence, and digged another well; and for that they strove not: and he called the name of it Rehoboth; and he said, For now the LORD hath made room for us, and we shall be fruitful in the land.

α.26.23 Onk na 8mun en Beersheba.
E.26.23 And he went up from thence to Beersheba.

α.26.24 Kah Jehovah wunnaéihtau ne nohkog kah n8wau, neen ummanitt8moh k8sh Abraham, ahque wabesish, newutche k8wetomsh, kah k8nanumush, kah kumm8chekéhtaush k8skannemuneog, newutche Abraham nuttinnúm.
E.26.24 And the LORD appeared unto him the same night, and said, I am the God of Abraham thy father: fear not, for I am with thee, and will bless thee, and multiply thy seed for my servant Abraham's sake.

α.26.25 Onk na wuttit ayimun Altar, kah wéhquetum 8wesuonk Jehovah, kah na 8weekin, kah na$ut wuttinnúmoh Isaak kutahamwoh wutahamonk.
E.26.25 And he builded an altar there, and called upon the name of the LORD, and pitched his tent there: and there Isaac's servants digged a well.

α.26.26 Kah Abimelech n[â]sukauau wutch Gerar, kah Ahuzzath pasuk 8weetatteamungoh, kah Phikol missugkenomp ut wutayeuwohteamut.
E.26.26 Then Abimelech went to him from Gerar, and Ahuzzath one of his friends, and Phichol the chief captain of his army.

α.26.27 Kah Isaak wuttinuh nahog, tohwutch peyaaúseóg kenaau, kah sekeneauweyóg, kah kutam[a]nimwop?
E.26.27 And Isaac said unto them, Wherefore come ye to me, seeing ye hate me, and have sent me away from you?

α.26.28 Kah n8waog, naumunnan wunnamuhkut Jehovah k8wetomuk, kah nussimun yeuyeu chadchekeittitteuh neenáwun kah ken, kah togkodtamuttúh wunn8waonk.
E.26.28 And they said, We saw certainly that the LORD was with thee: and we said, Let there be now an oath betwixt us, even betwixt us and thee, and let us make a covenant with thee;

α.26.29 Onk woh mat kummatcheneheúmun, neyane mat kummussúnunnómunnónup, kah [neyane] wanne teág nummatchteoh, webe k8nenéhennumun, kah k8nohteae moncheahennumunnônup: ken yeuyeu k8nanumuk Jehovah. 
E.26.29 That thou wilt do us no hurt, as we have not touched thee, and as we have done unto thee nothing but good, and have sent thee away in peace: thou art now the blessed of the LORD.

α.26.30 Onk ummishadtupheuh, kah nag meetsuog, kah wuttattamwog.
E.26.30 And he made them a feast, and they did eat and drink.

α.26.31 Kah nompoaeu omohkeog, kah chadchekeittúog, kah Isaak ummoncheahuk, & wunnohteae wunnukonóuh.
E.26.31 And they rose up betimes in the morning, and sware one to another: and Isaac sent them away, and they departed from him in peace.

α.26.32 Kah n$nih ne kesukok Isaak wuttinnúmoh peyâoh, kah wuttugquoh, papaume wutahamonk ne kodhamohetteup, kah wuttinóuh nummiskomumun nippe.
E.26.32 And it came to pass the same day, that Isaac's servants came, and told him concerning the well which they had digged, and said unto him, We have found water.

α.26.33 Kah wutissowetamun Sheba, newajeh hettamuk Keihtotan Beersheba pajeh yeu kesukok.
E.26.33 And he called it Shebah: therefore the name of the city is Beersheba unto this day.

α.26.34 Kah Esau yauunchage kodtumwohkom wamittumwussissit Judith wuttaunoh Beeri Wuthittite, kah Bashemath wuttaunoh Elon Wuthittite.
E.26.34 And Esau was forty years old when he took to wife Judith the daughter of Beeri the Hittite, and Bashemath the daughter of Elon the Hittite:

α.26.35 Yeug 8wesogitteahaongan8 Isaak kah Rebeckah.
E.26.35 Which were a grief of mind unto Isaac and to Rebekah.

α.27.1 ONk n$nih Isaak kohchisu8ut, kah yaném8uk wuskesukquash, woh mat naum8, kah weekomau Esauoh mohtomegheoncheh, kah wuttinuh, Nunnaumon, kah wuttinuh, kusseh neen yeu.
E.27.1 And it came to pass, that when Isaac was old, and his eyes were dim, so that he could not see, he called Esau his eldest son, and said unto him, My son: and he said unto him, Behold, here am I.

α.27.2 Kah n8wau, kusseh yeuyeu nukkechisu, matta n8wahteoh utti$yeu kesukod adt nupp8.
E.27.2 And he said, Behold now, I am old, I know not the day of my death:

α.27.3 Kah yeuyeu neemunush, k8wehquetumoush, kutauwohteongash, kuppetan, & kutahtomp, kah sohhash en ohteakonit, kah ahchuteah weyaús.
E.27.3 Now therefore take, I pray thee, thy weapons, thy quiver and thy bow, and go out to the field, and take me some venison;

α.27.4 Kah ayimah weekummeechum, neyane womantam, kah paudtah, onk woh nummeechun, onk woh nukketeahogkou k8nanumuk ash nanupp8omp.
E.27.4 And make me savoury meat, such as I love, and bring it to me, that I may eat; that my soul may bless thee before I die.

α.27.5 Onk Rebekah n8tam Isaak kôn8nont Esau wunnaumonuh, kah Esau au ohteakonit, ahchuwehteau weyaus, kah uppaudtauna.
E.27.5 And Rebekah heard when Isaac spake to Esau his son. And Esau went to the field to hunt for venison, and to bring it.

α.27.6 Kah Rebekah ken8nau Jakoboh wunnaumonuh, n8wau, kusseh, nunn8tau K8sh, ken8nau Esauoh keématoh, n8wau,
E.27.6 And Rebekah spake unto Jacob her son, saying, Behold, I heard thy father speak unto Esau thy brother, saying,

α.27.7 Paudtah weyaus, kah ayimah wunnummeechum, onk woh numméets, onk woh k8nanumash ut anaquabit Jehovah ash na nupp8omp.
E.27.7 Bring me venison, and make me savoury meat, that I may eat, and bless thee before the LORD before my death.

α.27.8 Newutche yeuyeu nunnaumon, nosweetash kuttinninn8wonk neyan unn8nun.
E.27.8 Now therefore, my son, obey my voice according to that which I command thee.

α.27.9 Aush yeuyeu en flocksut, nemskomah na$wutch neesuog goatsemesog wônogqutcheg, kah nag n8numéchumehkónuk wutch K8sh, neyane womóntog.
E.27.9 Go now to the flock, and fetch me from thence two good kids of the goats; and I will make them savoury meat for thy father, such as he loveth:

α.27.10 Kah woh kuppaudtauun K8sh, onk woh meetsu, onk woh k8nanumuk ash na nupp8kup.
E.27.10 And thou shalt bring it to thy father, that he may eat, and that he may bless thee before his death.

α.27.11 Onk Jakob unnau Rebekah noh okasoh, kusseh Esau nemat 8weshaganu, qut neen numm8ses.
E.27.11 And Jacob said to Rebekah his mother, Behold, Esau my brother is a hairy man, and I am a smooth man:

α.27.12 Paguodche n8sh woh nukquttinuk, kah ut wuskesukqut nen woh neyane as8kekodteámoénin, neit woh nuppaudtau nuhhog matánittuonk, qut matta wunánittuonk.
E.27.12 My father peradventure will feel me, and I shall seem to him as a deceiver; and I shall bring a curse upon me, and not a blessing.

α.27.13 Onk okasoh unnuk, matanittuonk ahtaúwutti nunnaumon, qut webe noswetash kúttinnunn8onk, kah monch nag nemskomah.
E.27.13 And his mother said unto him, Upon me be thy curse, my son: only obey my voice, and go fetch me them.

α.27.14 Onk [naau] kah wunâusuoh, kah uppaudtauónuh ohkasah, kah okasoh ayimwoh wekum mechum, neyane womontog 8shoh.
E.27.14 And he went, and fetched, and brought them to his mother: and his mother made savoury meat, such as his father loved.

α.27.15 Kah Rebekah nemunum 8néogk8onk mohtoméginitche wunnaumonuh Esauoh, ne ohtag weekit, kah wutogquonon Jakoboh nahohtôeu wunnaumonuh.
E.27.15 And Rebekah took goodly raiment of her eldest son Esau, which were with her in the house, and put them upon Jacob her younger son:

α.27.16 Onk upponamauoh goatsemese askonuh wunnutcheganit, kah umm8sittuppukanit.
E.27.16 And she put the skins of the kids of the goats upon his hands, and upon the smooth of his neck:

α.27.17 Onk wuttinnúmauh wekum mechum, kah petukqunnunk ne quoshauwehtog, ut wunnutcheganit wunnaumonuh Jakob.
E.27.17 And she gave the savoury meat and the bread, which she had prepared, into the hand of her son Jacob.

α.27.18 Kah peyaónau 8shoh, kah n8wau, n8sh, kah n8wau, nen yeu howan ken nunnaumon?
E.27.18 And he came unto his father, and said, My father: and he said, Here am I; who art thou, my son?

α.27.19 Kah Jakob unnau 8shoh, nen Esau mohtomegheadt, nummahche ussen neyan ann8sean, omohkish k8wehquetumoush, nummatapsh, kah meetch n8weyaus onk woh kukketeahogkou n8nanumuk.
E.27.19 And Jacob said unto his father, I am Esau thy first born; I have done according as thou badest me: arise, I pray thee, sit and eat of my venison, that thy soul may bless me.

α.27.20 Kah Isaak unnau wunnaumonuh, toh kittin teanuk namehteauun nunnaumon? kah n8wau, newutche Jehovah kummánitt8m nuppaudtunkqun anaquabeh.
E.27.20 And Isaac said unto his son, How is it that thou hast found it so quickly, my son? And he said, Because the LORD thy God brought it to me.

α.27.21 Onk Isaak unnau Jakoboh, pas8sukah yeuyeu nunnaumon onk woh kukqutunush uttohun wunnamuhkut ken nunnaumon Esau, asuh matta.
E.27.21 And Isaac said unto Jacob, Come near, I pray thee, that I may feel thee, my son, whether thou be my very son Esau or not.

α.27.22 Kah Jakob pas8sukauau Isaakoh 8shoh, kah ukquttinoh, kah n8wau, unnont8waonk wuttinnont8waonk Jakob, qut menutchegash wunnutchegash Esau.
E.27.22 And Jacob went near unto Isaac his father; and he felt him, and said, The voice is Jacob's voice, but the hands are the hands of Esau.

α.27.23 Kah matta 8wáheuh newutche wunnutchegash weshakinná8ash, neyane wunnutchegash Esau, neit 8nanumuh.
E.27.23 And he discerned him not, because his hands were hairy, as his brother Esau's hands: so he blessed him.

α.27.24 Kah n8wau, ken wunnamuhkut nunnaumon Esau? kah n8[m]au nen.
E.27.24 And he said, Art thou my very son Esau? And he said, I am.

α.27.25 Kah n8wau pas8che paudtah, kah nummeech 8weyausum nunnaumon, onk woh nukketeahogkou k8nanumuk: kah uppas8che paudtauón, kah metsu, kah uppaudtauoh wine, kah wuttattam.
E.27.25 And he said, Bring it near to me, and I will eat of my son's venison, that my soul may bless thee. And he brought it near to him, and he did eat: and he brought him wine and he drank.

α.27.26 Onk 8shoh Isaakoh wuttugquoh, pas8sukah yeuyeu, kah chipwutt8n[à]pweh nunnaumon.
E.27.26 And his father Isaac said unto him, Come near now, and kiss me, my son.

α.27.27 Kah uppas8sukauoh, kah wutchipwutt8nápoh, kah manontam ne asumungquok hogk8onk, kah 8nanumuh, kah n8wau, Kusseh, wuttissumunkqussuonk nunnaumon onatuh ne asumunkquok ohteuk, ne Jehovah wônantog.
E.27.27 And he came near, and kissed him: and he smelled the smell of his raiment, and blessed him, and said, See, the smell of my son is as the smell of a field which the LORD hath blessed:

α.27.28 Newutche God anninnumungqush néchipog wutch kesukquiug, kah 8nogk8onk ohke, kah m8natit weahchiminneash kah wine.
E.27.28 Therefore God give thee of the dew of heaven, and the fatness of the earth, and plenty of corn and wine:

α.27.29 Missinninnuog wuttinnúmish, kah wutohtimoneash nauaeihtunkqush, ken Sontimaish ut kematut, kah kokas wunnaumonuh nauae[i]htunkqush, matanumúnaj nish$noh pasuk noh matanumukquean, kah wunnanumunaj noh wananumukquean.
E.27.29 Let people serve thee, and nations bow down to thee: be lord over thy brethren, and let thy mother's sons bow down to thee: cursed be every one that curseth thee, and blessed be he that blesseth thee.

α.27.30 Onk n$nih Isaak mahche wunanumont Jakoboh, kah Jakob quenau monchit wutche anaquabenit Isaakoh 8shoh, Esau wematoh petutteau, wutche wutadchanat.
E.27.30 And it came to pass, as soon as Isaac had made an end of blessing Jacob, and Jacob was yet scarce gone out from the presence of Isaac his father, that Esau his brother came in from his hunting.

α.27.31 Kah noh wonk ayim wunnummechum, kah uppaudtauon 8shoh, kah unnau 8shoh, N8sh omohkij, kah mechitch 8weyaus wunnaumonuh, onk woh kukketeahogkou n8nanumuk;
E.27.31 And he also had made savoury meat, and brought it unto his father, and said unto his father, Let my father arise, and eat of his son's venison, that thy soul may bless me.

α.27.32 Kah Isaakoh 8shoh wuttugquoh, Howan ken? kah wuttinuh neen kenaumon mohtomegheadt Esau.
E.27.32 And Isaac his father said unto him, Who art thou? And he said, I am thy son, thy firstborn Esau.

α.27.33 Kah Isaak nunnukshau mishenukshaonk m8cheke, kah n8wau howan? uttiyeuoh mahche âdchant wutche weyaus, kah nuppaudtunkqun, kah nummahchipwun asquam papeyauop, & nummahche wunnanum, nux, kah noh pish wunnanumau.
E.27.33 And Isaac trembled very exceedingly, and said, Who? where is he that hath taken venison, and brought it me, and I have eaten of all before thou camest, and have blessed him? yea, and he shall be blessed.

α.27.34 Kah Esau n8tog ukkutt8wongash 8shoh, mau, muttaupp8su, kah wesogkohpausu, kah unnau 8shoh, Wunnanumeh, nen wonk, woi n8sh.
E.27.34 And when Esau heard the words of his father, he cried with a great and exceeding bitter cry, and said unto his father, Bless me, even me also, O my father.

α.27.35 Onk n8wau kemat wunnompuwussuwae peyau, kah amaunum k8nanumitteaongan.
E.27.35 And he said, Thy brother came with subtilty, and hath taken away thy blessing.

α.27.36 Kah n8wau, sun$nummatta wunnamuhkut ussuowesu Jakob, newutche nutas8kekomuk neesit nompe: amaúnum nummohtomegitteau8onk, kah kusseh, yeuyeu amaunum n8nanumitteaonk, kah n8wau, matta k8wadchanumiyeuh wunnanittuonk?
E.27.36 And he said, Is not he rightly named Jacob? for he hath supplanted me these two times: he took away my birthright; and, behold, now he hath taken away my blessing. And he said, Hast thou not reserved a blessing for me?

α.27.37 Kah Isaak wunnamp8hamauoh, kah unnau Esauoh, Kusseh, nutayimau k8sontimominneat, kah nuttinnumau wame weematuh 8tinninnúmunneat, kah numahche menéhke weachuminneash kah wine: onk toh woh kittinhennun ken nunnaumon.
E.27.37 And Isaac answered and said unto Esau, Behold, I have made him thy lord, and all his brethren have I given to him for servants; and with corn and wine have I sustained him: and what shall I do now unto thee, my son?

α.27.38 Kah Esau unnau 8shoh, Ken sun [n]ont kenequtahtoh wunanitteaonk n8sh; wunnanuméh, neen wonk woi n8sh, kah Esau mishont8wau kah mau.
E.27.38 And Esau said unto his father, Hast thou but one blessing, my father? bless me, even me also, O my father. And Esau lifted up his voice, and wept.

α.27.39 Kah 8shoh Isaakoh wunnamp8hamungquoh, kah wuttugquoh, Kusseh 8nogk8onk ohke, ne pish k8tohkin, & neechipog wutch ongkouwe kesukqut.
E.27.39 And Isaac his father answered and said unto him, Behold, thy dwelling shall be the fatness of the earth, and of the dew of heaven from above;

α.27.40 Kah pish kenashpe pomantam kuttogkomoneg, kah pish ken wuttinnúmoh kemat, & pish n$nih, ahtauan nanawunnumóonk pish kuppohquanum8wéyan wutch kussittippukanit.
E.27.40 And by thy sword shalt thou live, and shalt serve thy brother; and it shall come to pass when thou shalt have the dominion, that thou shalt break his yoke from off thy neck.

α.27.41 Kah Esau sekaneauau Jakoboh newutche wunnanittuonk unnadt woh wunnanumukupuh 8shoh, kah n8wau ut wúttahut, mauongane kesukodtash wutche n8sh teanuk peyau$m8ash, neit pish nunnush nemat Jakob.
E.27.41 And Esau hated Jacob because of the blessing wherewith his father blessed him: and Esau said in his heart, The days of mourning for my father are at hand; then will I slay my brother Jacob.

α.27.42 Yéush ukkutt8wongash Esau mohtomegheonche unnonash Rebekah, kah an8team8 kah wehkomon Jakob nahohtôeu wunnaumonuh, kah wuttinuh kusseh, kemat Esau taphéau wuhhogkuh papaume ken, noh kittinshikqunat.
E.27.42 And these words of Esau her elder son were told to Rebekah: and she sent and called Jacob her younger son, and said unto him, Behold, thy brother Esau, as touching thee, doth comfort himself, purposing to kill thee.

α.27.43 Newutche yeuyeu nunnaumon, nosweetash nuttinn8waonk kah neepaush, kenupsaush en Laban nemattut, ut Haran.
E.27.43 Now therefore, my son, obey my voice; arise, flee thou to Laban my brother to Haran;

α.27.44 Kah weetom ogkussequnne, yeán kemat kutáhquanumukqunat.
E.27.44 And tarry with him a few days, until thy brother's fury turn away;

α.27.45 Yeán kemat ummusquantamòonk qushkem8uk wutche ken, onk woh 8wa[n]antamun ne ánheadt, neit nutan8team, kah pish kenemskont na wutche, tohwutch woh wannéhenóg pasuk kesuk?
E.27.45 Until thy brother's anger turn away from thee, and he forget that which thou hast done to him: then I will send, and fetch thee from thence: why should I be deprived also of you both in one day?

α.27.46 Kah Rebekah wuttinuh Isaakuh, neen nussauunum nuppomantamóonk newutche wuttônuh Heth: Jakob ummittumwussit wuttaunoh Heth, yeug netatup nawajeh wuttaúnimukeg ne ohkeit, toh woh nuttinne wunnenehukqun nuppomantamóonk.
E.27.46 And Rebekah said to Isaac, I am weary of my life because of the daughters of Heth: if Jacob take a wife of the daughters of Heth, such as these which are of the daughters of the land, what good shall my life do me?

α.28.1 ONk Isaak wehkomau Jakoboh, kah 8nanumuh, kah ummechuméhkonuh, kah wuttinuh, Matta k8mittumwussissu wuttonin wutch Kanaan.
E.28.1 And Isaac called Jacob, and blessed him, and charged him, and said unto him, Thou shalt not take a wife of the daughters of Canaan.

α.28.2 Neepaush aush Padan-Aram weekit Bethuel 8shoh kokas, kah na ut ummittumwussish wutt[ô]noh Laban kokas wematoh.
E.28.2 Arise, go to Padanaram, to the house of Bethuel thy mother's father; and take thee a wife from thence of the daughers of Laban thy mother's brother.

α.28.3 Kah wamenuhkesu Manit wunnanumukqush, kah ayimungqush mônáonk, muttaanhukqush onk woh kummònam ut kummissinninnúuneat.
E.28.3 And God Almighty bless thee, and make thee fruitful, and multiply thee, that thou mayest be a multitude of people;

α.28.4 Kah aninnumunkqush wunnanumàonk Abrahamoh, ken kah k8skaneemuneog weeche ken, onk woh kutohtouun ohke neadt penuwohteaiyean, uttiyeu God anumauomp Abrahamoh.
E.28.4 And give thee the blessing of Abraham, to thee, and to thy seed with thee; that thou mayest inherit the land wherein thou art a stranger, which God gave unto Abraham.

α.28.5 Kah Isaak moncheàheau Jakoboh, kah au Padan-Aram en Laban wunnaumonuh Bethuel Wussyrian, Rebekah wunohtonukqussoh, Jakob kah Esau okasuoh.
E.28.5 And Isaac sent away Jacob: and he went to Padanaram unto Laban, son of Bethuel the Syrian, the brother of Rebekah, Jacob's and Esau's mother.

α.28.6 Esau nag* Isaak wunnanumau Jakóboh, kah ummoncheahheuh en Padan-Aram woh ummittumwussu na wutche, kah wunnanumont[,] kah ummechuméhkonuh n8wau, Matta pish k8mittumwussissu wuttôninneunk wutch Kanaan.
E.28.6 When Esau saw that Isaac had blessed Jacob, and sent him away to Padanaram, to take him a wife from thence; and that as he blessed him he gave him a charge, saying, Thou shalt not take a wife of the daughers of Canaan;

α.28.7 Kah Jakob n8swehtauau 8shoh kah okasoh kah mahche ont Padan-Aram.
E.28.7 And that Jacob obeyed his father and his mother, and was gone to Padanaram;

α.28.8 Onk Esau nag* wuttôneunk wutch Kanaan matchit ut wuskesukqut Isaak 8shoh.
E.28.8 And Esau seeing that the daughters of Canaan pleased not Isaac his father;

α.28.9 Neit Esau au Ishmaelut, kah wonk ummittumwussu, mahche nees8kauont, Mahalalhoh wuttônoh Ishmael, wunnaumonuh Abraham, wètatu Nebaioth, 8mittumwussissinneat.
E.28.9 Then went Esau unto Ishmael, and took unto the wives which he had Mahalath the daughter of Ishmael Abraham's son, the sister of Nebajoth, to be his wife.

α.28.10 Onk Jakob sohhám wutch Beersheba, kah au nogwu Haran.
E.28.10 And Jacob went out from Beersheba, and went toward Haran.

α.28.11 Onk ne peyon ayeuonganit, kah 8wampanóhkon newutche wayau, kah nemunum na ohtagish qussukquanash, kah wutohpukquasinúnash, & ne wussepsinin [á]yeuonganit.
E.28.11 And he lighted upon a certain place, and tarried there all night, because the sun was set; and he took of the stones of that place, and put them for his pillows, and lay down in that place to sleep.

α.28.12 Kah unnukquom, kah kusseh, tohk8tauonk neepatau ohkeit, kah ompachissin kesukqut, kah kusseh, wutangelsumoh God tohk8tauóog kah n8kontauóog.
E.28.12 And he dreamed, and behold a ladder set up on the earth, and the top of it reached to heaven: and behold the angels of God ascending and descending on it.

α.28.13 Kah kusseh Jehovah waabe neepau, kah n8wau, Nen Jehovah Ummanitt8moh Abraham k8sh, kah Ummanitt8moh Isaak, ne ohke ne sepsinan, ne kittinnumauunun kah k8skanemuneog.
E.28.13 And, behold, the LORD stood above it, and said, I am the LORD God of Abraham thy father, and the God of Isaac: the land whereon thou liest, to thee will I give it, and to thy seed;

α.28.14 Kah k8skanemuneog onatuh pish puppissiyeuash ohkeit, kah pish kutchachapénóog en wutcheksúaeyu, kah en wutchepwóeu, kah en nanúmaeu, kah sowanaeu, kah en kuhhogkat, kah en k8skanemuneog wame nish$noh wutteashiyéuunneau ohkeit pish wunnanumóog.
E.28.14 And thy seed shall be as the dust of the earth, and thou shalt spread abroad to the west, and to the east, and to the north, and to the south: and in thee and in thy seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed.

α.28.15 Kah kusseh k8wetomsh kah k8wadchansh nish$noh kutônush, onk yeu ut pish kukquihchuunush yeu ohkeit, newutche matta kenúkonún8, onk mahche ussean uttiyeu ánunnomp/
E.28.15 And, behold, I am with thee, and will keep thee in all places whither thou goest, and will bring thee again into this land; for I will not leave thee, until I have done that which I have spoken to thee of.

α.28.16 Kah Jakob t8kit wutch ukkouénat kah n8wau, wunamuhkut Jehovah yeu wutapin ayeuonganit, kah matta n8wahteauúnap. 
E.28.16 And Jacob awaked out of his sleep, and he said, Surely the LORD is in this place; and I knew it not.

α.28.17 Onk wabesu, kah n8wau, Uttiyeuun wabesuohkeyeu8? yeu matta onkatuk qut week God kah yeu kesukque squoant.
E.28.17 And he was afraid, and said, How dreadful is this place! this is none other but the house of God, and this is the gate of heaven.

α.28.18 Kah Jakob omohkeu nompoâeu, kah nemunum qussuk ne ápukquásukup, kah wunnepatauun wutche pogkomuhquonk, kah sokanum pumme wanashque.
E.28.18 And Jacob rose up early in the morning, and took the stone that he had put for his pillows, and set it up for a pillar, and poured oil upon the top of it.

α.28.19 Kah ne ayeuonk wuttehettamun Bethel, qut ne 8wesuonk otan negonne hettamuneau Luz.
E.28.19 And he called the name of that place Bethel: but the name of that city was called Luz at the first.

α.28.20 Kah Jakob quoshóau quoshaumaonk God, n8wau, God weetomukquean, kah wadchanukquean neyayeoi, kah aninnumungquean petukqununk ne woh meechu, kah hogk8onk agwee.
E.28.20 And Jacob vowed a vow, saying, If God will be with me, and will keep me in this way that I go, and will give me bread to eat, and raiment to put on,

α.28.21 Onk woh nukqushkem wonk n8sh weekit wunnohteàé, neit Jehovah pish N8manitt8mun.
E.28.21 So that I come again to my father's house in peace; then shall the LORD be my God:

α.28.22 Kah yeu qussuk neepatauomp wutch pogkomuhquonk, pish God 8weekin, kah wame ne pish ánumaiyean wunnamuhkut pish kittinumaush nish$noh piukque chepai.
E.28.22 And this stone, which I have set for a pillar, shall be God's house: and of all that thou shalt give me I will surely give the tenth unto thee.

α.29.1 Neit Jakob au wutaonganit, kah peyau ut ohkit wunneechaninneunk ut wutch[e]pwoaeu.
E.29.1 Then Jacob went on his journey, and came into the land of the people of the east.

α.29.2 Kah ummoninneauoh, kah kusseh wutahamonk ut ohteakonit, kah kusseh nishuog shepse chipanuog sepsinwog kishke, newutche ne wutch wutahamonganit 8tattamheonneau floksoh: kah mishikqussuk ohteau wussitt8nonog.
E.29.2 And he looked, and behold a well in the field, and, lo, there were three flocks of sheep lying by it; for out of that well they watered the flocks: and a great stone was upon the well's mouth.

α.29.3 Kah na peahettit wame floksog, kah wutomp8wutchanumunneau mishikqussuk wutc[h] wussitt8nónog, & wuttattamweheaog shepsoh, kah wonk upponamunneau qussuk wussit8nonog wutayeuonganit.
E.29.3 And thither were all the flocks gathered: and they rolled the stone from the well's mouth, and watered the sheep, and put the stone again upon the well's mouth in his place.

α.29.4 Kah Jakob wuttinuh nahog, neematog toh kuttaiinneau? kah n8waog Haran neenawun.
E.29.4 And Jacob said unto them, My brethren, whence be ye? And they said, Of Haran are we.

α.29.5 Kah wuttinuh nahog, K8waheaumw8 Laban wunnaumonuh Nahor? kah n8waog n8wahe[ò]un.
E.29.5 And he said unto them, Know ye Laban the son of Nahor? And they said, We know him.

α.29.6 Kah wuttinuh nahog, as kongketeau? kah n8waog as keteau, kah kusseh Rachel wuttaunoh pas8oh shepsoh.
E.29.6 And he said unto them, Is he well? And they said, He is well: and, behold, Rachel his daughter cometh with the sheep.

α.29.7 Kah n8wau, Kusseh ash qunni kesuk, kah asquam woh pas8wóog neetasuog moeu, wuttattamwáhuk shepsoh, kah monchek kah assam8k.
E.29.7 And he said, Lo, it is yet high day, neither is it time that the cattle should be gathered together: water ye the sheep, and go and feed them.

α.29.8 Kah n8waog, n8nanumumun, yean wame pas8wônaònt floksog moeu, kah yean wutomp8chanumunaónt qussuk wutch wussit8nónog, neit n8tattamheómun shepsoh.
E.29.8 And they said, We cannot, until all the flocks be gathered together, and till they roll the stone from the well's mouth; then we water the sheep.

α.29.9 Kah as konkekut8kauont nahog, Rachel peyau weeche 8shoh wuttushepsumoh, newutch wutassamuh.
E.29.9 And while he yet spake with them, Rachel came with her father's sheep; for she kept them.

α.29.10 Kah n$nih, Jakob nauont Racheloh wuttaunoh Laban, weematoh okasoh, kah wuttuṣshepsumoh Laban, okasoh wetateuh, & Jakob uppas8sukauoh, & wutomp8chânum qussuk wutch wussit8nónog, kah wuttattamwèheuh Laban uffloksumoh, okasoh wetatu.
E.29.10 And it came to pass, when Jacob saw Rachel the daughter of Laban his mother's brother, and the sheep of Laban his mother's brother, that Jacob went near, and rolled the stone from the well's mouth, and watered the flock of Laban his mother's brother.

α.29.11 Kah Jakob chipwutt8napwau Racheloh, kah mishont8wau kah mau.
E.29.11 And Jacob kissed Rachel, and lifted up his voice, and wept.

α.29.12 Kah Jakob wuttinuh Racheloh, Neen k8sh weematoh, kah Rebekah wunnaumonuh: kah quogqueu wuttinnon 8shoh.
E.29.12 And Jacob told Rachel that he was her father's brother, and that he was Rebekah's son: and she ran and told her father.

α.29.13 Kah n$nih Laban n8tog unaunchem8onaonk Jakob ummississoh wunnaumonuh, kah na ussishau wunnogskauoh, kah ukkoshkodtanuh, kah wutchipwutt8napo, kah uppetutteaheuh weekit, kah wuttinnonash Labanoh wame yeush kutt8wongash.
E.29.13 And it came to pass, when Laban heard the tidings of Jacob his sister's son, that he ran to meet him, and embraced him, and kissed him, and brought him to his house. And he told Laban all these things.

α.29.14 Kah Laban wuttinuh, Wunnamuhkut ken nuskon, kah n8weyaus, kah 8wetómuh ukkesukodtumash nepâuz.
E.29.14 And Laban said to him, Surely thou art my bone and my flesh. And he abode with him the space of a month.

α.29.15 Kah Laban wuttinuh Jak[a]boh, newutche ken neemat, sun woh n8tinninneum kuhhog wutch mon$teag? missohhamah toh an unkquatauun?
E.29.15 And Laban said unto Jacob, Because thou art my brother, shouldest thou therefore serve me for nought? tell me, what shall thy wages be?

α.29.16 Kah Laban nesitâunioh, 8wesuonk mohtomegit Leah, kah 8wesuonk nahohtôeu Rachel.
E.29.16 And Laban had two daughters: the name of the elder was Leah, and the name of the younger was Rachel.

α.29.17 Leah pannikquau, qut Rachel wunnetu, kah wunnompamukqussu.
E.29.17 Leah was tender eyed; but Rachel was beautiful and well favoured.

α.29.18 Kah Jakob womonau Racheloh, kah n8wau, nen kittinninneum nuhhog nes[a]usuk tahshit kodtumwae wutch Rachel peississit kuttannes.
E.29.18 And Jacob loved Rachel; and said, I will serve thee seven years for Rachel thy younger daughter.

α.29.19 Kah Laban n8wau, an wunnegik ken kuttinnúmauununonk, neit aninnumauog onkatuk wosketomp: weetómeh.
E.29.19 And Laban said, It is better that I give her to thee, than that I should give her to another man: abide with me.

α.29.20 Kah Jakob wuttinnúmuhkausu wuhhogkuh nes[à]usuk tahshe kodtumwae, wutch Racheloh: qut wunnauóuh oggúhsequinne newutche 8womonaonk.
E.29.20 And Jacob served seven years for Rachel; and they seemed unto him but a few days, for the love he had to her.

α.29.21 Neit Jakob unnau Labanoh, aninnumah nummittumwos, (newutche nukkesukodtumash numwohtaash) onk woh nuppetukau.
E.29.21 And Jacob said unto Laban, Give me my wife, for my days are fulfilled, that I may go in unto her.

α.29.22 Kah Laban mohmounau wame ne apitcheg, kah ayim mishadtup8onk.
E.29.22 And Laban gathered together all the men of the place, and made a feast.

α.29.23 Onk n$nih wanonk88k, kah nemunau Leahoh wuttaunoh, kah uppaudtauónuh, kah uppetukauuh.
E.29.23 And it came to pass in the evening, that he took Leah his daughter, and brought her to him; and he went in unto her.

α.29.24 Kah Laban aninnumauau wuttaunoh Leahoh, Zilpha wuttinúmun, onk woh ummaidumuh.
E.29.24 And Laban gave unto his daughter Leah Zilpah his maid for an handmaid.

α.29.25 Onk n$nih nompoaeu, kah kusseh, noh Leah, kah wuttinuh Labanah chaugua yeu anhéan? sunnummatta k8tinnineumeúmus nuhhog wutch Rachel? kah toh wútch kutas8kekomeh?
E.29.25 And it came to pass, that in the morning, behold, it was Leah: and he said to Laban, What is this thou hast done unto me? did not I serve with thee for Rachel? wherefore then hast thou beguiled me?

α.29.26 Kah Laban n8wau, Woh mô nano ut nutohkin, negoñe magun peississit nukasquam mohtomégit.
E.29.26 And Laban said, It must not be so done in our country, to give the younger before the firstborn.

α.29.27 Numwohtaush 8weekum wonk, kah yeuoh wonk kittiñumauunan newutche kutanakausuonk, anúhkonéhtaieum wonk nesausuk kodtumwae.
E.29.27 Fulfil her week, and we will give thee this also for the service which thou shalt serve with me yet seven other years.

α.29.28 Kah Jakob wuttussen, kah wunnumwohtauun 8weekum: kah wuttinnumauunoh Racheloh 8mittumwussisineat.
E.29.28 And Jacob did so, and fulfilled her week: and he gave him Rachel his daughter to wife also.

α.29.29 Kah Laban aninnumauau Racheloh wuttaunoh Bilhah wuttinnúmun mittumwussissoh wuttinnúmoh.
E.29.29 And Laban gave to Rachel his daughter Bilhah his handmaid to be her maid.

α.29.30 Kah petukauau wonk Racheloh, kah womonoh R[a]cheloh m8cheke onk Leahhoh, kah wonk wuttinnúmehkausu wuh[g]ogkuh nesausuk tahshe onkatogish kodtum8ash.
E.29.30 And he went in also unto Rachel, and he loved also Rachel more than Leah, and served with him yet seven other years.

α.29.31 Onk Jehovah nag* Leah sekeneaóonk wôhshinnúmaau wut$utkutôontómukkomut, qut Rachel mehchéeu.
E.29.31 And when the LORD saw that Leah was hated, he opened her womb: but Rachel was barren.

α.29.32 Kah Leah wompoquau, kah wunnaumonaeu, kah wuttissowenuh Ruben: newutche n8wau, wunnamuhkut Jehovah mónunneam n8támepunáonk, newutche yeuyeu nasuk n8womónuk.
E.29.32 And Leah conceived, and bare a son, and she called his name Reuben: for she said, Surely the LORD hath looked upon my affliction; now therefore my husband will love me.

α.29.33 Kah wonk wompoquau, kah wunnaumónaeu, kah n8wau, newutche Jehovah wunn8tamun nussekeneànteaonk, newutche yeuh wonk nuttinnumunkqunuh, kah wuttissowenuh Simeon.
E.29.33 And she conceived again, and bare a son; and said, Because the LORD hath heard I was hated, he hath therefore given me this son also: and she called his name Simeon.

α.29.34 Kah wonk wompoquau, kah wunnaumonaeu, kah n8wau yeu aquompak nasuk umm8sogquéhtunk, newutche nish wompaékitteau: newaj hennit Levi.
E.29.34 And she conceived again, and bare a son; and said, Now this time will my husband be joined unto me, because I have born him three sons: therefore was his name called Levi.

α.29.35 Kah wonk womoquau kah wunnaumonaeu, kah n8wau, yeuyeu nuttabuttantamau Jehovah, newutche ussowénont Judah kah ahquegheau.
E.29.35 And she conceived again, and bare a son: and she said, Now will I praise the LORD: therefore she called his name Judah; and left bearing.

α.30.1 KAH Rachel nag* matta wutchekitteauau Jakob, Rachel wutishkauónuh ummissesoh, kah unnau Jakoboh, aninnumah mukkiésog, qut matta, onk nunnup.
E.30.1 And when Rachel saw that she bare Jacob no children, Rachel envied her sister; and said unto Jacob, Give me children, or else I die.

α.30.2 Kah [j]akob ummusquanumáuonk n8hn8unau Racheloh, kah n8wau sun nen nompin God, noh kospaudtamungqean ummeechummúonk wutoontòmut.
E.30.2 And Jacob's anger was kindled against Rachel: and he said, Am I in God's stead, who hath withheld from thee the fruit of the womb?

α.30.3 Kah n8waú, kusseh nuttinnúm mittumwussis Bilhah, noh petukau, kah pish neechau ut nukkutukqut, onk woh n8neecham noh wutche.
E.30.3 And she said, Behold my maid Bilhah, go in unto her; and she shall bear upon my knees, that I may also have children by her.

α.30.4 Kah wuttinnumáoh Bilhahoh ummaidumoh 8mittumwussissinneat, kah Jakob uppetukauau.
E.30.4 And she gave him Bilhah her handmaid to wife: and Jacob went in unto her.

α.30.5 Kah Bilhah wompequau, kah neechanushao Jakoboh.
E.30.5 And Bilhah conceived, and bare Jacob a son.

α.30.6 Kah Rachel n8wop, God n8sumukup, & wonk n8tam n8wadtauatonkqussuonk, kah nuttinnumunk wunnaumonain, newaj hennont Dan.
E.30.6 And Rachel said, God hath judged me, and hath also heard my voice, and hath given me a son: therefore called she his name Dan.

α.30.7 Kah Bilhah wuttinúmoh Rachel wonk wompequau, kah nahohtôeu wutchekitteauau Jakoboh.
E.30.7 And Bilhah Rachel's maid conceived again, and bare Jacob a second son.

α.30.8 Kah Rachel n8wau, mishe quogquadtinnittúonk nukquogquadtinohkon nummissis: kah nussongqueh, kah wuttissowenuh Naphtali.
E.30.8 And Rachel said, With great wrestlings have I wrestled with my sister, and I have prevailed: and she called his name Naphtali.

α.30.9 Leah nag* wutahquegheaonk, neemunau Zilpha ummaidumoh, kah wuttinnumauónuh Jakoboh 8mitumwussissinneat.
E.30.9 When Leah saw that she had left bearing, she took Zilpah her maid, and gave her Jacob to wife.

α.30.10 Kah Zilpha ummaidumoh Leah neekitteauau wunnaumonuh Jakoboh.
E.30.10 And Zilpah Leah's maid bare Jacob a son.

α.30.11 Kah Leah n8wau, m8naouk peyaum8 kah wuttissowenuh Gad.
E.30.11 And Leah said, A troop cometh: and she called his name Gad.

α.30.12 Kah Zilphah Leah ummaidumoh nohohtôeu nekitteauau Jakoboh wuñaumonuh
E.30.12 And Zilpah Leah's maid bare Jacob a second son.

α.30.13 Kah Leah n8wau, n8ni, newutche wuttônéunk pish nuttinnúkquog k8nanumit kah wuttissowenuh Ashur.
E.30.13 And Leah said, Happy am I, for the daughters will call me blessed: and she called his name Asher.

α.30.14 Kah Ruben pomushau kesukodáeu eninnowaut wheatash, kah namehteau Mandrakes ut ohteakonit, kah uppaudtauun okasoh Leahoh: neit Rachel unnau Leahoh, aninnumah k8wequetumoush kenaumon ummandraksumash.
E.30.14 And Reuben went in the days of wheat harvest, and found mandrakes in the field, and brought them unto his mother Leah. Then Rachel said to Leah, Give me, I pray thee, of thy son's mandrakes.

α.30.15 Kah wuttinuh, sun peamesan keneemunúmayeuonk nahsuk, kah wonk kukkod amaunum ummandraksum nunnaumon? kah Rachel n8wau, newutche woh keneesinau yeu nohkog newutche kenaumon ummandraksum.
E.30.15 And she said unto her, Is it a small matter that thou hast taken my husband? and wouldest thou take away my son's mandrakes also? And Rachel said, Therefore he shall lie with thee to night for thy son's mandrakes.

α.30.16 Kah Jakob 8m ohteakonit wunnonkquàe, kah Leah sohham wunnogskauoh, kah n8wau, nawhónk kuppetukah nen, newutche wunnamuhkut nummahche kutann8nsh ken wutche nunnaumon ummandraksumoh, kah weetukquom8tuog ne nohkog.
E.30.16 And Jacob came out of the field in the evening, and Leah went out to meet him, and said, Thou must come in unto me; for surely I have hired thee with my son's mandrakes. And he lay with her that night.

α.30.17 Kah God wunn8tauuh Leahhoh, kah wompoquau, kah wutcheketeauau Jakoboh napanna wutteáshompaneaont.
E.30.17 And God hearkened unto Leah, and she conceived, and bare Jacob the fifth son.

α.30.18 Kah Leah n8wau, God nuttinnumunk nunnoguhkouonk, newutche nutinnumau nummaidumoh nahsuk: kah wuttissowenuh Issachar.
E.30.18 And Leah said, God hath given me my hire, because I have given my maiden to my husband: and she called his name Issachar.

α.30.19 Kah wonk Leah womoquau, kah nekitteauau Jakoboh nequtta tahshu wunnaumōnuh.
E.30.19 And Leah conceived again, and bare Jacob the sixth son.

α.30.20 Onk Leah n8wau, God nummahche ani[ñ]umunk n8[ne]ohtóonk, yeuyeu nasuk n8weetomuk, newutche nequtta nutteeashompaégitteau, kah wuttussowenuh Zebulun.
E.30.20 And Leah said, God hath endued me with a good dowry; now will my husband dwell with me, because I have born him six sons: and she called his name Zebulun.

α.30.21 Kah ompetak wuttòneu, kah wuttissowenuh Dinah.
E.30.21 And afterwards she bare a daughter, and called her name Dinah.

α.30.22 Kah God mehquanumau Racheloh, kah God wunn8tauoh, kah woshwúnumauoh wututkut[ô]ontómukkomut.
E.30.22 And God remembered Rachel, and God hearkened to her, and opened her womb.

α.30.23 Kah wompoquau, kah wunnaumonaeu kah n8wau, God amau[n]m nuttiaspinumiteaonk.
E.30.23 And she conceived, and bare a son; and said, God hath taken away my reproach:

α.30.24 Kah wuttehenuh Joseph, kah n8wau, Jehovah pish nuttinnumunk onkatoge nunnaumonuh.
E.30.24 And she called his name Joseph; and said, The LORD shall add to me another son.

α.30.25 Onk n$nih, Rachel neechad Josephuh, Jakob unnau Labanoh, Monche[à]heh, onk woh nuttóm nutayeuonganit, kah nutohket
E.30.25 And it came to pass, when Rachel had born Joseph, that Jacob said unto Laban, Send me away, that I may go unto mine own place, and to my country.

α.30.26 Aninnumah nummittumwussog, kah neechanog newutche nag k8tenúmukaúunup nuhhogk, kah moncheti: newutche k8wahteoh k8tinninnúmuhkauunop nuhhog.
E.30.26 Give me my wives and my children, for whom I have served thee, and let me go: for thou knowest my service which I have done thee.

α.30.27 Kah Laban wuttinuh, k8wihquetumoush namehteauon kitteamonteanittuonk ut kuskesukqut, yeu apsh, nunnetúhtouun wutch qutchehteaonganit Jehovah, n8nanumuk newutche ken.
E.30.27 And Laban said unto him, I pray thee, if I have found favour in thine eyes, tarry: for I have learned by experience that the LORD hath blessed me for thy sake.

α.30.28 Kah n8wau, missohhamah kutonkquatunk noh wonk kittinnumaúunun.
E.30.28 And he said, Appoint me thy wages, and I will give it.

α.30.29 Kah wuttinuh, k8wahteoun ne án wuttinneumuhkauun nuhhog, & toh nuttin nánauweheonup kenetasumog.
E.30.29 And he said unto him, Thou knowest how I have served thee, and how thy cattle was with me.

α.30.30 Newutche kutohguhsétit weske peyam, onk muttaonoóg: kah Jehovah k8nanumuk nadteoh paôon, kah yeuyeu ahquompak woh wonk nukquoshaeihtam nehenwonche neek?
E.30.30 For it was little which thou hadst before I came, and it is now increased unto a multitude; and the LORD hath blessed thee since my coming: and now when shall I provide for mine own house also?

α.30.31 Kah n8wau, chauguash kittinnumaúush, kah Jakob n8wau matta teag kittinnumaiyeush: yeu nehhean, wonk pish nukqushkem, nutassam, kah nanauéhheoóg kuffloksumog.
E.30.31 And he said, What shall I give thee? And Jacob said, Thou shalt not give me any thing: if thou wilt do this thing for me, I will again feed and keep thy flock.

α.30.32 Nuppannumwusham wame kuffloksumog yeu kesukok, nutamaun wame momonesitcheg, mômóechohkesitcheg netasuog, kah wame moompamukqussitcheg neetasuog kenugke shepsoh, kah chohkesitcheg, & momonesitcheg, ut kenugke goatsog, & yeu pish nutonkquatunk.
E.30.32 I will pass through all thy flock to day, removing from thence all the speckled and spotted cattle, and all the brown cattle among the sheep, and the spotted and speckled among the goats: and of such shall be my hire.

α.30.33 Neit pish nussampweusseonk wauw[o]m8 wutch nen saup, toh utt8che peyaum8uk wutch nutonkquatunk anaquabean: nish$noh mat mónónesein, kah mat mômochohkesein? kenugke goatsut, kah matta moampánukqussein kenugke shepsog, ne pish tatupantamauonuh kôm8tukus.
E.30.33 So shall my righteousness answer for me in time to come, when it shall come for my hire before thy face: every one that is not speckled and spotted among the goats, and brown among the sheep, that shall be counted stolen with me.

α.30.34 Kah Laban n8wau kusseh, nukkodtantam niyôuut ne an8wáan.
E.30.34 And Laban said, Behold, I would it might be according to thy word.

α.30.35 Onk amaunau ne kesukok nompashimau goatsoh momonesit, kah wame squaushimwe goatsoh momonésinutcheh, & cho[h]kesinitche nish$noh pasuk n8wompechohkesit, kah wame mom8esitcheh kenugke shepsoh, kah wuttinuumaunuh nahog en wunnutcheganit wunnaumonuh. 
E.30.35 And he removed that day the he goats that were ringstraked and spotted, and all the she goats that were speckled and spotted, and every one that had some white in it, and all the brown among the sheep, and gave them into the hand of his sons.

α.30.36 Onk nishikquinushon na ponamun nôeu nehenwonche kah Jakob, kah Jakob assamau wunneetasumoh onkatogane Laban.
E.30.36 And he set three days' journey betwixt himself and Jacob: and Jacob fed the rest of Laban's flocks.

α.30.37 Kah Jakob neemunumau mehtugk8mesash ashkuhquame metwe, kah paudteateamenash, kah wompemusseshash, & 8wowómpehinuh, kah momoneteauunash mehtugk8mesash.
E.30.37 And Jacob took him rods of green poplar, and of the hazel and chestnut tree; and pilled white strakes in them, and made the white appear which was in the rods.

α.30.38 Kah ne ponamun mehtugk8mesash nish wowompekinukish anaquabhettit floksog ut pasohtheganit, kah ahhut wuttattamohettit, floksog paahettit wuttattamohettit, onk woh wompequau8og notsipamóhettit.
E.30.38 And he set the rods which he had pilled before the flocks in the gutters in the watering troughs when the flocks came to drink, that they should conceive when they came to drink.

α.30.39 Kah floksog wompequauog ut anaquohtag mehtugk8mesash, kah nechaog neetasuog mômônesitcheg, chohchohkesitcheg & wéénu momonesitcheg.
E.30.39 And the flocks conceived before the rods, and brought forth cattle ringstraked, speckled, and spotted.

α.30.40 Kah Jakob chipin[a]u lambsog, kah weongqua8kaoh wuskesukquash floksog nogqueu en kohtipusquanepisinutche, kah wame moampamukqúsinutche en ufflocksumut Laban, kah chippeponam nehenwonche uffloksumoh, kah matta upponuh Laban wunnetasumut.
E.30.40 And Jacob did separate the lambs, and set the faces of the flocks toward the ringstraked, and all the brown in the flock of Laban; and he put his own flocks by themselves, and put them not unto Laban's cattle.

α.30.41 Onk n$[u]ih matikenukeg netasuog wompequahettit, Jakob ponam mehtugk8mesash ut anaquabhettit wuskesukk8ont, ut pasohtheganit, onk woh wompequau8og kenugke mehtugk8mesekontu.
E.30.41 And it came to pass, whensoever the stronger cattle did conceive, that Jacob laid the rods before the eyes of the cattle in the gutters, that they might conceive among the rods.

α.30.42 Qut neetasuog n8chemweṣhettit, matta ne ponamauau, nemuhkuh nan8chumwesuoh Laban, qut menuhkesuoh Jâkob.
E.30.42 But when the cattle were feeble, he put them not in: so the feebler were Laban's, and the stronger Jacob's.

α.30.43 Onk wosketomp nano mon[à]oh m8cheke, kah m8chekohshau nétasu, kah mittumwussisse wuttinneúmoh, kah wosketompae wuttinnumoh, kah kamelsog kah assesog.
E.30.43 And the man increased exceedingly, and had much cattle, and maidservants, and menservants, and camels, and asses.

α.31.1 ONK n8tam ukkutt8wongash wunnaumonuh Laban, n8waog, Jakob amaunum wame ohtaukupash k8shinonut: & ne 8tahtauun ohtágkup k8shinonut, wame ne sohsum8onk wutohqunúmun.
E.31.1 And he heard the words of Laban's sons, saying, Jacob hath taken away all that was our father's; and of that which was our father's hath he gotten all this glory.

α.31.2 Kah Jakob kuhkinneam wuttinnússúonk Laban, kah kusseh, matta uppóe[ú] moneauoh neyane negonae.
E.31.2 And Jacob beheld the countenance of Laban, and, behold, it was not toward him as before.

α.31.3 Kah Jehovah unnau Jakoboh, qushkish en wutohket k8shog, kah kuttinnowamôuhtu kah k8wetomsh.
E.31.3 And the LORD said unto Jacob, Return unto the land of thy fathers, and to thy kindred; and I will be with thee.

α.31.4 Kah Jakob an8team8, & weekomoh Rachel kah Leah en ohteakonit, en wutchippashum8mehtu.
E.31.4 And Jacob sent and called Rachel and Leah to the field unto his flock,

α.31.5 Kah wuttinuh nahog, nunaum k8sheu wuttinnussuonk, matta nupp[ô]e monunneungk8, neyane negonaeu, qut ummanitt8moh n8sh n8wetomukup.
E.31.5 And said unto them, I see your father's countenance, that it is not toward me as before; but the God of my father hath been with me.

α.31.6 Kah k8wahteauunneau, n8tinninnúmuhkau k8sheu nuhhogkuh weeche wame nummenuhkesuonk.
E.31.6 And ye know that with all my power I have served your father.

α.31.7 Kah k8sheu nutass8kekomuk & ôs8wunum nutonkquatunkash piogqut nompe, qut God matta wuttinnánumoh n8woskhukqunat.
E.31.7 And your father hath deceived me, and changed my wages ten times; but God suffered him not to hurt me.

α.31.8 Yeu n8wadt mom8echohkésitcheg, ne pish kutonkquatunk, neit wame neetasuog neecháog mohm8echohkésunitche: asuh yeu n8wadt wééne momoeesit, ne pish kutunkquatunk, neit wame neetasuog neechaog weenompasik, wutchohkein8.
E.31.8 If he said thus, The speckled shall be thy wages; then all the cattle bare speckled: and if he said thus, The ringstraked shall be thy hire; then bare all the cattle ringstraked.

α.31.9 Yeu in God amaunau wunnetasumoh k8sheu, kah nuttinumunkqunash.
E.31.9 Thus God hath taken away the cattle of your father, and given them to me.

α.31.10 Onk n$nih, ne áhutt8che wompoquahettit neetasuog, nuttishpadtauomp, kah nunnaum ut kouenat, kah kusseh nomposhimwogineg ayimáuukeg, neg wutchohkéin8 weenompasu, kah mohm8e chohkesuog, kah momonesuog.
E.31.10 And it came to pass at the time that the cattle conceived, that I lifted up mine eyes, and saw in a dream, and, behold, the rams which leaped upon the cattle were ringstraked, speckled, and grisled.

α.31.11 Káh wutangelsumoh God nuken8nukup ut koenat, kah nussim nen yeu.
E.31.11 And the angel of God spake unto me in a dream, saying, Jacob: And I said, Here am I.

α.31.12 Onk n8wau yeuyeu spuhquáish, kah n[a]ish, wame nomposhimwog neg ayimauukeg, wutchohkéinnu weenompasik, mohm8e chohkésuog kah momonesuog, newutche nunnaumun wame Laban anhukquean.
E.31.12 And he said, Lift up now thine eyes, and see, all the rams which leap upon the cattle are ringstraked, speckled, and grisled: for I have seen all that Laban doeth unto thee.

α.31.13 Nen Manitto ut Bethel uttôhadt samúnumop pogkomuhquonk, kah uttoh adt quoshauáop quoshaumáonk God: yeuyeu nepaush, sohhash yeu wutch ohket, kah qushkish en wutohtuóut kuttinonkumóog.
E.31.13 I am the God of Bethel, where thou anointedst the pillar, and where thou vowedst a vow unto me: now arise, get thee out from this land, and return unto the land of thy kindred.

α.31.14 Kah Rachel kah Leah wunnamp8hamauoh, kah wuttinóuh, as na ohteau nutchippunumónteaonganun, asuh ahteóonk wutche nenawun n8shun wekit?
E.31.14 And Rachel and Leah answered and said unto him, Is there yet any portion or inheritance for us in our father's house?

α.31.15 Sunnum$matta nutogquanumuk8un penuwohteáut? newutche mag8 nuhhogkanonash, kah máhtshadtau wame nutteagwunnónut.
E.31.15 Are we not counted of him strangers? for he hath sold us, and hath quite devoured also our money.

α.31.16 Newutche wame wenauwetuongash God amaunukish wutch n8shunnónut nen nutaihéin kah neech[au]sinnonog, yeuyeu neit uttoh anukquéan God, ne ussish.
E.31.16 For all the riches which God hath taken from our father, that is ours, and our children's: now then, whatsoever God hath said unto thee, do.

α.31.17 Neit Jakob neepau, kah ponau wunnaumonuh, kah ummittumwussoh, kamelsut.
E.31.17 Then Jacob rose up, and set his sons and his wives upon camels;

α.31.18 Kah monchanau wame wunnetasumoh, kah wame maumachiash nish nóhtwunukish, kah netasu wamuhwhonche ut Padan$Aram, onk woh au Isaakanit 8shut ohkit Kanaan.
E.31.18 And he carried away all his cattle, and all his goods which he had gotten, the cattle of his getting, which he had gotten in Padanaram, for to go to Isaac his father in the land of Canaan.

α.31.19 Kah Laban monchu m8swau shepsoh, kah Rachel komm8to wuttinneukontunkoh 8shoh.
E.31.19 And Laban went to shear his sheep: and Rachel had stolen the images that were her father's.

α.31.20 Kah Jakob monchu matta wahteauug Laban Wussyrian, matta unnunk nummonchem.
E.31.20 And Jacob stole away unawares to Laban the Syrian, in that he told him not that he fled.

α.31.21 Nemehkuh nagum wussemo, kah wame ne ohtunk, kah nepau, kah qushkodteau seip, kah n8quashau nogqueu wadchuut Gilead.
E.31.21 So he fled with all that he had; and he rose up, and passed over the river, and set his face toward the mount Gilead.

α.31.22 Onk unnon Laban, nashikquinokok, Jakob wussemoi.
E.31.22 And it was told Laban on the third day that Jacob was fled.

α.31.23 Onk wechauau wematoh, kah wunn8sukauóuh nesausuk tahshikquinne, kah ummattanóuh wadchuut Gilead.
E.31.23 And he took his brethren with him, and pursued after him seven days' journey; and they overtook him in the mount Gilead.

α.31.24 Onk God uppeyaonuh Labanoh Wussyrian nukkonáe unukquomunat, & wuttinuh, ahque wutch wunneyeuonganit matcheus Jakob.
E.31.24 And God came to Laban the Syrian in a dream by night, and said unto him, Take heed that thou speak not to Jacob either good or bad.

α.31.25 Neit Laban mattanau Jakoboh, kah Jakob wekitteau ut wadchuut, kah Laban weeche wematoh wekiteáog ut wadchuut Gilead.
E.31.25 Then Laban overtook Jacob. Now Jacob had pitched his tent in the mount: and Laban with his brethren pitched in the mount of Gilead.

α.31.26 Onk Laban unnau Jakoboh, toh kutussen? kukkemeu moncheunk mat n8wahteouun, kah nemun nuttônog onatuh missinóut nashpe togkodteg.
E.31.26 And Laban said to Jacob, What hast thou done, that thou hast stolen away unawares to me, and carried away my daughters, as captives taken with the sword?

α.31.27 Tohwutch wussemoan kemeu, kah kukkemeu monchem wutche nuhhogkat, kah matta kutiss8un? onk woh kummoncheáhenup weeche wekontamóonk, kah ket8hamaongash, kah pepequoanash, kah harpsash.
E.31.27 Wherefore didst thou flee away secretly, and steal away from me; and didst not tell me, that I might have sent thee away with mirth, and with songs, with tabret, and with harp?

α.31.28 Kah matta kittinánumeuh nutchipwutt8napôn nunnaumonog, kah nuttônog, yeuyeu kummattammágwe ussem, ne ásean.
E.31.28 And hast not suffered me to kiss my sons and my daughters? thou hast now done foolishly in so doing.

α.31.29 Menuhkesuonk ohteau nunnutcheganit k8woskhenunat, qut ummanitt8moh k8sh8wôog nukken8nukup neásittupukok, n8wau ahque us Jakob wanegik asuh matchet.
E.31.29 It is in the power of my hand to do you hurt: but the God of your father spake unto me yesternight, saying, Take thou heed that thou speak not to Jacob either good or bad.

α.31.30 Onk yeuyeu kodmonchean, newutche m8cheke kukkodtantamup wek k8sh: tohwutch komm8toan nummanitt8mog?
E.31.30 And now, though thou wouldest needs be gone, because thou sore longedst after thy father's house, yet wherefore hast thou stolen my gods?

α.31.31 Kah Jakob namp8huk unnau Laban, newutche n8wabesip, newutche nussip, paguodche woh kutchekeeu neemunnumah kutt[ó]nog.
E.31.31 And Jacob answered and said to Laban, Because I was afraid: for I said, Peradventure thou wouldest take by force thy daughters from me.

α.31.32 Uttoh adt nameheadt kummanitt8mog ahque pomantaj, anaquabhettit nematinnónog naish uttiyeu wadtaihéean, ut nuhhogkat, kah neemunush: newutche Jakob matta wahteaúou Rachel ukkomm8tinuh.
E.31.32 With whomsoever thou findest thy gods, let him not live: before our brethren discern thou what is thine with me, and take it to thee. For Jacob knew not that Rachel had stolen them.

α.31.33 Onk Laban petutteau wekit Jakob, kah Leah weekit, kah wekoont wuttinnúmuneunk nesuog mittumwussisog, qut wanne wunnámheuh, neit sohham wutch Leah wekit kah petutteau Rachel wekit.
E.31.33 And Laban went into Jacob's tent, and into Leah's tent, and into the two maidservants' tents; but he found them not. Then went he out of Leah's tent, and entered into Rachel's tent.

α.31.34 Yeuyeu Rachel nemunont nunneukontunkoh uponoh ohpohteashitte[un]ganit wutch kamelsog, kah wutohpapinneuh: kah Laban natinneukontam wame wek, qut matta wunnàmheuh.
E.31.34 Now Rachel had taken the images, and put them in the camel's furniture, and sat upon them. And Laban searched all the tent, but found them not.

α.31.35 Onk unnau 8shoh, ahque toh ussunauwohúnitti nussontimom, newutche matta nunneepauoh anaquabean: newutche ne âhúttèhettit mittumwussioog nutáhtauun, onk natinohteau, qut matta nameheáou nunneukontunkoh.
E.31.35 And she said to her father, Let it not displease my lord that I cannot rise up before thee; for the custom of women is upon me. And he searched but found not the images.

α.31.36 Onk Jakob musquantam, kah ukkeketéhtauoh Labanoh, kah Jakob namp8huk wuttinuh Laban; teaguas nuppanneuss[é]onk, teaguas nummatcheseonk, waj musquanittamwe wunnaumatúhkéan.
E.31.36 And Jacob was wroth, and chode with Laban: and Jacob answered and said to Laban, What is my trespass? what is my sin, that thou hast so hotly pursued after me?

α.31.37 Natinneakontaman wame nutahtóonk teaguas kummiskom kummaumachih? yeu ponsh anaquabhettit neematog kah keematog, onk woh wussittumwog ut nashauwe kenawun.
E.31.37 Whereas thou hast searched all my stuff, what hast thou found of all thy household stuff? set it here before my brethren and thy brethren, that they may judge betwixt us both.

α.31.38 Neesnechage kodtumwae mahche k8weetomsh: squoshimusse shepsoh kah goatsoh matta nussauoúog: numposhimimwe floksog matta nummôwhôog.
E.31.38 This twenty years have I been with thee; thy ewes and thy she goats have not cast their young, and the rams of thy flock have I not eaten.

α.31.39 Noh woh nehnégikáuut, matta kuppaudtauun8un, ne n8wanteauun, kenatauwompatamun ut nunnutcheganit, komm8tomuk kesukodáeu, asuh komm8tomuk nukonáeu.
E.31.39 That which was torn of beasts I brought not unto thee; I bare the loss of it; of my hand didst thou require it, whether stolen by day, or stolen by night.

α.31.40 Ye[ú] mo nuttinaiin kesukodaeu, kussittau nuttônauúshik, kah t8hpu nukonaeu, kah kouéonk amái wutch nuskesukqut.
E.31.40 Thus I was; in the day the drought consumed me, and the frost by night; and my sleep departed from mine eyes.

α.31.41 Yeu nuttinaiin neesnechage kodtumwae kekit, k8tinnúmukáuunup nabo yauudt kodtumwae wutch nesuog kuttónog, kah nequtta tahshit kodtumwae wutch keneetasumog, kah kutôhs8wúnum nutonkquatongash piukqut nompe.
E.31.41 Thus have I been twenty years in thy house; I served thee fourteen years for thy two daughters, and six years for thy cattle: and thou hast changed my wages ten times.

α.31.42 Tohneit ummanitt8moh n8sh, ummanitt8moh Abraham, kah wabesuónche Isaak matta weetomuk8us, wunnamuhkut woh toh ne kittit móncheáhen: God naum nutôhquanum8onk, kah wutanakausuongash nunnutcheg, kah kutáushkómuk neasittupukok.
E.31.42 Except the God of my father, the God of Abraham, and the fear of Isaac, had been with me, surely thou hadst sent me away now empty. God hath seen mine affliction and the labour of my hands, and rebuked thee yesternight.

α.31.43 Onk Laban wunnamp8hamauoh, kah unnau Jakoboh, yeug wuttôneunk nuttônog, kah yeug mukkióg nummukkiyeúmog, kah yeug netasuog nunneetasúmog, kah wame ne nauman uttaihe: onk toh woh nuttinhéoog yeu kesukok yeug nuttônog, asuh ummukkiyeúm8uh ne neechahetticheh?
E.31.43 And Laban answered and said unto Jacob, These daughters are my daughters, and these children are my children, and these cattle are my cattle, and all that thou seest is mine: and what can I do this day unto these my daughters, or unto their children which they have born?

α.31.44 Yeuyeu newutche peyaush, wunn8wadtuh nen kah ken: kah wauwónaj ut nashauwe nen kah ken.
E.31.44 Now therefore come thou, let us make a covenant, I and thou; and let it be for a witness between me and thee.

α.31.45 Onk Jakob neemunum qussuk, kah neepataúun wutche pogkomuhkquonk.
E.31.45 And Jacob took a stone, and set it up for a pillar.

α.31.46 Kah Jakob unnau weematuh, mukinnum8k qussukquanash, kah nemunnumwog qussukquanash kah wunnumwonkquodtau[u]nkoash, kah meetsuog ne ut nomungquág.
E.31.46 And Jacob said unto his brethren, Gather stones; and they took stones, and made an heap: and they did eat there upon the heap.

α.31.47 Kah Laban wuttissowetamun Jegar$sahadutha. Qut Jakob wuttissowetamun Gale[a]d.
E.31.47 And Laban called it Jegarsahadutha: but Jacob called it Galeed.

α.31.48 Kah Laban n8wau, yeush nomungquagsh wauwon nashauwe et ken kah neen yeu kesukok, newutch ne hettamun Galeed.
E.31.48 And Laban said, This heap is a witness between me and thee this day. Therefore was the name of it called Galeed;

α.31.49 Kah Mizpàh, newutche n8wau, Jehovah askuhwhèteaj nashauwe nen kah ken, chachaubuhteáog.
E.31.49 And Mizpah; for he said, The LORD watch between me and thee, when we are absent one from another.

α.31.50 Onkupunadt nuttônog, asuh wonk ummittumwusséan onkatogig onk yeug nuttônog, matta how[à]n k8weetomuk8mun, naush God 8wauon nashauwe ken kah neen.
E.31.50 If thou shalt afflict my daughters, or if thou shalt take other wives beside my daughters, no man is with us; see, God is witness betwixt me and thee.

α.31.51 Onk Laban unnau Jakoboh, naush yeu nom8ungquág, kah naush yeu neepatúhquonk, ne yeu naumóunkquttau ut nashauwe nen kah ken.
E.31.51 And Laban said to Jacob, Behold this heap, and behold this pillar, which I have cast betwixt me and thee:

α.31.52 Yeu nom8unquag wauwóm8udj: matta kupaumukómaun8un yeu nom8ungquag, kah matta pish kupaumukomaéin yeu n8m8ungquag & yeu nepatuhquonk wutch wuskehuwaonk.
E.31.52 This heap be witness, and this pillar be witness, that I will not pass over this heap to thee, and that thou shalt not pass over this heap and this pillar unto me, for harm.

α.31.53 Ummanitt8moh Abraham kah ummanitt8moh Nahor, ummanitt8m8uh 8shuoh wussitich nashauwe kenawun, kah Jakob chadchekéyeuau nashpu wabesuónoncheh 8shoh Isaakoh.
E.31.53 The God of Abraham, and the God of Nahor, the God of their father, judge betwixt us. And Jacob sware by the fear of his father Isaac.

α.31.54 Neit Jakob sephausue sephausuongash ut wadchuut, onk weekomau weematuh meechinat petukqunneg, kah meechupanneg petukqunneg, kah nequttaqúnohteaog ut wadchúut.
E.31.54 Then Jacob offered sacrifice upon the mount, and called his brethren to eat bread: and they did eat bread, and tarried all night in the mount.

α.31.55 Onk nompoaeu Laban neepau, kah chipwuttauapwau wunnaumonuh, kah wuttônuh, kah 8nanaumuh, kah Laban na 8mun, au wutayeuonganit.
E.31.55 And early in the morning Laban rose up, and kissed his sons and his daughters, and blessed them: and Laban departed, and returned unto his place.

α.32.1 ONk Jakob aáyomp, kah wutangelsumoh God wunnogskauóoh.
E.32.1 And Jacob went on his way, and the angels of God met him.

α.32.2 Kah Jakob nauont nah, n8wau, yeu wutayeuwéhteomoh God, wuttissowetamun yeu ayeuonk Mahanaim.
E.32.2 And when Jacob saw them, he said, This is God's host: and he called the name of that place Mahanaim.

α.32.3 Kah Jakob ann8nau wuttamomeúaénuoh negonaeu, en Esau$ut weematut, ut ohket Seir, wutohkit Edom.
E.32.3 And Jacob sent messengers before him to Esau his brother unto the land of Seir, the country of Edom.

α.32.4 Onk noh wuttinuh, n8wau yeu pish kuttinnóneau nussontimom Esau, kittinneum Jakob yeu wussin, nuttinneapeyom Labanut, kah na nutayin yeu pajeh.
E.32.4 And he commanded them, saying, Thus shall ye speak unto my lord Esau; Thy servant Jacob saith thus, I have sojourned with Laban, and stayed there until now:

α.32.5 Kah n8wadchan oxinog, kah assesog, floksog, wosketompae wuttinnèumuneunk, kah mittumwussisse wuttinneumuneunk, kah nutan8team unnonat nussontimom, onk woh nunnamteoh kitteamonteanittúonk anaquabean.
E.32.5 And I have oxen, and asses, flocks, and menservants, and womenservants: and I have sent to tell my lord, that I may find grace in thy sight.

α.32.6 Kah an8naenuog qushkeog en Jakob$ut, n8waog, nuppeyaônómun kemat Esau, kah wonk peyau kenogskunk, kah yauut pasuk88oh wosketompuh weechâau.
E.32.6 And the messengers returned to Jacob, saying, We came to thy brother Esau, and also he cometh to meet thee, and four hundred men with him.

α.32.7 Kah Jakob mishewabesu, kah wuttamantam, onk chippinau missinninnuh ne weechógqutcheh, kah floksoh kah heardsoh, kah kamelsoh neese chippe.
E.32.7 Then Jacob was greatly afraid and distressed: and he divided the people that was with him, and the flocks, and herds, and the camels, into two bands;

α.32.8 Kah n8wau, Esau peyaónont nequt chepiyeuoh todtogkomont, neit nequt chepiyeuog neg sequttahwhutcheg, woh pohquohhamwog.
E.32.8 And said, If Esau come to the one company, and smite it, then the other company which is left shall escape.

α.32.9 Kah Jakob n8wau, woi Ummanitt8moh n8sh Abraham, káh Ummanitt8moh n8sh Isaak, Jehovah kuttissup qushkish en kutohket, kah en kutawâmóohtu, kah pish k8nenéhush.
E.32.9 And Jacob said, O God of my father Abraham, and God of my father Isaac, the LORD which saidst unto me, Return unto thy country, and to thy kindred, and I will deal well with thee:

α.32.10 Neen nuppeisses onk nish papeasikish wame kummonaneteaongash, & wame wunnomwausséonk, ne annumauadt kittinneum, newutche webe anwohhou weeche nupaumushon yeu Jordan, kah yeuyeu nunneesechipan.
E.32.10 I am not worthy of the least of all the mercies, and of all the truth, which thou hast shewed unto thy servant; for with my staff I passed over this Jordan; and now I am become two bands.

α.32.11 Pohquohwusseh k8wehquetumoush wutche wunnutcheganit nemat, wutch wunnutcheganit Esau: newutché n8wabesuon ishkont peyau kah nuttadtogkomuk, kah wutokasin weeche mukkiog.
E.32.11 Deliver me, I pray thee, from the hand of my brother, from the hand of Esau: for I fear him, lest he will come and smite me, and the mother with the children.

α.32.12 Onk kittinn8wop wunnamuhkut k8nenéhesh, kah k8skannemuneog nutogqueh kehtahanne naguntu, na matta woh w[ò]ogketam8mug newutche muttanwog.
E.32.12 And thou saidst, I will surely do thee good, and make thy seed as the sand of the sea, which cannot be numbered for multitude.

α.32.13 Onk ne kouin ne nohkog, kah nemunum ne ohtag wunnutcheganit mag8onk wutch Esau wematoh.
E.32.13 And he lodged there that same night; and took of that which came to his hand a present for Esau his brother;

α.32.14 Neesit pasuk88oh squoshimwoh goatsoh, kah neesinchagodtoh nomposhimwog goatsog, neesit pasuk88oh squashemwusoh shepsoh, kah neesinchagkodtoh nomposhimwoh.
E.32.14 Two hundred she goats, and twenty he goats, two hundred ewes, and twenty rams,

α.32.15 Swinchagodtoh kamelsoh wussogodtunkaninitche, weeche kamelsemesoh: yauunchagkodtoh kowas[h]inoh, kah piukqussuog nomposhimwog: neesinchagkodtog squoshimwog asseṣog, kah piukqussuog assemésog.
E.32.15 Thirty milch camels with their colts, forty kine, and ten bulls, twenty she asses, and ten foals.

α.32.16 Onk nah upponuh ut wunnutchgan8óut wuttiñeumoh, nish$noh wuttinussiñeau chipushaog: kah unnau wuttinneumoh, paumukiek, kah chadchaubenushagk nashauwe chipwushaonk, kah chipwushaonk.
E.32.16 And he delivered them into the hand of his servants, every drove by themselves; and said unto his servants, Pass over before me, and put a space betwixt drove and drove.

α.32.17 Kah unnau negonshanutcheh, n8wau Esau nemat nogushkongquean, kah nat8tomungquean, n8wadt, howan ken, kah tunohkutom? kah howane wuttaiheuh anaquoshaan?
E.32.17 And he commanded the foremost, saying, When Esau my brother meeteth thee, and asketh thee, saying, Whose art thou? and whither goest thou? and whose are these before thee?

α.32.18 Neit woh kussim wuttaiheoh kittinneum Jakob, yeu mag8onk uss8weuttauun nussontimom ut Esau, kah kusseh wonk nagum wuttat 8m.
E.32.18 Then thou shalt say, They be thy servant Jacob's; it is a present sent unto my lord Esau: and, behold, also he is behind us.

α.32.19 Onk netátup wuttinnon nahohtoeu peyònutcheh, kah nashéuunutcheh, kah wame néh asukoncheg neetasu, n8wadt, yeu woh kuttinnoneau Esau nameheug.
E.32.19 And so commanded he the second, and the third, and all that followed the droves, saying, On this manner shall ye speak unto Esau, when ye find him.

α.32.20 Kah wonk unn8k, kusseh kittinneum Jakob wuttat 8m, newutche n8wau, N8sikitteoh nashpe mag8onk negonshaúm8uk, kah ompetak pish nunnaum wuskesuk, pagodche wussuhketeahuk nuskesuk.
E.32.20 And say ye moreover, Behold, thy servant Jacob is behind us. For he said, I will appease him with the present that goeth before me, and afterward I will see his face; peradventure he will accept of me.

α.32.21 Neit mag8onk negonne qushkodteaum8: kah nagum ne nohkog weechequom8mau chaubwushanutcheh.
E.32.21 So went the present over before him: and himself lodged that night in the company.

α.32.22 Kah nepau ne nohkog, kah nemunau neesuoh ummittumwussoh, kah nesuoh mittumwussissoh wuttinneum, káh nabo nequttuoh wunnaumonuh, kah qushkodteau ut pongquag Jabbok.
E.32.22 And he rose up that night, and took his two wives, and his two womenservants, and his eleven sons, and passed over the ford Jabbok.

α.32.23 Onk noh wunnemunoh, kah ukqushkodteaheuh sepuut, kah qushkodteato wame ne ahtunk.
E.32.23 And he took them, and sent them over the brook, and sent over that he had.

α.32.24 Kah Jakob nussiyeu, kah wosketomp ukquohquodtinohkonuh wampaneh.
E.32.24 And Jacob was left alone; and there wrestled a man with him until the breaking of the day.

α.32.25 Kah nag* matta wussohkauoh, ummissinoh ut ummauweteasumut: & Jakob wobpé qunukqui quadtinuthettit.
E.32.25 And when he saw that he prevailed not against him, he touched the hollow of his thigh; and the hollow of Jacob's thigh was out of joint, as he wrestled with him.

α.32.26 Kah n8wau ponuneh[:] newutche mohtompan, kah n8wau, Matta kupponann8h, kuttumma wunnanuméan.
E.32.26 And he said, Let me go, for the day breaketh. And he said, I will not let thee go, except thou bless me.

α.32.27 Kah wuttinuh, Toh kuttehenit? kah n8wau, Jakob.
E.32.27 And he said unto him, What is thy name? And he said, Jacob.

α.32.28 Kah n8wau, matta pish wonk kuttehenitteuh Jakob, qut Israel, newutche onatuh Sontim kummenuhkes ut Godut kah missinninnûtu, kah kussohkus.
E.32.28 And he said, Thy name shall be called no more Jacob, but Israel: for as a prince hast thou power with God and with men, and hast prevailed.

α.32.29 Kah Jakob wunnat8tumau kah n8wau, missohhamah k8wehquetumoush k8wésuonk, kah n8wau, Tohwutch nat8tomuhteaan n8wesuonk? onk ne wuttit wunnanumon.
E.32.29 And Jacob asked him, and said, Tell me, I pray thee, thy name. And he said, Wherefore is it that thou dost ask after my name? And he blessed him there.

α.32.30 Kah Jakob wuttissowetamun ne ohke Peniel, newutche nunnau God muskesukqut wutch muskesukqut, kah nukketeaonk wadchanumun.
E.32.30 And Jacob called the name of the place Peniel: for I have seen God face to face, and my life is preserved.

α.32.31 Kah quoshkodteadt Peniel pashpishau, kah kehkéchhau ut wobpéit,
E.32.31 And as he passed over Penuel the sun rose upon him, and he halted upon his thigh.

α.32.32 newaj wunnaumoneunk Israel matta meechhetteg wutchaht ne nanohtagkup ne ohtag ut pukquag mobpee, yeu pajeh yeu kesukok, newutche mussinnum ut pukquag wobpee Jakob wutchoht nanohtag.
E.32.32 Therefore the children of Israel eat not of the sinew which shrank, which is upon the hollow of the thigh, unto this day: because he touched the hollow of Jacob's thigh in the sinew that shrank.

α.33.1 ONk Jakob spuhquaeu kah natawômpu, & kusseh Esau peyau, & weechaau yauut pasuk88oh wosketompuh, kah chippinau mukkiésoh en Leahut, kah Rachelut, kah ut nesuoh wuttinneumoh mittumwussisoh.
E.33.1 And Jacob lifted up his eyes, and looked, and, behold, Esau came, and with him four hundred men. And he divided the children unto Leah, and unto Rachel, and unto the two handmaids.

α.33.2 Kah wunnegonashoh wuttinneumoh mittumwussissog, kah wunnechanoh, & Leah, kah wunnechanoh nahohtoeu, kah Rachel kah Joseph wuttat.
E.33.2 And he put the handmaids and their children foremost, and Leah and her children after, and Rachel and Joseph hindermost.

α.33.3 Onk upaumukauoh wunnegonuhkauoh, kah nauwaeu en ohkeit nesausuk tahshit, kah na pas8sukauont weematoh.
E.33.3 And he passed over before them, and bowed himself to the ground seven times, until he came near to his brother.

α.33.4 Onk Esau quogqueu wunnogskauoh, & ukkinuh, kah ompatissinwog wussittipukanòash kah wutchipwutt8napo, kah mauog.
E.33.4 And Esau ran to meet him, and embraced him, and fell on his neck, and kissed him: and they wept.

α.33.5 Kah spuhqueu, kah naau mittumwossisoh kah mukkiesoh, kah n8wau, Howanig yeug weechogqueaneg? kah n8wau, Mukkiog God nanôwe anumaont kittinneumoh.
E.33.5 And he lifted up his eyes, and saw the women and the children; and said, Who are those with thee? And he said, The children which God hath graciously given thy servant.

α.33.6 Neit wuttinneumoh mittumwossisog pas8tshaog, kah mukkiog kah nauwaéog.
E.33.6 Then the handmaidens came near, they and their children, and they bowed themselves.

α.33.7 Kah Leah wonk wéeche wu[u]nechanoh pas8tshaog, kah nauwaéog: kah ompetasik Joseph pas8tshau, kah Rachel, kah nauwaéog.
E.33.7 And Leah also with her children came near, and bowed themselves: and after came Joseph near and Rachel, and they bowed themselves.

α.33.8 Kah n8wau, Toh kittinnauwuttam neg wame netasuog nogskóuagig? kah n8wau, Newutche namehteauun wussikiteahittúonk ut nussontimomut.
E.33.8 And he said, What meanest thou by all this drove which I met? And he said, These are to find grace in the sight of my lord.

α.33.9 Kah Esau n8wau, nuttapet nemat, wuttaiheesh ne ahtóan.
E.33.9 And Esau said, I have enough, my brother; keep that thou hast unto thyself.

α.33.10 Kah Jakob n8wau, matta, k8wehquetumoush, yeuyeu amehteauon kitteamonteanittúonk ut anaquabean neit nemunush nummag8onk, ut nunnutcheganit, newutch waj nunnaum kuskesuk, onatuh naumuk God wuskesuk, kah k8womon[é]h.
E.33.10 And Jacob said, Nay, I pray thee, if now I have found grace in thy sight, then receive my present at my hand: for therefore I have seen thy face, as though I had seen the face of God, and thou wast pleased with me.

α.33.11 Nemunush k8wehquetumoush n8naneteaonk ne paudtauun, newutche nanowe n8nanumuk God, kah newutche n8wameit kah ummenuhke nanumpassumoh, kah wunnemunúmun.
E.33.11 Take, I pray thee, my blessing that is brought to thee; because God hath dealt graciously with me, and because I have enough. And he urged him, and he took it.

α.33.12 Kah n8wau, Pomushaituh, kah monchetuh, kah nagonsham[.]
E.33.12 And he said, Let us take our journey, and let us go, and I will go before thee.

α.33.13 Kah wuttinuh, Nussontimom wahteoun mukkiog n8chumwesuog, kah floksog, heardsog wompequauog n8wechógquog, kah kenup8hkahettit pasuk kesuk, wame floksog nupp8og.
E.33.13 And he said unto him, My lord knoweth that the children are tender, and the flocks and herds with young are with me: and if men should overdrive them one day, all the flock will die.

α.33.14 Nussontimom k8wehquetumoush negónuhkau kittinneum, kah nummanunne nummonchanóog, neyanahkuhquomaushahettit, nutanakausuongan anaquashi: kah neyanahkuhquomaushahettit mukkiog, onk peyauónog nussontimomut ut Seir.
E.33.14 Let my lord, I pray thee, pass over before his servant: and I will lead on softly, according as the cattle that goeth before me and the children be able to endure, until I come unto my lord unto Seir.

α.33.15 Kah Esau n8wau, Yeuyeu nukkodtumauunutti nawhutche wech[ò]gqueaneg, kah n8wau, tohwutche yeu, namehteauwutti kitteamonteanittuonk wuskesukqut nussontimom.
E.33.15 And Esau said, Let me now leave with thee some of the folk that are with me. And he said, What needeth it? let me find grace in the sight of my lord.

α.33.16 Kah Esau qushkeu ne kesukok, en mayut én Seir
E.33.16 So Esau returned that day on his way unto Seir.

α.33.17 Kah Jakob au Sukkoth, kah wekitteau, kah wekikauau wunneetasumoh, newajeh hettamuk ne ayeuonk Sukkoth.
E.33.17 And Jacob journeyed to Succoth, and built him an house, and made booths for his cattle: therefore the name of the place is called Succoth.

α.33.18 Kah Jakob peyau Shamel, otan ut Shechem, ut ohkeit Kanan, wag Padan-Aram: kah wetu anaquohtag otan.
E.33.18 And Jacob came to Shalem, a city of Shechem, which is in the land of Canaan, when he came from Padanaram; and pitched his tent before the city.

α.33.19 Kah adtôau kodchúhki ohteuk, ne ponuk week, wunnutcehganit wunnechanoh Hamor 8shoh Shechem, nequt pasuk88h shepsemesoh.
E.33.19 And he bought a parcel of a field, where he had spread his tent, at the hand of the children of Hamor, Shechem's father, for an hundred pieces of money.

α.33.20 Kah ne wuttit ayimunau Altar, kah wuttissowetamun El-Elioe-Israel: Manit Ummanitt8moh Israel.
E.33.20 And he erected there an altar, and called it EleloheIsrael.

α.34.1 ONk Dinah wuttaunoh Leah, nekitteauompoh Jakoboh, sohham natauwóhkau wuttauneunk ne ohkeit.
E.34.1 And Dinah the daughter of Leah, which she bare unto Jacob, went out to see the daughters of the land.

α.34.2 Kah Shechem wunnaumonuh Hamor, Wuthivite, Sontim ne ut ohkeit, nauont, wunnemunoh, wunnesinuh, kah ummatcheuh.
E.34.2 And when Shechem the son of Hamor the Hivite, prince of the country, saw her, he took her, and lay with her, and defiled her.

α.34.3 Kah ukketeahogkôunoh kodtanumau Dinah wuttaunoh Jakob, kah womonau nunksquoh, kah ukken8nuh ut wuttahut nunksquau.
E.34.3 And his soul clave unto Dinah the daughter of Jacob, and he loved the damsel, and spake kindly unto the damsel.

α.34.4 Onk Shechem ken8nau 8shoh Hamor, n8wau, Yeuoh quaguashwehtamah nunksquau n8mittumwussissin.
E.34.4 And Shechem spake unto his father Hamor, saying, Get me this damsel to wife.

α.34.5 Onk Jakob n8tog noh matcheheau Dinahoh wuttaunoh (yeuyeu wunnaumonuh weechayéumóog neétasu ut ohtakonit) kah Jakob matta toh éyeu ne toh wuttit peyón[a]u.
E.34.5 And Jacob heard that he had defiled Dinah his daughter: now his sons were with his cattle in the field: and Jacob held his peace until they were come.

α.34.6 Onk Hamor 8shoh Shechem sohhau en Jakob, ukkéket8hkauónat.
E.34.6 And Hamor the father of Shechem went out unto Jacob to commune with him.

α.34.7 Kah wunnaumonuh Jakob w[a]munit ohteakonit, n8tamòhettit: & wosketompaog neuanatamwog, kah wussaume musquanatámwog, newutche as8kanakausit ut Israelut, neesuk wuttaunoh Jakob matta woh ne asémuk.
E.34.7 And the sons of Jacob came out of the field when they heard it: and the men were grieved, and they were very wroth, because he had wrought folly in Israel in lying with Jacob's daughter: which thing ought not to be done.

α.34.8 Kah Hamor ukkeket8hkauoh, n8wau, Ukkete[à]hogkôunoh Shechem nunnaumon kodtanumoh kuttaunoh, k8wehquet[ú]moush aninn[a]mau ummittumwossitch.
E.34.8 And Hamor communed with them, saying, The soul of my son Shechem longeth for your daughter: I pray you give her him to wife.

α.34.9 Kah wetauatitteuh, aninnumaiinnean kuttaun8óog, kah neemun8k nuttaununnónog.
E.34.9 And make ye marriages with us, and give your daughters unto us, and take our daughters unto you.

α.34.10 Onk woh k8weechaiyeumimun, kah ohke ohteau anaquabeyóg: ayékq, kah na$ut anaqushunk, kah na wutohkek.
E.34.10 And ye shall dwell with us: and the land shall be before you; dwell and trade ye therein, and get you possessions therein.

α.34.11 Kah Shechem unnôh 8shoh kah wunnohtônugqussoh, namehteauutti kitteamonteanittuonk ut anaquabeóg, kah uttóh aseóg ne kittinúmauununeau.
E.34.11 And Shechem said unto her father and unto her brethren, Let me find grace in your eyes, and what ye shall say unto me I will give.

α.34.12 Uttoh an kodtantamóg, wehquetum[a]iegk mag8onk asuh ahtóonk, kuttinnumauúnneau, ne an8waog, qut aninnumaiegk nunksqua nummittumwossissinat.
E.34.12 Ask me never so much dowry and gift, and I will give according as ye shall say unto me: but give me the damsel to wife.

α.34.13 Kah wunnaumonuh Jakob namp8hamauóog Shechemoh, kah Hamoroh 8shoh as8kekodteamóe, kah n8waog, Newutche matchéheau Dinahoh umissésuoh.
E.34.13 And the sons of Jacob answered Shechem and Hamor his father deceitfully, and said, because he had defiled Dinah their sister:

α.34.14 Kah wuttinóuh, matta woh yeu nutusseinan, aninnumauon nummissésinónuh, noh matta quoshqussóseg, newutche ne nukkekômitteaonganun.
E.34.14 And they said unto them, We cannot do this thing, to give our sister to one that is uncircumcised; for that were a reproach unto us:

α.34.15 Qut yeu$ut kuttapeneauunumun kenaau, unaiyóg neániyéog, kah nish$noh pasu wosketomp q[o]shqusausit.
E.34.15 But in this will we consent unto you: If ye will be as we be, that every male of you be circumcised;

α.34.16 Neit nenawun kittinnumauunumun nuttannonog kenaau, wonk neemunnómun kuttaun8wóog, onk k8wetómunumun, onk kuppasuk88mun.
E.34.16 Then will we give our daughters unto you, and we will take your daughters to us, and we will dwell with you, and we will become one people.

α.34.17 Kah matta kukkeihtaéog kukquoshqussósinneaout; neit neemunnómun nuttaunun, kah nummonchemun.
E.34.17 But if ye will not hearken unto us, to be circumcised; then will we take our daughter, and we will be gone.

α.34.18 Onk ukkutt8wongan88ash 8sekitteohkongqunash Hamor, kah Shechem Hamor wunnaumonuh.
E.34.18 And their words pleased Hamor, and Shechem Hamor's son.

α.34.19 Onk wusken matta ianóntam8 ne ussénàt, newutche tapeneauau wuttaunoh Jakob: káh m8cheke quttiánumau, onk wame ut weekit 8shoh.
E.34.19 And the young man deferred not to do the thing, because he had delight in Jacob's daughter: and he was more honourable than all the house of his father.

α.34.20 Neit Hamor kah Shechem yeuh wunnaumonuh, peyauog squoantam ut otanat, & kéket8hkauóog wosketompuh ut wut8tanaòut, n8waog.
E.34.20 And Hamor and Shechem his son came unto the gate of their city, and communed with the men of their city, saying,

α.34.21 Yeug wosketompaog manunnissuog ut kuhhogkanónut, newutche wutóhkhettich ne ohkeit, kah na$ut anaqusháhettich, newutche, ohke, kusseh wamut nag$wutche, mittumwussitteuh wuttaun8uh, kah aninnumauontuh kuttaunónuh.
E.34.21 These men are peaceable with us; therefore let them dwell in the land, and trade therein; for the land, behold, it is large enough for them; let us take their daughters to us for wives, and let us give them our daughters.

α.34.22 Webe yeu ut wosketompaog k8n8wónanónog, k8weetomukqunnanónut, kup-pasuk8inneanónut, nish$noh wosketomp quoshqusausit, neyane quoshqusauṡhettit.
E.34.22 Only herein will the men consent unto us for to dwell with us, to be one people, if every male among us be circumcised, as they are circumcised.

α.34.23 Nishnoh uppuppinushim8m8oh, kah wuttinneetuongan8, kah nish$noh wunnetasúm8uh, sunnum$matta k8taihéinan? qut webe tapeneauontuh, onk k8wetomukqunnónog.
E.34.23 Shall not their cattle and their substance and every beast of their's be our's? only let us consent unto them, and they will dwell with us.

α.34.24 Kah wunnamptauóog Hamor, kah Shechem wunnaumonuh, wame neh sohhamunutcheh wutch squoantamut otanit, kah nish$noh pasuk wosketomp quoshqusausu, wame neh sohhamunutcheh wutch squoantamut wut8tanit.
E.34.24 And unto Hamor and unto Shechem his son hearkened all that went out of the gate of his city; and every male was circumcised, all that went out of the gate of his city.

α.34.25 Onk n$nih nashikquinukok kehkecheṡhettit, neesuoh wunnaumonuh Jakob, Simeon kah Levi Dinah wunohtonukqussoh, neeswe neemunnumwog togkodtegash, menuhke quenittamwog otan, kah paguanáog wame wosketompuh.
E.34.25 And it came to pass on the third day, when they were sore, that two of the sons of Jacob, Simeon and Levi, Dinah's brethren, took each man his sword, and came upon the city boldly, and slew all the males.

α.34.26 Kah nushaog Hamor, kah Shechemoh wunnaumonuh en kenag togkodteg, kah neemunáog Dinahoh wutch Shechem wekit kah sohhamwog.
E.34.26 And they slew Hamor and Shechem his son with the edge of the sword, and took Dinah out of Shechem's house, and went out.

α.34.27 Wunnaumonuh Jakob quenittamwog ne nohtómuk, kah mukk8kinnumwog otan, newutche nag matcheheáog ummissésuoh.
E.34.27 The sons of Jacob came upon the slain, and spoiled the city, because they had defiled their sister.

α.34.28 Mukkináog wutshepsum8uh, kah wutoxinum8uh, kah wutassum8uh, kah ne noh ohtag otanit, kah ne ohtagupoh ohteakonit.
E.34.28 They took their sheep, and their oxen, and their asses, and that which was in the city, and that which was in the field,

α.34.29 Kah wame wenauwetuonk, kàh wame uppeissésum8uh, kah 8mittumwussissineunk ummissinohkonáoh: kah mukk8kinóog wame ne ohtag wetuómut.
E.34.29 And all their wealth, and all their little ones, and their wives took they captive, and spoiled even all that was in the house.

α.34.30 Onk Jakob unnàu Simeonun, kah Levioh, k8tamohkusumw8 kummatchemunkquinneat k8wutche neg wadohkitcheg ohkeit: kenugke Kananitsog, kah Perisitsog: kah nen nutohguhsinneat, pish nag mukinne[ô]g ayeuuhkóne nen, kah pish nushhukquog, kah pish nen nuppaguanit, kah neek.
E.34.30 And Jacob said to Simeon and Levi, Ye have troubled me to make me to stink among the inhabitants of the land, among the Canaanites and the Perizzites: and I being few in number, they shall gather themselves together against me, and slay me; and I shall be destroyed, I and my house.

α.34.31 Kah n8waog, noh woh anehheau nummissésinónuh, onatuh n$noh nanwunw8dsquaâsit.
E.34.31 And they said, Should he deal with our sister as with an harlot?

α.35.1 ONk God unnau Jakoboh, nepaush ogquodchuaush Bethel, kah na wutohkish, kah na$ut ayish Altar en Godut, noh naeihtunkquean, wasémwean wutch wuskesukqut Esau kemat.
E.35.1 And God said unto Jacob, Arise, go up to Bethel, and dwell there: and make there an altar unto God, that appeared unto thee when thou fleddest from the face of Esau thy brother.

α.35.2 Neit Jakob unnau neh wame wekit apinitcheh, kah wame neh wechogqutcheh, pogken8k penowe manittóog k8wutche kuhhogkaout, kah pahkesek, kah ôs8wunum8k kutogk8un8ash.
E.35.2 Then Jacob said unto his household, and to all that were with him, Put away the strange gods that are among you, and be clean, and change your garments:

α.35.3 Onk nepauwutteuh, kah ogquodchuontuh Bethel, kah na nutit ayimun Altar en Godut, noh n8tiup ne kesukok wodtaméhpunáan, kah noh weecháop en mayut ne [á]yomp.
E.35.3 And let us arise, and go up to Bethel; and I will make there an altar unto God, who answered me in the day of my distress, and was with me in the way which I went.

α.35.4 Onk nag aninnumauáog Jakoboh wame penowe manitt8h neh apinitcheh wunnutcheganóut, kah wame wusságsohh8unóuh, neg wuttauogkouòut: onk Jakob upposekinuh ut n8htimussit kishke Shechem.
E.35.4 And they gave unto Jacob all the strange gods which were in their hand, and all their earrings which were in their ears; and Jacob hid them under the oak which was by Shechem.

α.35.5 Onk auog, kah 8wabesehuwáonk Jehovah ohteau otanáhtu quinnuppe, kah matta asuhkauauôog wunnaumonuh Jakob.
E.35.5 And they journeyed: and the terror of God was upon the cities that were round about them, and they did not pursue after the sons of Jacob.

α.35.6 Neit Jakob peyáu Luz, ut ohket Kanaan (ne Bethel) nagum kah wame missinninnuh weechogqutcheh.
E.35.6 So Jacob came to Luz, which is in the land of Canaan, that is, Bethel, he and all the people that were with him.

α.35.7 Onk ne wuttit ayeuon Altar, kah wutissowetamun ayeuonk, El-Bethel, newutche na God wuttit naéihtaonuh wasémwut wutch wuskesukqut wematoh.
E.35.7 And he built there an altar, and called the place Elbethel: because there God appeared unto him, when he fled from the face of his brother.

α.35.8 Kah Deborah Rebekah wunn8sásumoh nupp8, kah noh posekinuh wômokôag Bethel, ut agwe n8htimissit, kah ussowetamun Allon-Bachuth.
E.35.8 But Deborah Rebekah's nurse died, and she was buried beneath Bethel under an oak: and the name of it was called Allonbachuth.

α.35.9 Kah God wonk naiehtaau Jakoboh, waj sohhog Padan-Aram, kah 8nanumuh.
E.35.9 And God appeared unto Jacob again, when he came out of Padanaram, and blessed him.

α.35.10 Kah God wuttinuh, kuttissowis Jakob, matta pish wonk kuttissowesu Jakob, qut Israel ne k8wesuonk, kah wuttiss8wenuh Israel.
E.35.10 And God said unto him, Thy name is Jacob: thy name shall not be called any more Jacob, but Israel shall be thy name: and he called his name Israel.

α.35.11 Kah God wuttinuh, nen Manitt8 wamemanuhkése, mishummechumish, kah muttáaush, wutohtim[ô]in, kah m8naash wutohtimòneash pish wutchayeum8ash kuhhogkat, kah tahs8tamwog pish 8mwog kusseganohtogqut.
E.35.11 And God said unto him, I am God Almighty: be fruitful and multiply; a nation and a company of nations shall be of thee, and kings shall come out of thy loins;

α.35.12 Kah ne ohke anúmagup Abraham kah Isáak, kuttinnumàunun, kah k8skannemunneog nahohtôeu ken nuttinnúmauoneau ohke.
E.35.12 And the land which I gave Abraham and Isaac, to thee I will give it, and to thy seed after thee will I give the land.

α.35.13 Onk God ushpeu nah wutch ne ut ayeuonganit keket8hkauomp.
E.35.13 And God went up from him in the place where he talked with him.

α.35.14 Onk Jakob wpnam neepatúhquonk ne áyeuonganit adt ken8nukqut, hassun nepatuhquonk, onk ne wussokanumun wuttattamòe sephausuonk onk ne wussokanumun pummee.
E.35.14 And Jacob set up a pillar in the place where he talked with him, even a pillar of stone: and he poured a drink offering thereon, and he poured oil thereon.

α.35.15 Kah Jakob wuttissowetamun ne ayeuonk, God ne adt ken8nomp, Bethel.
E.35.15 And Jacob called the name of the place where God spake with him, Bethel.

α.35.16 Onk 8mwog Bethel, kah na wutch pahs88 Ephrath, kah Rachel nechau, kah siogke nechau.
E.35.16 And they journeyed from Bethel; and there was but a little way to come to Ephrath: and Rachel travailed, and she had hard labour.

α.35.17 Onk n$nih siogke nechad, midwife wuttinuh, ahque wabesish, yeu wonk mo[s] k8wadchan kenaumon.
E.35.17 And it came to pass, when she was in hard labour, that the midwife said unto her, Fear not; thou shalt have this son also.

α.35.18 Onk n$nih keteahogkou aumait (newutche nupp8) kah wuttissowenuh Benoni, kah 8shoh wuttissowenukquoh Benjamin.
E.35.18 And it came to pass, as her soul was in departing, (for she died) that she called his name Benoni: but his father called him Benjamin.

α.35.19 Onk Rachel nupp8, kah posekinau en mayut, ut nogque Ephrath, uttiyeu Bethlehem.
E.35.19 And Rachel died, and was buried in the way to Ephrath, which is Bethlehem.

α.35.20 Onk Jakob ponamun nepatuhquonk woskeche weenohket, ne pogkomuhquonk 8wenohke Rachel yeu pajeh kesukok.
E.35.20 And Jacob set a pillar upon her grave: that is the pillar of Rachel's grave unto this day.

α.35.21 Onk Israel na 8mun, kah wekitteau ut ongkouwe wonkon8sinit Edaar.
E.35.21 And Israel journeyed, and spread his tent beyond the tower of Edar.

α.35.22 Onk n$nih, Israel na wadohket, kah Ruben monchu, kah neesin Bilha 8wishquineuh wutch Jakob, kah Israel wunn8tamun; onk wunnaumonuh Jakob nabo nesu8oh.
E.35.22 And it came to pass, when Israel dwelt in that land, that Reuben went and lay with Bilhah his father's concubine: and Israel heard it. Now the sons of Jacob were twelve:

α.35.23 Wunnaumonuh Leah, Ruben, Jakob mohtomegheoncheh, kah Simeon, kah Levi, kah Juda[h], kah Ishakar, kah Zabulon.
E.35.23 The sons of Leah; Reuben, Jacob's firstborn, and Simeon, and Levi, and Judah, and Issachar, and Zebulun:

α.35.24 Wunnaumonuh Rachel, Joseph kah Benjamin.
E.35.24 The sons of Rachel; Joseph, and Benjamin:

α.35.25 Wunnaumonuh Bilhah ummaidumoh Rachel, Dan, kah Naphtali.
E.35.25 And the sons of Bilhah, Rachel's handmaid; Dan, and Naphtali:

α.35.26 Kah wunnaumonuh Zilpah ummaidumoh Leah, Gad, kah Asher. Yeuh wunnaumonuh Jakob, neh adt nekitteawutche ut Padan-Aram.
E.35.26 And the sons of Zilpah, Leah's handmaid: Gad, and Asher: these are the sons of Jacob, which were born to him in Padanaram.

α.35.27 Onk Jakob peyaònau 8shoh Isaakoh ut Mamre, ut otanit Arba (ne Hebron) uttoh Abraham kah Isaak àneapeyahettit.
E.35.27 And Jacob came unto Isaac his father unto Mamre, unto the city of Arbah, which is Hebron, where Abraham and Isaac sojourned.

α.35.28 Kah ukkesukkodtumash Isaak nequt pasuk8e kodtumwae kah shwosuk tahshinchage kodtumwae.
E.35.28 And the days of Isaac were an hundred and fourscore years.

α.35.29 Onk Isaak nashomont ukketeahogkonuh, kah nupp8: kah mukkinneu ummissinninnúmut, mahtauntog kah sepe pomantog: kah wunnaumonuh Esau kah Jakob nag upposekinòuh.
E.35.29 And Isaac gave up the ghost, and died, and was gathered unto his people, being old and full of days: and his sons Esau and Jacob buried him.

α.36.1 KAH yeush wutontseongash Esau: yeuoh Edom.
E.36.1 Now these are the generations of Esau, who is Edom.

α.36.2 Esau ummittumwussu wuttauneunk ut Kanaan. Adah wuttaunoh Elon, wuttehittite, kah [À]holibama wuttaunoh Anah, wuttaunoh Zibeon wuthivite.
E.36.2 Esau took his wives of the daughters of Canaan; Adah the daughter of Elon the Hittite, and Aholibamah the daughter of Anah the daughter of Zibeon the Hivite;

α.36.3 Kah Bashemath wuttaunoh Ishmael, wesumissoh Nebaioth.
E.36.3 And Bashemath Ishmael's daughter, sister of Nebajoth.

α.36.4 Kah Adah nekitteau Esauoh, Eliphaz, kah Bashemath nekheau Revel.
E.36.4 And Adah bare to Esau Eliphaz; and Bashemath bare Reuel;

α.36.5 Kah Aholibamah nekheau Jeush, & Jaalam, kah Korah, yeuh wunnaumonuh Esau, ut nekitteawutche ut ohket Kanaan.
E.36.5 And Aholibamah bare Jeush, and Jaalam, and Korah: these are the sons of Esau, which were born unto him in the land of Canaan.

α.36.6 Kah Esau nemunau ummittumwussoh, kah wunnaumonuh, kah wuttaunoh, & wame keteahogkôunoh wekit, kah wunnetasumoh, kah wame upuppinashim8moh, kah wame wuttinnetuonk ne ahtunk ut ohkit Kanaan, ónk au wutohtimóneat, wutch wuskesukqut wechaioh Jakoboh.
E.36.6 And Esau took his wives, and his sons, and his daughters, and all the persons of his house, and his cattle, and all his beasts, and all his substance, which he had got in the land of Canaan; and went into the country from the face of his brother Jacob.

α.36.7 Newutche 8wenaiétuongan8 wussaumanit matta woh wunnu wechayeuteog, kah ne ohke uttoh adt penuwohteahettit wunn8nunouh newutche wunnetasúm8uh.
E.36.7 For their riches were more than that they might dwell together; and the land wherein they were strangers could not bear them because of their cattle.

α.36.8 Nemehkuh wetu Esau wadchuut Seir, Esau noh Edom.
E.36.8 Thus dwelt Esau in mount Seir: Esau is Edom.

α.36.9 Kah yeush wutontseongash Esau 8sh8woh Edomitsog wadchuut Seir.
E.36.9 And these are the generations of Esau the father of the Edomites in mount Seir:

α.36.10 Yeush 8wesuongan88ash wunnaumonuh Esau, Eliphaz wunnaumonuh Adah, ummittumwussoh Esau: Revel wunnaumonuh Bashemath ummittumwussoh Esau.
E.36.10 These are the names of Esau's sons; Eliphaz the son of Adah the wife of Esau, Reuel the son of Bashemath the wife of Esau.

α.36.11 Kah wunnaumonuh Eliphaz Teman, Omar, Zepho, kah Gatam, kah Kenaz.
E.36.11 And the sons of Eliphaz were Teman, Omar, Zepho, and Gatam, and Kenaz.

α.36.12 Kah Timnah 8wishqun wutch Eliphaz wunnaumonuh Esau, kah noh nechauau Eliphaz[,] Amalekoh, yeuh wunnaumonuh Adah Esau ummittumwussoh.
E.36.12 And Timna was concubine to Eliphaz Esau's son; and she bare to Eliphaz Amalek: these were the sons of Adah Esau's wife.

α.36.13 Kah yeush wunnaumonuh Revel, Nahath, kah Zerah Shammah, kah Mizzah: yeuh wunnaumonuh ummittumwussoh Esau.
E.36.13 And these are the sons of Reuel; Nahath, and Zerah, Shammah, and Mizzah: these were the sons of Bashemath Esau's wife.

α.36.14 Kah yeuh wunnaumonuh Aholibamah, wuttaunoh Anah, wuttaunoh Zibeon, ummittumwussoh Esau: kah nekiteauau Esauoh Jeush, kah Jaalam kah Korah.
E.36.14 And these were the sons of Aholibamah, the daughter of Anah the daughter of Zibeon, Esau's wife: and she bare to Esau Jeush, and Jaalam, and Korah.

α.36.15 Yeug mugquompaog wunnaumonuh Esau, wunnaumonuh Eliphaz mohtomegheunche Esau, mugquomp Teman, mugquomp Omer, mugquomp Zepho, mugquomp Kenaz
E.36.15 These were dukes of the sons of Esau: the sons of Eliphaz the firstborn son of Esau; duke Teman, duke Omar, duke Zepho, duke Kenaz,

α.36.16 Mugquomp Korah, mugquomp Gatam, mugquomp Amalek. Yeug mugquompaog wutontséonganoh Eliphaz: ut ohkit Edom, yeuh wunnaumonuh Adah.
E.36.16 Duke Korah, duke Gatam, and duke Amalek: these are the dukes that came of Eliphaz in the land of Edom; these were the sons of Adah.

α.36.17 Kah yeuh wunnaumonuh Revel wunnaumonuh Esau, mugquomp Nahath, mugquomp Zerah, mugquomp Shammah, mugquomp Mizzah, yeug mugquompaog wutontseonguh Revel, ut ohkit Edom: yeuh wunnaumonuh Bashimath ummittumwussoh Esau.
E.36.17 And these are the sons of Reuel Esau's son; duke Nahath, duke Zerah, duke Shammah, duke Mizzah: these are the dukes that came of Reuel in the land of Edom; these are the sons of Bashemath Esau's wife.

α.36.18 Kah yeuh wunnaumonuh Aholibamah ummittumwussoh Esau, mugquomp Jesh, mugquomp Jaalam, mugquomp Korah, yeug mugquompaog wutontseonguh Aholibamah wuttaunoh Anah ummit[t]umwussoh Esau.
E.36.18 And these are the sons of Aholibamah Esau's wife; duke Jeush, duke Jaalam, duke Korah: these were the dukes that came of Aholibamah the daughter of Anah, Esau's wife.

α.36.19 Yeuh wunnaumonuh Esau (noh Edom) kah yeug ummugquompomuh,
E.36.19 These are the sons of Esau, who is Edom, and these are their dukes.

α.36.20 Yeuh wunnaumonuh Seir, wuthorite, noh ne wadohkit Lotan, kah Shobal, kah Zibeon, kah Anah.
E.36.20 These are the sons of Seir the Horite, who inhabited the land; Lotan, and Shobal, and Zibeon, and Anah,

α.36.21 Kah Dishan, kah zer, & Dishan, yeug mugquompaog Wuthoritsog, wunnaumonun Seir, ut ohkit Edom.
E.36.21 And Dishon, and Ezer, and Dishan: these are the dukes of the Horites, the children of Seir in the land of Edom.

α.36.22 Kah wunnechanoh Lotan, Hori kah Heman, kah ummississoh Lotan, Timna.
E.36.22 And the children of Lotan were Hori and Hemam; and Lotan's sister was Timna.

α.36.23 Kah yeuh wunnechanoh Shobal, Alban, kah Manahath, kah Ebal: Shepo, kah Onam.
E.36.23 And the children of Shobal were these; Alvan, and Manahath, and Ebal, Shepho, and Onam.

α.36.24 Kah ye[u] wunnechanoh Zibeon neeswe Ajah kah Anah, yeuoh noh Anah maskauont mulesoh ut touohkomukqut, assamont wutassumoh 8shoh Zibeon.
E.36.24 And these are the children of Zibeon; both Ajah, and Anah: this was that Anah that found the mules in the wilderness, as he fed the asses of Zibeon his father.

α.36.25 Kah yeuh wunnaumonuh Anah, Dishon, kah Aholibam[á]h wuttau[m]oh Ana[h].
E.36.25 And the children of Anah were these; Dishon, and Aholibamah the daughter of Anah.

α.36.26 Kah yeuh wunnechanoh Dishon, Hemdan, kah Eshban, kah Ithran, kah Cheran.
E.36.26 And these are the children of Dishon; Hemdan, and Eshban, and Ithran, and Cheran.

α.36.27 Yeuh wunnechanoh Ezer, Bilhan kah Zaavan, kah Akan.
E.36.27 The children of Ezer are these; Bilhan, and Zaavan, and Akan.

α.36.28 Wunnechanoh Dishan yeuh, Uz, kah Aran.
E.36.28 The children of Dishan are these; Uz, and Aran.

α.36.29 Yeug mugquompaog Wuthoritsog, mugquomp Lotan, mugquomp Shobal, mugquomp Zibeon, mugquomp Anah.
E.36.29 These are the dukes that came of the Horites; duke Lotan, duke Shobal, duke Zibeon, duke Anah,

α.36.30 Mugquomp Dishon, mugquomp Ezer, mugquomp Dishan, yeug mugquompaog wutontseonguh Hori: kenugke mugquompaog ut ohkit Seir.
E.36.30 Duke Dishon, duke Ezer, duke Dishan: these are the dukes that came of Hori, among their dukes in the land of Seir.

α.36.31 Kah yeug ketass8timwog nanànuwacheg ut ohkit Edom, asquam nana[ú]newahettegkup tahs8tamwog ut Israel.
E.36.31 And these are the kings that reigned in the land of Edom, before there reigned any king over the children of Israel.

α.36.32 Bela wunnaumonuh Beor nana[ù]num Edom, kah ussowetamun wut[o]tan Dinhabah.
E.36.32 And Bela the son of Beor reigned in Edom: and the name of his city was Dinhabah.

α.36.33 Kah Bela nupp8, kah Jobab wunnaumonuh Zera ut Bozra wunnompu nan[á]nuwomukquoh.
E.36.33 And Bela died, and Jobab the son of Zerah of Bozrah reigned in his stead.

α.36.34 Kah Jobab nupp8, kah Husham wutch ohkit wuttemani wunnompu nananuw[ó]mukquoh.
E.36.34 And Jobab died, and Husham of the land of Temani reigned in his stead.

α.36.35 Kah Husham nupp8, kah Hadad wunnaumonuh Bedad (noh toôkodtogkup Midian wutohtekonit Moab) wunnompe nanánuwomukquoh, kah ussowetamun wutótan Avith.
E.36.35 And Husham died, and Hadad the son of Bedad, who smote Midian in the field of Moab, reigned in his stead: and the name of his city was Avith.

α.36.36 Kah Hadad nupp8, kah Samlah ut Masrekah wunnompu nanánuwomukquoh.
E.36.36 And Hadad died, and Samlah of Masrekah reigned in his stead.

α.36.37 Kah Samlah nupp8, kah Saul ut Rehoboth sepuut, wunnompeu nanánuwomukquoh.
E.36.37 And Samlah died, and Saul of Rehoboth by the river reigned in his stead.

α.36.38 Kah Saul nupp8, kah Baalhanan wunnaumonuh Achbor wunnompeu nanánuwomukquoh.
E.36.38 And Saul died, and Baalhanan the son of Achbor reigned in his stead.

α.36.39 Kah Baalhanan wunnaumonuh Achbor nupp8, kah Hadar wunnompeu nananuwomukquoh, kah ussowetamun wutotan Pau, kah ummittamwussoh u[s]sowesuoh Mehetabel, wuttaunoh Matred, wuttaunoh Mezahab.
E.36.39 And Baalhanan the son of Achbor died, and Hadar reigned in his stead: and the name of his city was Pau; and his wife's name was Mehetabel, the daughter of Matred, the daughter of Mezahab.

α.36.40 Kah yeush 8wesuongan8ash mugquompaog wutontseongah Esau, ne ahhut tahshinu[nn]éhettit, ne ahhut tahshohkeahettit ne ussoweṡhettit, mugquomp Timnah, mugquomp Alvah, mugquomp Jetheth.
E.36.40 And these are the names of the dukes that came of Esau, according to their families, after their places, by their names; duke Timnah, duke Alvah, duke Jetheth,

α.36.41 Mugquomp Aholibamah, mugquomp Elah, mugquomp Pinon.
E.36.41 Duke Aholibamah, duke Elah, duke Pinon,

α.36.42 Mugquomp Kenaz, mugquomp Teman, mugquomp [N]ibzar.
E.36.42 Duke Kenaz, duke Teman, duke Mibzar,

α.36.43 Mugquomp Magdiel, mugquomp Iram, yeug mugquompaog wutch Edom, ne adtahshik wutàyeuonganóoash, ohkit ne wutohtaongan8. Yeuoh Esau 8sh8oh Wut-Edomitsog.
E.36.43 Duke Magdiel, duke Iram: these be the dukes of Edom, according to their habitations in the land of their possession: he is Esau the father of the Edomites.

α.37.1 ONk Jakob wutohtut ne ohkit 8shoh namspaóneup, ohkit Kanaan.
E.37.1 And Jacob dwelt in the land wherein his father was a stranger, in the land of Canaan.

α.37.2 Yeush wutontseongash Jakob: Joseph nabo nesausuk audtashit kodtumwohkog, assamau floksoh weeche wematoh, kah wuskenes wetómau wunnaumonuh Bilhah, kah wunnaumonuh Zilpah, 8shoh ummittumwussoh: kah Joseph paudtaaunchem8hkaau 8shoh nag wutche matchenéhtamóonk.
E.37.2 These are the generations of Jacob. Joseph, being seventeen years old, was feeding the flock with his brethren; and the lad was with the sons of Bilhah, and with the sons of Zilpah, his father's wives: and Joseph brought unto his father their evil report.

α.37.3 Onk Israel m8cheke womonau Josephoh anue onke ne wame wunnechanoh, newutche neh wunnaumonuh ukkechiyeúuneat kah wutayimaúoh hogkóonk m8cheke chohkoi.
E.37.3 Now Israel loved Joseph more than all his children, because he was the son of his old age: and he made him a coat of many colours.

α.37.4 Kah wematoh naumohettit wut8shimau n[a]h m8cheke 8womonuh onk ne wame wematoh, nag wussekena[ô]uh, kah matta 8neken8nòuh.
E.37.4 And when his brethren saw that their father loved him more than all his brethren, they hated him, and could not speak peaceably unto him.

α.37.5 Onk Joseph unnugquom unnugquomuonk, kah wuttinnon wematoh, onk m8cheke wussekeneaouh.
E.37.5 And Joseph dreamed a dream, and he told it his brethren: and they hated him yet the more.

α.37.6 Kah wuttinuh nahog n8tam8k k8wehquetumonumw8 yeu unnugquomuonk, ne ánugquom.
E.37.6 And he said unto them, Hear, I pray you, this dream which I have dreamed:

α.37.7 Kah kusseh, nutàhassepenomun Shevesash ut ohteakonit, kah kusseh nutuṣṡhevsum omokem8, kah nepom8, kah kusseh kutuṣṡhevsum8ash wéinnekompataash kah nauaeihtamog nutuṣṡhevsum.
E.37.7 For, behold, we were binding sheaves in the field, and, lo, my sheaf arose, and also stood upright; and, behold, your sheaves stood round about, and made obeisance to my sheaf.

α.37.8 Onk wematuh wuttugquoh, ken wunnamuhkut ken[a]nauwi[n]yimun? asuh ken wunnamuhkut pish kutànuass8tamwòmimun? kah wussekeneauôuh m8cheke wonk, newutche wuttinnukquom8òngash, kah ukkutt8wongash.
E.37.8 And his brethren said to him, Shalt thou indeed reign over us? or shalt thou indeed have dominion over us? And they hated him yet the more for his dreams, and for his words.

α.37.9 Wonk unnukquomp onkatk unnukquom8onk, kah wuttinon wematoh, kah n8wau: kusseh, wonk nuttinnukquom onkatuk unnukquom8onk, kah kusseh, nepauz, kah nanepaúzshadt kah nabo nequttuutcheg anogqsog nunnauwaeihtunkquog.
E.37.9 And he dreamed yet another dream, and told it his brethren, and said, Behold, I have dreamed a dream more; and, behold, the sun and the moon and the eleven stars made obeisance to me.

α.37.10 Kah wuttinnon 8shoh kah wematoh, kah 8shoh aushkòmuk, kah wuttinuh, teague yeu anukquoman unnukquomuonk? nen kah kokas, kah kematog wunnamuhkut pish kenauwaeihtanumun, ut ohkit?
E.37.10 And he told it to his father, and to his brethren: and his father rebuked him, and said unto him, What is this dream that thou hast dreamed?  Shall I and thy mother and thy brethren indeed come to bow down ourselves to thee to the earth?

α.37.11 Onk wematuh ishkauònuk, qut 8shoh kukkinneasu wuttinn8waonk.
E.37.11 And his brethren envied him; but his father observed the saying.

α.37.12 Kah wematoh moncheoh assammaoh 8sh[ó]h uffloksumoh ut Shechem.
E.37.12 And his brethren went to feed their father's flock in Shechem.

α.37.13 Kah Israel unnau Josephoh, sunnummatta kematog assámo8og floksoh ut Shechem? peyaush kah kuttann8nsh nayin, onk wuttinuh, nen yeu.
E.37.13 And Israel said unto Joseph, Do not thy brethren feed the flock in Shechem? come, and I will send thee unto them. And he said to him, Here am I.

α.37.14 Kah wuttinuh, monchish k8wehquetumoush, naish 8nohteaongan8 kematog, onk wunnaihhettit floksog, kah wonk aunchem8ka[h]: nemehkuh wutan8nuh wutch 8nohkôut Hebron, kah peyau Shechem.
E.37.14 And he said to him, Go, I pray thee, see whether it be well with thy brethren, and well with the flocks; and bring me word again. So he sent him out of the vale of Hebron, and he came to Shechem.

α.37.15 Kah wosketomp wunnamheuh, kah kusseh, pohp[ŏ]mushau ohteakonit, kah wosketomp wunnat8tomauoh teaguas kenatineaham?
E.37.15 And a certain man found him, and, behold, he was wandering in the field: and the man asked him, saying, What seekest thou?

α.37.16 Kah n8wau, natineah nematog, missohhamah k8wehquetumoush uttoh adtannadtupwehettit floksog.
E.37.16 And he said, I seek my brethren: tell me, I pray thee, where they feed their flocks.

α.37.17 Kah wosketomp n8wau, yeu 8muneau, newutche nunn8taòog n8waog ontuh Dotahn: kah Joseph wunn8sukauoh wematoh, kah wunnamheuh ut Dothan.
E.37.17 And the man said, They are departed hence; for I heard them say, Let us go to Dothan. And Joseph went after his brethren, and found them in Dothan.

α.37.18 Kah náuàhettit n[ó]adtit in, asquam pas8sukauunk: nah 8nass8mŏuh, wunnushonaout.
E.37.18 And when they saw him afar off, even before he came near unto them, they conspired against him to slay him.

α.37.19 Kah unnittuog, kusseh yeuoh unnukquomuénin paont.
E.37.19 And they said one to another, Behold, this dreamer cometh.

α.37.20 Ehhah yeuyeu newutche nushontuh, kah unnuhteatuh pahsahthéganit, kah pish kenaumumun uttoh aniyinit wuttinnukquomuonk.
E.37.20 Come now therefore, and let us slay him, and cast him into some pit, and we will say, Some evil beast hath devoured him: and we shall see what will become of his dreams.

α.37.21 Onk Ruben wunn8tamun, kah uppohquohwhunoh wutch wunnutcheganit, kah n8wau, ahque nushontuh.
E.37.21 And Reuben heard it, and he delivered him out of their hands; and said, Let us not kill him.

α.37.22 Onk Ruben wuttinuh nahog, ahque seàhham8k 8squeheonk yeu unnohteagk pas8thetanit ut touohkomuk, kah ahque ponam8k kenutchegan88ash wuhhogkat: onk woh uppohquohwhunoh wutch wunnutchegan88ut, upponónat 8sh8óut wonk.
E.37.22 And Reuben said unto them, Shed no blood, but cast him into this pit that is in the wilderness, and lay no hand upon him; that he might rid him out of their hands, to deliver him to his father again.

α.37.23 Onk n$nih Joseph paont wematut: upposkinó[u]h Josephoh wuthogk8onk m8chekenag wuthogk8onk, ne à[q]ut.
E.37.23 And it came to pass, when Joseph was come unto his brethren, that they stript Joseph out of his coat, his coat of many colours that was on him;

α.37.24 Onk wutohqunóuh, kah wuttinohkonàoh pahs8theganit, kah pohsehtheg matchaog oht[á]no, wanne nippéno.
E.37.24 And they took him, and cast him into a pit: and the pit was empty, there was no water in it.

α.37.25 Kah nummatappuog meechwog petukqunneg; kah spadtaompuog, kah natawompuog, kah kusseh chipwushàog Ishmaelitsog 8mwoh Gilead, weeche kamelsoh, kenunnumwog spcery kah balme, kah myrre, wutuss8wuttànaòash Egypt.
E.37.25 And they sat down to eat bread: and they lifted up their eyes and looked, and, behold, a company of Ishmeelites came from Gilead with their camels bearing spicery and balm and myrrh, going to carry it down to Egypt.

α.37.26 Kah Judah unnau wematoh, toh kittinnompasimun, nushogkut kematun, kah adtahtauog 8sqheonk?
E.37.26 And Judah said unto his brethren, What profit is it if we slay our brother, and conceal his blood?

α.37.27 Kah eninnumauontuh Ishmaelitsog, kah ahque kenutcheganonash ponamauontuh newutche noh kematin, kah k8weyausin, kah wematuh wuttapeneaumunin.
E.37.27 Come, and let us sell him to the Ishmeelites, and let not our hand be upon him; for he is our brother and our flesh. And his brethren were content.

α.37.28 Neit paumushauog Midianitsog, anaqusháenuog, kah wuttóhshinuh: kah wussohwhunóuh Josephoh wutch pahsohtheganit, kah mag8og Josephoh en Ishmaelitsut, wutch neesneechaginneai silver, kah s8wunaog Josephoh Egipt.
E.37.28 Then there passed by Midianites merchantmen; and they drew and lifted up Joseph out of the pit, and sold Joseph to the Ishmeelites for twenty pieces of silver: and they brought Joseph into Egypt.

α.37.29 Neit Ruben qushkeu en pohsohtheganit, kah kusseh, Joseph matta appu pohsohtheganit, kah s8quhkom wuhogk8unash.
E.37.29 And Reuben returned unto the pit; and, behold, Joseph was not in the pit; and he rent his clothes.

α.37.30 Kah qushkeu en wematut, kah n8wau[-] peisses matchaog, kah nen uttoh woh nuttôn.
E.37.30 And he returned unto his brethren, and said, The child is not; and I, whither shall I go?

α.37.31 Kah nemunumwog Joseph wutohgk8wonk, kah nushaog goatsemesoh, kah quogkinnumwog hogk8onk 8squeheonganit.
E.37.31 And they took Joseph's coat, and killed a kid of the goats, and dipped the coat in the blood;

α.37.32 Kah negonshhuwaog hogk8onk m8chekenag, kah uppaudtauonau 8sh8woh.
E.37.32 And they sent the coat of many colours, and they brought it to their father; and said, This have we found: know now whether it be thy son's coat or no.

α.37.33 Onk 8wahteauun, kah n8wau, Nunnaumon wuthogk8onk, matche puppinashim umm8wh[ó]uh, Joseph wunnamuhkut s8kshanau.
E.37.33 And he knew it, and said, It is my son's coat; an evil beast hath devoured him; Joseph is without doubt rent in pieces.

α.37.34 Onk Jakob nehnekshadtau wuthogk8unash, kah mattónag ponam uppusquanit, kah mauemau wunnaumonuh m8chetikqunne.
E.37.34 And Jacob rent his clothes, and put sackcloth upon his loins, and mourned for his son many days.

α.37.35 Kah wame wunnaumonuh, kah wame wuttaunoh neepauog ukkodnupweeshanóuh, qut sekeneam poanatamwehéonat: kah n8wau, newutche nuttom weenohkit wutche nunnaumon, mauwon: yeu wuttin mauemukqun 8shoh.
E.37.35 And all his sons and all his daughters rose up to comfort him; but he refused to be comforted; and he said, For I will go down into the grave unto my son mourning. Thus his father wept for him.

α.37.36 Onk Midianitsog ummagunáuh en Potipharut, wutanohsuéneumoh Pharoh, kah mugquomp askuhwhoteadt.
E.37.36 And the Midianites sold him into Egypt unto Potiphar, an officer of Pharaoh's, and captain of the guard.

α.38.1 
E.38.1 And it came to pass at that time, that Judah went down from his brethren, and turned in to a certain Adullamite, whose name was Hirah.

α.38.2 
E.38.2 And Judah saw there a daughter of a certain Canaanite, whose name was Shuah; and he took her, and went in unto her.

α.38.3 
E.38.3 And she conceived, and bare a son; and he called his name Er.

α.38.4 
E.38.4 And she conceived again, and bare a son; and she called his name Onan.

α.38.5 
E.38.5 And she yet again conceived, and bare a son; and called his name Shelah: and he was at Chezib, when she bare him.

α.38.6 
E.38.6 And Judah took a wife for Er his firstborn, whose name was Tamar.

α.38.7 
E.38.7 And Er, Judah's firstborn, was wicked in the sight of the LORD; and the LORD slew him.

α.38.8 
E.38.8 And Judah said unto Onan, Go in unto thy brother's wife, and marry her, and raise up seed to thy brother.

α.38.9 
E.38.9 And Onan knew that the seed should not be his; and it came to pass, when he went in unto his brother's wife, that he spilled it on the ground, lest that he should give seed to his brother.

α.38.10 
E.38.10 And the thing which he did displeased the LORD: wherefore he slew him also.

α.38.11 
E.38.11 Then said Judah to Tamar his daughter in law, Remain a widow at thy father's house, till Shelah my son be grown: for he said, Lest peradventure he die also, as his brethren did. And Tamar went and dwelt in her father's house.

α.38.12 
E.38.12 And in process of time the daughter of Shuah Judah's wife died; and Judah was comforted, and went up unto his sheepshearers to Timnath, he and his friend Hirah the Adullamite.

α.38.13 
E.38.13 And it was told Tamar, saying, Behold thy father in law goeth up to Timnath to shear his sheep.

α.38.14 
E.38.14 And she put her widow's garments off from her, and covered her with a vail, and wrapped herself, and sat in an open place, which is by the way to Timnath; for she saw that Shelah was grown, and she was not given unto him to wife.

α.38.15 
E.38.15 When Judah saw her, he thought her to be an harlot; because she had covered her face.

α.38.16 
E.38.16 And he turned unto her by the way, and said, Go to, I pray thee, let me come in unto thee; (for he knew not that she was his daughter in law.) And she said, What wilt thou give me, that thou mayest come in unto me?

α.38.17 
E.38.17 And he said, I will send thee a kid from the flock. And she said, Wilt thou give me a pledge, till thou send it?

α.38.18 
E.38.18 And he said, What pledge shall I give thee? And she said, Thy signet, and thy bracelets, and thy staff that is in thine hand. And he gave it her, and came in unto her, and she conceived by him.

α.38.19 
E.38.19 And she arose, and went away, and laid by her vail from her, and put on the garments of her widowhood.

α.38.20 
E.38.20 And Judah sent the kid by the hand of his friend the Adullamite, to receive his pledge from the woman's hand: but he found her not.

α.38.21 
E.38.21 Then he asked the men of that place, saying, Where is the harlot, that was openly by the way side? And they said, There was no harlot in this place.

α.38.22 
E.38.22 And he returned to Judah, and said, I cannot find her; and also the men of the place said, that there was no harlot in this place.

α.38.23 
E.38.23 And Judah said, Let her take it to her, lest we be shamed: behold, I sent this kid, and thou hast not found her.

α.38.24 
E.38.24 And it came to pass about three months after, that it was told Judah, saying, Tamar thy daughter in law hath played the harlot; and also, behold, she is with child by whoredom. And Judah said, Bring her forth, and let her be burnt.

α.38.25 
E.38.25 When she was brought forth, she sent to her father in law, saying, By the man, whose these are, am I with child: and she said, Discern, I pray thee, whose are these, the signet, and bracelets, and staff.

α.38.26 
E.38.26 And Judah acknowledged them, and said, She hath been more righteous than I; because that I gave her not to Shelah my son. And he knew her again no more.

α.38.27 
E.38.27 And it came to pass in the time of her travail, that, behold, twins were in her womb.

α.38.28 
E.38.28 And it came to pass, when she travailed, that the one put out his hand: and the midwife took and bound upon his hand a scarlet thread, saying, This came out first.

α.38.29 
E.38.29 And it came to pass, as he drew back his hand, that, behold, his brother came out: and she said, How hast thou broken forth? this breach be upon thee: therefore his name was called Pharez.

α.38.30 
E.38.30 And afterward came out his brother, that had the scarlet thread upon his hand: and his name was called Zarah.

α.39.1 
E.39.1 And Joseph was brought down to Egypt; and Potiphar, an officer of Pharaoh, captain of the guard, an Egyptian, bought him of the hands of the Ishmeelites, which had brought him down thither.

α.39.2 
E.39.2 And the LORD was with Joseph, and he was a prosperous man; and he was in the house of his master the Egyptian.

α.39.3 
E.39.3 And his master saw that the LORD was with him, and that the LORD made all that he did to prosper in his hand.

α.39.4 
E.39.4 And Joseph found grace in his sight, and he served him: and he made him overseer over his house, and all that he had he put into his hand.

α.39.5 
E.39.5 And it came to pass from the time that he had made him overseer in his house, and over all that he had, that the LORD blessed the Egyptian's house for Joseph's sake; and the blessing of the LORD was upon all that he had in the house, and in the field.

α.39.6 
E.39.6 And he left all that he had in Joseph's hand; and he knew not ought he had, save the bread which he did eat. And Joseph was a goodly person, and well favoured.

α.39.7 
E.39.7 And it came to pass after these things, that his master's wife cast her eyes upon Joseph; and she said, Lie with me.

α.39.8 
E.39.8 But he refused, and said unto his master's wife, Behold, my master wotteth not what is with me in the house, and he hath committed all that he hath to my hand;

α.39.9 
E.39.9 There is none greater in this house than I; neither hath he kept back any thing from me but thee, because thou art his wife: how then can I do this great wickedness, and sin against God?

α.39.10 
E.39.10 And it came to pass, as she spake to Joseph day by day, that he hearkened not unto her, to lie by her, or to be with her.

α.39.11 
E.39.11 And it came to pass about this time, that Joseph went into the house to do his business; and there was none of the men of the house there within.

α.39.12 
E.39.12 And she caught him by his garment, saying, Lie with me: and he left his garment in her hand, and fled, and got him out.

α.39.13 
E.39.13 And it came to pass, when she saw that he had left his garment in her hand, and was fled forth,

α.39.14 
E.39.14 That she called unto the men of her house, and spake unto them, saying, See, he hath brought in an Hebrew unto us to mock us; he came in unto me to lie with me, and I cried with a loud voice:

α.39.15 
E.39.15 And it came to pass, when he heard that I lifted up my voice and cried, that he left his garment with me, and fled, and got him out.

α.39.16 
E.39.16 And she laid up his garment by her, until his lord came home.

α.39.17 
E.39.17 And she spake unto him according to these words, saying, The Hebrew servant, which thou hast brought unto us, came in unto me to mock me:

α.39.18 
E.39.18 And it came to pass, as I lifted up my voice and cried, that he left his garment with me, and fled out.

α.39.19 
E.39.19 And it came to pass, when his master heard the words of his wife, which she spake unto him, saying, After this manner did thy servant to me; that his wrath was kindled.

α.39.20 
E.39.20 And Joseph's master took him, and put him into the prison, a place where the king's prisoners were bound: and he was there in the prison.

α.39.21 
E.39.21 But the LORD was with Joseph, and shewed him mercy, and gave him favour in the sight of the keeper of the prison.

α.39.22 
E.39.22 And the keeper of the prison committed to Joseph's hand all the prisoners that were in the prison; and whatsoever they did there, he was the doer of it.

α.39.23 
E.39.23 The keeper of the prison looked not to any thing that was under his hand; because the LORD was with him, and that which he did, the LORD made it to prosper.

α.40.1 
E.40.1 And it came to pass after these things, that the butler of the king of Egypt and his baker had offended their lord the king of Egypt.

α.40.2 
E.40.2 And Pharaoh was wroth against two of his officers, against the chief of the butlers, and against the chief of the bakers.

α.40.3 
E.40.3 And he put them in ward in the house of the captain of the guard, into the prison, the place where Joseph was bound.

α.40.4 
E.40.4 And the captain of the guard charged Joseph with them, and he served them: and they continued a season in ward.

α.40.5 
E.40.5 And they dreamed a dream both of them, each man his dream in one night, each man according to the interpretation of his dream, the butler and the baker of the king of Egypt, which were bound in the prison.

α.40.6 
E.40.6 And Joseph came in unto them in the morning, and looked upon them, and, behold, they were sad.

α.40.7 
E.40.7 And he asked Pharaoh's officers that were with him in the ward of his lord's house, saying, Wherefore look ye so sadly to day?

α.40.8 
E.40.8 And they said unto him, We have dreamed a dream, and there is no interpreter of it. And Joseph said unto them, Do not interpretations belong to God? tell me them, I pray you.

α.40.9 
E.40.9 And the chief butler told his dream to Joseph, and said to him, In my dream, behold, a vine was before me;

α.40.10 
E.40.10 And in the vine were three branches: and it was as though it budded, and her blossoms shot forth; and the clusters thereof brought forth ripe grapes:

α.40.11 
E.40.11 And Pharaoh's cup was in my hand: and I took the grapes, and pressed them into Pharaoh's cup, and I gave the cup into Pharaoh's hand.

α.40.12 
E.40.12 And Joseph said unto him, This is the interpretation of it: The three branches are three days:

α.40.13 
E.40.13 Yet within three days shall Pharaoh lift up thine head, and restore thee unto thy place: and thou shalt deliver Pharaoh's cup into his hand, after the former manner when thou wast his butler.

α.40.14 
E.40.14 But think on me when it shall be well with thee, and shew kindness, I pray thee, unto me, and make mention of me unto Pharaoh, and bring me out of this house:

α.40.15 
E.40.15 For indeed I was stolen away out of the land of the Hebrews: and here also have I done nothing that they should put me into the dungeon.

α.40.16 
E.40.16 When the chief baker saw that the interpretation was good, he said unto Joseph, I also was in my dream, and, behold, I had three white baskets on my head:

α.40.17 
E.40.17 And in the uppermost basket there was of all manner of bakemeats for Pharaoh; and the birds did eat them out of the basket upon my head.

α.40.18 
E.40.18 And Joseph answered and said, This is the interpretation thereof: The three baskets are three days:

α.40.19 
E.40.19 Yet within three days shall Pharaoh lift up thy head from off thee, and shall hang thee on a tree; and the birds shall eat thy flesh from off thee.

α.40.20 
E.40.20 And it came to pass the third day, which was Pharaoh's birthday, that he made a feast unto all his servants: and he lifted up the head of the chief butler and of the chief baker among his servants.

α.40.21 
E.40.21 And he restored the chief butler unto his butlership again; and he gave the cup into Pharaoh's hand:

α.40.22 
E.40.22 But he hanged the chief baker: as Joseph had interpreted to them.

α.40.23 
E.40.23 Yet did not the chief butler remember Joseph, but forgat him.

α.41.1 
E.41.1 And it came to pass at the end of two full years, that Pharaoh dreamed: and, behold, he stood by the river.

α.41.2 
E.41.2 And, behold, there came up out of the river seven well favoured kine and fatfleshed; and they fed in a meadow.

α.41.3 
E.41.3 And, behold, seven other kine came up after them out of the river, ill favoured and leanfleshed; and stood by the other kine upon the brink of the river.

α.41.4 
E.41.4 And the ill favoured and leanfleshed kine did eat up the seven well favoured and fat kine. So Pharaoh awoke.

α.41.5 
E.41.5 And he slept and dreamed the second time: and, behold, seven ears of corn came up upon one stalk, rank and good.

α.41.6 
E.41.6 And, behold, seven thin ears and blasted with the east wind sprung up after them.

α.41.7 
E.41.7 And the seven thin ears devoured the seven rank and full ears. And Pharaoh awoke, and, behold, it was a dream.

α.41.8 
E.41.8 And it came to pass in the morning that his spirit was troubled; and he sent and called for all the magicians of Egypt, and all the wise men thereof: and Pharaoh told them his dream; but there was none that could interpret them unto Pharaoh.

α.41.9 
E.41.9 Then spake the chief butler unto Pharaoh, saying, I do remember my faults this day:

α.41.10 
E.41.10 Pharaoh was wroth with his servants, and put me in ward in the captain of the guard's house, both me and the chief baker:

α.41.11 
E.41.11 And we dreamed a dream in one night, I and he; we dreamed each man according to the interpretation of his dream.

α.41.12 
E.41.12 And there was there with us a young man, an Hebrew, servant to the captain of the guard; and we told him, and he interpreted to us our dreams; to each man according to his dream he did interpret.

α.41.13 
E.41.13 And it came to pass, as he interpreted to us, so it was; me he restored unto mine office, and him he hanged.

α.41.14 
E.41.14 Then Pharaoh sent and called Joseph, and they brought him hastily out of the dungeon: and he shaved himself, and changed his raiment, and came in unto Pharaoh.

α.41.15 
E.41.15 And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, I have dreamed a dream, and there is none that can interpret it: and I have heard say of thee, that thou canst understand a dream to interpret it.

α.41.16 
E.41.16 And Joseph answered Pharaoh, saying, It is not in me: God shall give Pharaoh an answer of peace.

α.41.17 
E.41.17 And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, In my dream, behold, I stood upon the bank of the river:

α.41.18 
E.41.18 And, behold, there came up out of the river seven kine, fatfleshed and well favoured; and they fed in a meadow:

α.41.19 
E.41.19 And, behold, seven other kine came up after them, poor and very ill favoured and leanfleshed, such as I never saw in all the land of Egypt for badness:

α.41.20 
E.41.20 And the lean and the ill favoured kine did eat up the first seven fat kine:

α.41.21 
E.41.21 And when they had eaten them up, it could not be known that they had eaten them; but they were still ill favoured, as at the beginning. So I awoke.

α.41.22 
E.41.22 And I saw in my dream, and, behold, seven ears came up in one stalk, full and good:

α.41.23 
E.41.23 And, behold, seven ears, withered, thin, and blasted with the east wind, sprung up after them:

α.41.24 
E.41.24 And the thin ears devoured the seven good ears: and I told this unto the magicians; but there was none that could declare it to me.

α.41.25 
E.41.25 And Joseph said unto Pharaoh, The dream of Pharaoh is one: God hath shewed Pharaoh what he is about to do.

α.41.26 
E.41.26 The seven good kine are seven years; and the seven good ears are seven years: the dream is one.

α.41.27 
E.41.27 And the seven thin and ill favoured kine that came up after them are seven years; and the seven empty ears blasted with the east wind shall be seven years of famine.

α.41.28 
E.41.28 This is the thing which I have spoken unto Pharaoh: What God is about to do he sheweth unto Pharaoh.

α.41.29 
E.41.29 Behold, there come seven years of great plenty throughout all the land of Egypt:

α.41.30 
E.41.30 And there shall arise after them seven years of famine; and all the plenty shall be forgotten in the land of Egypt; and the famine shall consume the land;

α.41.31 
E.41.31 And the plenty shall not be known in the land by reason of that famine following; for it shall be very grievous.

α.41.32 
E.41.32 And for that the dream was doubled unto Pharaoh twice; it is because the thing is established by God, and God will shortly bring it to pass.

α.41.33 
E.41.33 Now therefore let Pharaoh look out a man discreet and wise, and set him over the land of Egypt.

α.41.34 
E.41.34 Let Pharaoh do this, and let him appoint officers over the land, and take up the fifth part of the land of Egypt in the seven plenteous years.

α.41.35 
E.41.35 And let them gather all the food of those good years that come, and lay up corn under the hand of Pharaoh, and let them keep food in the cities.

α.41.36 
E.41.36 And that food shall be for store to the land against the seven years of famine, which shall be in the land of Egypt; that the land perish not through the famine.

α.41.37 
E.41.37 And the thing was good in the eyes of Pharaoh, and in the eyes of all his servants.

α.41.38 
E.41.38 And Pharaoh said unto his servants, Can we find such a one as this is, a man in whom the Spirit of God is?

α.41.39 
E.41.39 And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, Forasmuch as God hath shewed thee all this, there is none so discreet and wise as thou art:

α.41.40 
E.41.40 Thou shalt be over my house, and according unto thy word shall all my people be ruled: only in the throne will I be greater than thou.

α.41.41 
E.41.41 And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, See, I have set thee over all the land of Egypt.

α.41.42 
E.41.42 And Pharaoh took off his ring from his hand, and put it upon Joseph's hand, and arrayed him in vestures of fine linen, and put a gold chain about his neck;

α.41.43 
E.41.43 And he made him to ride in the second chariot which he had; and they cried before him, Bow the knee: and he made him ruler over all the land of Egypt.

α.41.44 
E.41.44 And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, I am Pharaoh, and without thee shall no man lift up his hand or foot in all the land of Egypt.

α.41.45 
E.41.45 And Pharaoh called Joseph's name Zaphnathpaaneah; and he gave him to wife Asenath the daughter of Potipherah priest of On. And Joseph went out over all the land of Egypt.

α.41.46 
E.41.46 And Joseph was thirty years old when he stood before Pharaoh king of Egypt. And Joseph went out from the presence of Pharaoh, and went throughout all the land of Egypt.

α.41.47 
E.41.47 And in the seven plenteous years the earth brought forth by handfuls.

α.41.48 
E.41.48 And he gathered up all the food of the seven years, which were in the land of Egypt, and laid up the food in the cities: the food of the field, which was round about every city, laid he up in the same.

α.41.49 
E.41.49 And Joseph gathered corn as the sand of the sea, very much, until he left numbering; for it was without number.

α.41.50 
E.41.50 And unto Joseph were born two sons before the years of famine came, which Asenath the daughter of Potipherah priest of On bare unto him.

α.41.51 
E.41.51 And Joseph called the name of the firstborn Manasseh: For God, said he, hath made me forget all my toil, and all my father's house.

α.41.52 
E.41.52 And the name of the second called he Ephraim: For God hath caused me to be fruitful in the land of my affliction.

α.41.53 
E.41.53 And the seven years of plenteousness, that was in the land of Egypt, were ended.

α.41.54 
E.41.54 And the seven years of dearth began to come, according as Joseph had said: and the dearth was in all lands; but in all the land of Egypt there was bread.

α.41.55 
E.41.55 And when all the land of Egypt was famished, the people cried to Pharaoh for bread: and Pharaoh said unto all the Egyptians, Go unto Joseph; what he saith to you, do.

α.41.56 
E.41.56 And the famine was over all the face of the earth: and Joseph opened all the storehouses, and sold unto the Egyptians; and the famine waxed sore in the land of Egypt.

α.41.57 
E.41.57 And all countries came into Egypt to Joseph for to buy corn; because that the famine was so sore in all lands.

α.42.1 
E.42.1 Now when Jacob saw that there was corn in Egypt, Jacob said unto his sons, Why do ye look one upon another?

α.42.2 
E.42.2 And he said, Behold, I have heard that there is corn in Egypt: get you down thither, and buy for us from thence; that we may live, and not die.

α.42.3 
E.42.3 And Joseph's ten brethren went down to buy corn in Egypt.

α.42.4 
E.42.4 But Benjamin, Joseph's brother, Jacob sent not with his brethren; for he said, Lest peradventure mischief befall him.

α.42.5 
E.42.5 And the sons of Israel came to buy corn among those that came: for the famine was in the land of Canaan.

α.42.6 
E.42.6 And Joseph was the governor over the land, and he it was that sold to all the people of the land: and Joseph's brethren came, and bowed down themselves before him with their faces to the earth.

α.42.7 
E.42.7 And Joseph saw his brethren, and he knew them, but made himself strange unto them, and spake roughly unto them; and he said unto them, Whence come ye? And they said, From the land of Canaan to buy food.

α.42.8 
E.42.8 And Joseph knew his brethren, but they knew not him.

α.42.9 
E.42.9 And Joseph remembered the dreams which he dreamed of them, and said unto them, Ye are spies; to see the nakedness of the land ye are come.

α.42.10 
E.42.10 And they said unto him, Nay, my lord, but to buy food are thy servants come.

α.42.11 
E.42.11 We are all one man's sons; we are true men, thy servants are no spies.

α.42.12 
E.42.12 And he said unto them, Nay, but to see the nakedness of the land ye are come.

α.42.13 
E.42.13 And they said, Thy servants are twelve brethren, the sons of one man in the land of Canaan; and, behold, the youngest is this day with our father, and one is not.

α.42.14 
E.42.14 And Joseph said unto them, That is it that I spake unto you, saying, Ye are spies:

α.42.15 
E.42.15 Hereby ye shall be proved: By the life of Pharaoh ye shall not go forth hence, except your youngest brother come hither.

α.42.16 
E.42.16 Send one of you, and let him fetch your brother, and ye shall be kept in prison, that your words may be proved, whether there be any truth in you: or else by the life of Pharaoh surely ye are spies.

α.42.17 
E.42.17 And he put them all together into ward three days.

α.42.18 
E.42.18 And Joseph said unto them the third day, This do, and live; for I fear God:

α.42.19 
E.42.19 If ye be true men, let one of your brethren be bound in the house of your prison: go ye, carry corn for the famine of your houses:

α.42.20 
E.42.20 But bring your youngest brother unto me; so shall your words be verified, and ye shall not die. And they did so.

α.42.21 
E.42.21 And they said one to another, We are verily guilty concerning our brother, in that we saw the anguish of his soul, when he besought us, and we would not hear; therefore is this distress come upon us.

α.42.22 
E.42.22 And Reuben answered them, saying, Spake I not unto you, saying, Do not sin against the child; and ye would not hear? therefore, behold, also his blood is required.

α.42.23 
E.42.23 And they knew not that Joseph understood them; for he spake unto them by an interpreter.

α.42.24 
E.42.24 And he turned himself about from them, and wept; and returned to them again, and communed with them, and took from them Simeon, and bound him before their eyes.

α.42.25 
E.42.25 Then Joseph commanded to fill their sacks with corn, and to restore every man's money into his sack, and to give them provision for the way: and thus did he unto them.

α.42.26 
E.42.26 And they laded their asses with the corn, and departed thence.

α.42.27 
E.42.27 And as one of them opened his sack to give his ass provender in the inn, he espied his money; for, behold, it was in his sack's mouth.

α.42.28 
E.42.28 And he said unto his brethren, My money is restored; and, lo, it is even in my sack: and their heart failed them, and they were afraid, saying one to another, What is this that God hath done unto us?

α.42.29 
E.42.29 And they came unto Jacob their father unto the land of Canaan, and told him all that befell unto them; saying,

α.42.30 
E.42.30 The man, who is the lord of the land, spake roughly to us, and took us for spies of the country.

α.42.31 
E.42.31 And we said unto him, We are true men; we are no spies:

α.42.32 
E.42.32 We be twelve brethren, sons of our father; one is not, and the youngest is this day with our father in the land of Canaan.

α.42.33 
E.42.33 And the man, the lord of the country, said unto us, Hereby shall I know that ye are true men; leave one of your brethren here with me, and take food for the famine of your households, and be gone:

α.42.34 
E.42.34 And bring your youngest brother unto me: then shall I know that ye are no spies, but that ye are true men: so will I deliver you your brother, and ye shall traffick in the land.

α.42.35 
E.42.35 And it came to pass as they emptied their sacks, that, behold, every man's bundle of money was in his sack: and when both they and their father saw the bundles of money, they were afraid.

α.42.36 
E.42.36 And Jacob their father said unto them, Me have ye bereaved of my children: Joseph is not, and Simeon is not, and ye will take Benjamin away: all these things are against me.

α.42.37 
E.42.37 And Reuben spake unto his father, saying, Slay my two sons, if I bring him not to thee: deliver him into my hand, and I will bring him to thee again.

α.42.38 
E.42.38 And he said, My son shall not go down with you; for his brother is dead, and he is left alone: if mischief befall him by the way in the which ye go, then shall ye bring down my gray hairs with sorrow to the grave.

α.43.1 
E.43.1 And the famine was sore in the land.

α.43.2 
E.43.2 And it came to pass, when they had eaten up the corn which they had brought out of Egypt, their father said unto them, Go again, buy us a little food.

α.43.3 
E.43.3 And Judah spake unto him, saying, The man did solemnly protest unto us, saying, Ye shall not see my face, except your brother be with you.

α.43.4 
E.43.4 If thou wilt send our brother with us, we will go down and buy thee food:

α.43.5 
E.43.5 But if thou wilt not send him, we will not go down: for the man said unto us, Ye shall not see my face, except your brother be with you.

α.43.6 
E.43.6 And Israel said, Wherefore dealt ye so ill with me, as to tell the man whether ye had yet a brother?

α.43.7 
E.43.7 And they said, The man asked us straitly of our state, and of our kindred, saying, Is your father yet alive? have ye another brother? and we told him according to the tenor of these words: could we certainly know that he would say, Bring your brother down?

α.43.8 
E.43.8 And Judah said unto Israel his father, Send the lad with me, and we will arise and go; that we may live, and not die, both we, and thou, and also our little ones.

α.43.9 
E.43.9 I will be surety for him; of my hand shalt thou require him: if I bring him not unto thee, and set him before thee, then let me bear the blame for ever:

α.43.10 
E.43.10 For except we had lingered, surely now we had returned this second time.

α.43.11 
E.43.11 And their father Israel said unto them, If it must be so now, do this; take of the best fruits in the land in your vessels, and carry down the man a present, a little balm, and a little honey, spices, and myrrh, nuts, and almonds:

α.43.12 
E.43.12 And take double money in your hand; and the money that was brought again in the mouth of your sacks, carry it again in your hand; peradventure it was an oversight:

α.43.13 
E.43.13 Take also your brother, and arise, go again unto the man:

α.43.14 
E.43.14 And God Almighty give you mercy before the man, that he may send away your other brother, and Benjamin. If I be bereaved of my children, I am bereaved.

α.43.15 
E.43.15 And the men took that present, and they took double money in their hand and Benjamin; and rose up, and went down to Egypt, and stood before Joseph.

α.43.16 
E.43.16 And when Joseph saw Benjamin with them, he said to the ruler of his house, Bring these men home, and slay, and make ready; for these men shall dine with me at noon.

α.43.17 
E.43.17 And the man did as Joseph bade; and the man brought the men into Joseph's house.

α.43.18 
E.43.18 And the men were afraid, because they were brought into Joseph's house; and they said, Because of the money that was returned in our sacks at the first time are we brought in; that he may seek occasion against us, and fall upon us, and take us for bondmen, and our asses.

α.43.19 
E.43.19 And they came near to the steward of Joseph's house, and they communed with him at the door of the house,

α.43.20 
E.43.20 And said, O sir, we came indeed down at the first time to buy food:

α.43.21 
E.43.21 And it came to pass, when we came to the inn, that we opened our sacks, and, behold, every man's money was in the mouth of his sack, our money in full weight: and we have brought it again in our hand.

α.43.22 
E.43.22 And other money have we brought down in our hands to buy food: we cannot tell who put our money in our sacks.

α.43.23 
E.43.23 And he said, Peace be to you, fear not: your God, and the God of your father, hath given you treasure in your sacks: I had your money. And he brought Simeon out unto them.

α.43.24 
E.43.24 And the man brought the men into Joseph's house, and gave them water, and they washed their feet; and he gave their asses provender.

α.43.25 
E.43.25 And they made ready the present against Joseph came at noon: for they heard that they should eat bread there.

α.43.26 
E.43.26 And when Joseph came home, they brought him the present which was in their hand into the house, and bowed themselves to him to the earth.

α.43.27 
E.43.27 And he asked them of their welfare, and said, Is your father well, the old man of whom ye spake? Is he yet alive?

α.43.28 
E.43.28 And they answered, Thy servant our father is in good health, he is yet alive. And they bowed down their heads, and made obeisance.

α.43.29 
E.43.29 And he lifted up his eyes, and saw his brother Benjamin, his mother's son, and said, Is this your younger brother, of whom ye spake unto me? And he said, God be gracious unto thee, my son.

α.43.30 
E.43.30 And Joseph made haste; for his bowels did yearn upon his brother: and he sought where to weep; and he entered into his chamber, and wept there.

α.43.31 
E.43.31 And he washed his face, and went out, and refrained himself, and said, Set on bread.

α.43.32 
E.43.32 And they set on for him by himself, and for them by themselves, and for the Egyptians, which did eat with him, by themselves: because the Egyptians might not eat bread with the Hebrews; for that is an abomination unto the Egyptians.

α.43.33 
E.43.33 And they sat before him, the firstborn according to his birthright, and the youngest according to his youth: and the men marvelled one at another.

α.43.34 
E.43.34 And he took and sent messes unto them from before him: but Benjamin's mess was five times so much as any of their's. And they drank, and were merry with him.

α.44.1 
E.44.1 And he commanded the steward of his house, saying, Fill the men's sacks with food, as much as they can carry, and put every man's money in his sack's mouth.

α.44.2 
E.44.2 And put my cup, the silver cup, in the sack's mouth of the youngest, and his corn money. And he did according to the word that Joseph had spoken.

α.44.3 
E.44.3 As soon as the morning was light, the men were sent away, they and their asses.

α.44.4 
E.44.4 And when they were gone out of the city, and not yet far off, Joseph said unto his steward, Up, follow after the men; and when thou dost overtake them, say unto them, Wherefore have ye rewarded evil for good?

α.44.5 
E.44.5 Is not this it in which my lord drinketh, and whereby indeed he divineth? ye have done evil in so doing.

α.44.6 
E.44.6 And he overtook them, and he spake unto them these same words.

α.44.7 
E.44.7 And they said unto him, Wherefore saith my lord these words? God forbid that thy servants should do according to this thing:

α.44.8 
E.44.8 Behold, the money, which we found in our sacks' mouths, we brought again unto thee out of the land of Canaan: how then should we steal out of thy lord's house silver or gold?

α.44.9 
E.44.9 With whomsoever of thy servants it be found, both let him die, and we also will be my lord's bondmen.

α.44.10 
E.44.10 And he said, Now also let it be according unto your words: he with whom it is found shall be my servant; and ye shall be blameless.

α.44.11 
E.44.11 Then they speedily took down every man his sack to the ground, and opened every man his sack.

α.44.12 
E.44.12 And he searched, and began at the eldest, and left at the youngest: and the cup was found in Benjamin's sack.

α.44.13 
E.44.13 Then they rent their clothes, and laded every man his ass, and returned to the city.

α.44.14 
E.44.14 And Judah and his brethren came to Joseph's house; for he was yet there: and they fell before him on the ground.

α.44.15 
E.44.15 And Joseph said unto them, What deed is this that ye have done? wot ye not that such a man as I can certainly divine?

α.44.16 
E.44.16 And Judah said, What shall we say unto my lord? what shall we speak?  or how shall we clear ourselves? God hath found out the iniquity of thy servants: behold, we are my lord's servants, both we, and he also with whom the cup is found.

α.44.17 
E.44.17 And he said, God forbid that I should do so: but the man in whose hand the cup is found, he shall be my servant; and as for you, get you up in peace unto your father.

α.44.18 
E.44.18 Then Judah came near unto him, and said, Oh my lord, let thy servant, I pray thee, speak a word in my lord's ears, and let not thine anger burn against thy servant: for thou art even as Pharaoh.

α.44.19 
E.44.19 My lord asked his servants, saying, Have ye a father, or a brother?

α.44.20 
E.44.20 And we said unto my lord, We have a father, an old man, and a child of his old age, a little one; and his brother is dead, and he alone is left of his mother, and his father loveth him.

α.44.21 
E.44.21 And thou saidst unto thy servants, Bring him down unto me, that I may set mine eyes upon him.

α.44.22 
E.44.22 And we said unto my lord, The lad cannot leave his father: for if he should leave his father, his father would die.

α.44.23 
E.44.23 And thou saidst unto thy servants, Except your youngest brother come down with you, ye shall see my face no more.

α.44.24 
E.44.24 And it came to pass when we came up unto thy servant my father, we told him the words of my lord.

α.44.25 
E.44.25 And our father said, Go again, and buy us a little food.

α.44.26 
E.44.26 And we said, We cannot go down: if our youngest brother be with us, then will we go down: for we may not see the man's face, except our youngest brother be with us.

α.44.27 
E.44.27 And thy servant my father said unto us, Ye know that my wife bare me two sons:

α.44.28 
E.44.28 And the one went out from me, and I said, Surely he is torn in pieces; and I saw him not since:

α.44.29 
E.44.29 And if ye take this also from me, and mischief befall him, ye shall bring down my gray hairs with sorrow to the grave.

α.44.30 
E.44.30 Now therefore when I come to thy servant my father, and the lad be not with us; seeing that his life is bound up in the lad's life;

α.44.31 
E.44.31 It shall come to pass, when he seeth that the lad is not with us, that he will die: and thy servants shall bring down the gray hairs of thy servant our father with sorrow to the grave.

α.44.32 
E.44.32 For thy servant became surety for the lad unto my father, saying, If I bring him not unto thee, then I shall bear the blame to my father for ever.

α.44.33 
E.44.33 Now therefore, I pray thee, let thy servant abide instead of the lad a bondman to my lord; and let the lad go up with his brethren.

α.44.34 
E.44.34 For how shall I go up to my father, and the lad be not with me? lest peradventure I see the evil that shall come on my father.

α.45.1 
E.45.1 Then Joseph could not refrain himself before all them that stood by him; and he cried, Cause every man to go out from me. And there stood no man with him, while Joseph made himself known unto his brethren.

α.45.2 
E.45.2 And he wept aloud: and the Egyptians and the house of Pharaoh heard.

α.45.3 
E.45.3 And Joseph said unto his brethren, I am Joseph; doth my father yet live? And his brethren could not answer him; for they were troubled at his presence.

α.45.4 
E.45.4 And Joseph said unto his brethren, Come near to me, I pray you. And they came near. And he said, I am Joseph your brother, whom ye sold into Egypt.

α.45.5 
E.45.5 Now therefore be not grieved, nor angry with yourselves, that ye sold me hither: for God did send me before you to preserve life.

α.45.6 
E.45.6 For these two years hath the famine been in the land: and yet there are five years, in the which there shall neither be earing nor harvest.

α.45.7 
E.45.7 And God sent me before you to preserve you a posterity in the earth, and to save your lives by a great deliverance.

α.45.8 
E.45.8 So now it was not you that sent me hither, but God: and he hath made me a father to Pharaoh, and lord of all his house, and a ruler throughout all the land of Egypt.

α.45.9 
E.45.9 Haste ye, and go up to my father, and say unto him, Thus saith thy son Joseph, God hath made me lord of all Egypt: come down unto me, tarry not:

α.45.10 
E.45.10 And thou shalt dwell in the land of Goshen, and thou shalt be near unto me, thou, and thy children, and thy children's children, and thy flocks, and thy herds, and all that thou hast:

α.45.11 
E.45.11 And there will I nourish thee; for yet there are five years of famine; lest thou, and thy household, and all that thou hast, come to poverty.

α.45.12 
E.45.12 And, behold, your eyes see, and the eyes of my brother Benjamin, that it is my mouth that speaketh unto you.

α.45.13 
E.45.13 And ye shall tell my father of all my glory in Egypt, and of all that ye have seen; and ye shall haste and bring down my father hither.

α.45.14 
E.45.14 And he fell upon his brother Benjamin's neck, and wept; and Benjamin wept upon his neck.

α.45.15 
E.45.15 Moreover he kissed all his brethren, and wept upon them: and after that his brethren talked with him.

α.45.16 
E.45.16 And the fame thereof was heard in Pharaoh's house, saying, Joseph's brethren are come: and it pleased Pharaoh well, and his servants.

α.45.17 
E.45.17 And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, Say unto thy brethren, This do ye; lade your beasts, and go, get you unto the land of Canaan;

α.45.18 
E.45.18 And take your father and your households, and come unto me: and I will give you the good of the land of Egypt, and ye shall eat the fat of the land.

α.45.19 
E.45.19 Now thou art commanded, this do ye; take you wagons out of the land of Egypt for your little ones, and for your wives, and bring your father, and come.

α.45.20 
E.45.20 Also regard not your stuff; for the good of all the land of Egypt is your's.

α.45.21 
E.45.21 And the children of Israel did so: and Joseph gave them wagons, according to the commandment of Pharaoh, and gave them provision for the way.

α.45.22 
E.45.22 To all of them he gave each man changes of raiment; but to Benjamin he gave three hundred pieces of silver, and five changes of raiment.

α.45.23 
E.45.23 And to his father he sent after this manner; ten asses laden with the good things of Egypt, and ten she asses laden with corn and bread and meat for his father by the way.

α.45.24 
E.45.24 So he sent his brethren away, and they departed: and he said unto them, See that ye fall not out by the way.

α.45.25 
E.45.25 And they went up out of Egypt, and came into the land of Canaan unto Jacob their father,

α.45.26 
E.45.26 And told him, saying, Joseph is yet alive, and he is governor over all the land of Egypt. And Jacob's heart fainted, for he believed them not.

α.45.27 
E.45.27 And they told him all the words of Joseph, which he had said unto them: and when he saw the wagons which Joseph had sent to carry him, the spirit of Jacob their father revived:

α.45.28 
E.45.28 And Israel said, It is enough; Joseph my son is yet alive: I will go and see him before I die.

α.46.1 
E.46.1 And Israel took his journey with all that he had, and came to Beersheba, and offered sacrifices unto the God of his father Isaac.

α.46.2 
E.46.2 And God spake unto Israel in the visions of the night, and said, Jacob, Jacob. And he said, Here am I.

α.46.3 
E.46.3 And he said, I am God, the God of thy father: fear not to go down into Egypt; for I will there make of thee a great nation:

α.46.4 
E.46.4 I will go down with thee into Egypt; and I will also surely bring thee up again: and Joseph shall put his hand upon thine eyes.

α.46.5 
E.46.5 And Jacob rose up from Beersheba: and the sons of Israel carried Jacob their father, and their little ones, and their wives, in the wagons which Pharaoh had sent to carry him.

α.46.6 
E.46.6 And they took their cattle, and their goods, which they had gotten in the land of Canaan, and came into Egypt, Jacob, and all his seed with him:

α.46.7 
E.46.7 His sons, and his sons' sons with him, his daughters, and his sons' daughters, and all his seed brought he with him into Egypt.

α.46.8 
E.46.8 And these are the names of the children of Israel, which came into Egypt, Jacob and his sons: Reuben, Jacob's firstborn.

α.46.9 
E.46.9 And the sons of Reuben; Hanoch, and Phallu, and Hezron, and Carmi.

α.46.10 
E.46.10 And the sons of Simeon; Jemuel, and Jamin, and Ohad, and Jachin, and Zohar, and Shaul the son of a Canaanitish woman.

α.46.11 
E.46.11 And the sons of Levi; Gershon, Kohath, and Merari.

α.46.12 
E.46.12 And the sons of Judah; Er, and Onan, and Shelah, and Pharez, and Zarah: but Er and Onan died in the land of Canaan. And the sons of Pharez were Hezron and Hamul.

α.46.13 
E.46.13 And the sons of Issachar; Tola, and Phuvah, and Job, and Shimron.

α.46.14 
E.46.14 And the sons of Zebulun; Sered, and Elon, and Jahleel.

α.46.15 
E.46.15 These be the sons of Leah, which she bare unto Jacob in Padanaram, with his daughter Dinah: all the souls of his sons and his daughters were thirty and three.

α.46.16 
E.46.16 And the sons of Gad; Ziphion, and Haggi, Shuni, and Ezbon, Eri, and Arodi, and Areli.

α.46.17 
E.46.17 And the sons of Asher; Jimnah, and Ishuah, and Isui, and Beriah, and Serah their sister: and the sons of Beriah; Heber, and Malchiel.

α.46.18 
E.46.18 These are the sons of Zilpah, whom Laban gave to Leah his daughter, and these she bare unto Jacob, even sixteen souls.

α.46.19 
E.46.19 The sons of Rachel Jacob's wife; Joseph, and Benjamin.

α.46.20 
E.46.20 And unto Joseph in the land of Egypt were born Manasseh and Ephraim, which Asenath the daughter of Potipherah priest of On bare unto him.

α.46.21 
E.46.21 And the sons of Benjamin were Belah, and Becher, and Ashbel, Gera, and Naaman, Ehi, and Rosh, Muppim, and Huppim, and Ard.

α.46.22 
E.46.22 These are the sons of Rachel, which were born to Jacob: all the souls were fourteen.

α.46.23 
E.46.23 And the sons of Dan; Hushim.

α.46.24 
E.46.24 And the sons of Naphtali; Jahzeel, and Guni, and Jezer, and Shillem.

α.46.25 
E.46.25 These are the sons of Bilhah, which Laban gave unto Rachel his daughter, and she bare these unto Jacob: all the souls were seven.

α.46.26 
E.46.26 All the souls that came with Jacob into Egypt, which came out of his loins, besides Jacob's sons' wives, all the souls were threescore and six;

α.46.27 
E.46.27 And the sons of Joseph, which were born him in Egypt, were two souls: all the souls of the house of Jacob, which came into Egypt, were threescore and ten.

α.46.28 
E.46.28 And he sent Judah before him unto Joseph, to direct his face unto Goshen; and they came into the land of Goshen.

α.46.29 
E.46.29 And Joseph made ready his chariot, and went up to meet Israel his father, to Goshen, and presented himself unto him; and he fell on his neck, and wept on his neck a good while.

α.46.30 
E.46.30 And Israel said unto Joseph, Now let me die, since I have seen thy face, because thou art yet alive.

α.46.31 
E.46.31 And Joseph said unto his brethren, and unto his father's house, I will go up, and shew Pharaoh, and say unto him, My brethren, and my father's house, which were in the land of Canaan, are come unto me;

α.46.32 
E.46.32 And the men are shepherds, for their trade hath been to feed cattle; and they have brought their flocks, and their herds, and all that they have.

α.46.33 
E.46.33 And it shall come to pass, when Pharaoh shall call you, and shall say, What is your occupation?

α.46.34 
E.46.34 That ye shall say, Thy servants' trade hath been about cattle from our youth even until now, both we, and also our fathers: that ye may dwell in the land of Goshen; for every shepherd is an abomination unto the Egyptians.

α.47.1 
E.47.1 Then Joseph came and told Pharaoh, and said, My father and my brethren, and their flocks, and their herds, and all that they have, are come out of the land of Canaan; and, behold, they are in the land of Goshen.

α.47.2 
E.47.2 And he took some of his brethren, even five men, and presented them unto Pharaoh.

α.47.3 
E.47.3 And Pharaoh said unto his brethren, What is your occupation? And they said unto Pharaoh, Thy servants are shepherds, both we, and also our fathers.

α.47.4 
E.47.4 They said moreover unto Pharaoh, For to sojourn in the land are we come; for thy servants have no pasture for their flocks; for the famine is sore in the land of Canaan: now therefore, we pray thee, let thy servants dwell in the land of Goshen.

α.47.5 
E.47.5 And Pharaoh spake unto Joseph, saying, Thy father and thy brethren are come unto thee:

α.47.6 
E.47.6 The land of Egypt is before thee; in the best of the land make thy father and brethren to dwell; in the land of Goshen let them dwell: and if thou knowest any men of activity among them, then make them rulers over my cattle.

α.47.7 
E.47.7 And Joseph brought in Jacob his father, and set him before Pharaoh: and Jacob blessed Pharaoh.

α.47.8 
E.47.8 And Pharaoh said unto Jacob, How old art thou?

α.47.9 
E.47.9 And Jacob said unto Pharaoh, The days of the years of my pilgrimage are an hundred and thirty years: few and evil have the days of the years of my life been, and have not attained unto the days of the years of the life of my fathers in the days of their pilgrimage.

α.47.10 
E.47.10 And Jacob blessed Pharaoh, and went out from before Pharaoh.

α.47.11 
E.47.11 And Joseph placed his father and his brethren, and gave them a possession in the land of Egypt, in the best of the land, in the land of Rameses, as Pharaoh had commanded.

α.47.12 
E.47.12 And Joseph nourished his father, and his brethren, and all his father's household, with bread, according to their families.

α.47.13 
E.47.13 And there was no bread in all the land; for the famine was very sore, so that the land of Egypt and all the land of Canaan fainted by reason of the famine.

α.47.14 
E.47.14 And Joseph gathered up all the money that was found in the land of Egypt, and in the land of Canaan, for the corn which they bought: and Joseph brought the money into Pharaoh's house.

α.47.15 
E.47.15 And when money failed in the land of Egypt, and in the land of Canaan, all the Egyptians came unto Joseph, and said, Give us bread: for why should we die in thy presence? for the money faileth.

α.47.16 
E.47.16 And Joseph said, Give your cattle; and I will give you for your cattle, if money fail.

α.47.17 
E.47.17 And they brought their cattle unto Joseph: and Joseph gave them bread in exchange for horses, and for the flocks, and for the cattle of the herds, and for the asses: and he fed them with bread for all their cattle for that year.

α.47.18 
E.47.18 When that year was ended, they came unto him the second year, and said unto him, We will not hide it from my lord, how that our money is spent; my lord also hath our herds of cattle; there is not ought left in the sight of my lord, but our bodies, and our lands:

α.47.19 
E.47.19 Wherefore shall we die before thine eyes, both we and our land? buy us and our land for bread, and we and our land will be servants unto Pharaoh: and give us seed, that we may live, and not die, that the land be not desolate.

α.47.20 
E.47.20 And Joseph bought all the land of Egypt for Pharaoh; for the Egyptians sold every man his field, because the famine prevailed over them: so the land became Pharaoh's.

α.47.21 
E.47.21 And as for the people, he removed them to cities from one end of the borders of Egypt even to the other end thereof.

α.47.22 
E.47.22 Only the land of the priests bought he not; for the priests had a portion assigned them of Pharaoh, and did eat their portion which Pharaoh gave them: wherefore they sold not their lands.

α.47.23 
E.47.23 Then Joseph said unto the people, Behold, I have bought you this day and your land for Pharaoh: lo, here is seed for you, and ye shall sow the land.

α.47.24 
E.47.24 And it shall come to pass in the increase, that ye shall give the fifth part unto Pharaoh, and four parts shall be your own, for seed of the field, and for your food, and for them of your households, and for food for your little ones.

α.47.25 
E.47.25 And they said, Thou hast saved our lives: let us find grace in the sight of my lord, and we will be Pharaoh's servants.

α.47.26 
E.47.26 And Joseph made it a law over the land of Egypt unto this day, that Pharaoh should have the fifth part, except the land of the priests only, which became not Pharaoh's.

α.47.27 
E.47.27 And Israel dwelt in the land of Egypt, in the country of Goshen; and they had possessions therein, and grew, and multiplied exceedingly.

α.47.28 
E.47.28 And Jacob lived in the land of Egypt seventeen years: so the whole age of Jacob was an hundred forty and seven years.

α.47.29 
E.47.29 And the time drew nigh that Israel must die: and he called his son Joseph, and said unto him, If now I have found grace in thy sight, put, I pray thee, thy hand under my thigh, and deal kindly and truly with me; bury me not, I pray thee, in Egypt:

α.47.30 
E.47.30 But I will lie with my fathers, and thou shalt carry me out of Egypt, and bury me in their buryingplace. And he said, I will do as thou hast said.

α.47.31 
E.47.31 And he said, Swear unto me. And he sware unto him. And Israel bowed himself upon the bed's head.

α.48.1 
E.48.1 And it came to pass after these things, that one told Joseph, Behold, thy father is sick: and he took with him his two sons, Manasseh and Ephraim.

α.48.2 
E.48.2 And one told Jacob, and said, Behold, thy son Joseph cometh unto thee: and Israel strengthened himself, and sat upon the bed.

α.48.3 
E.48.3 And Jacob said unto Joseph, God Almighty appeared unto me at Luz in the land of Canaan, and blessed me,

α.48.4 
E.48.4 And said unto me, Behold, I will make thee fruitful, and multiply thee, and I will make of thee a multitude of people; and will give this land to thy seed after thee for an everlasting possession.

α.48.5 
E.48.5 And now thy two sons, Ephraim and Manasseh, which were born unto thee in the land of Egypt before I came unto thee into Egypt, are mine; as Reuben and Simeon, they shall be mine.

α.48.6 
E.48.6 And thy issue, which thou begettest after them, shall be thine, and shall be called after the name of their brethren in their inheritance.

α.48.7 
E.48.7 And as for me, when I came from Padan, Rachel died by me in the land of Canaan in the way, when yet there was but a little way to come unto Ephrath: and I buried her there in the way of Ephrath; the same is Bethlehem.

α.48.8 
E.48.8 And Israel beheld Joseph's sons, and said, Who are these?

α.48.9 
E.48.9 And Joseph said unto his father, They are my sons, whom God hath given me in this place. And he said, Bring them, I pray thee, unto me, and I will bless them.

α.48.10 
E.48.10 Now the eyes of Israel were dim for age, so that he could not see. And he brought them near unto him; and he kissed them, and embraced them.

α.48.11 
E.48.11 And Israel said unto Joseph, I had not thought to see thy face: and, lo, God hath shewed me also thy seed.

α.48.12 
E.48.12 And Joseph brought them out from between his knees, and he bowed himself with his face to the earth.

α.48.13 
E.48.13 And Joseph took them both, Ephraim in his right hand toward Israel's left hand, and Manasseh in his left hand toward Israel's right hand, and brought them near unto him.

α.48.14 
E.48.14 And Israel stretched out his right hand, and laid it upon Ephraim's head, who was the younger, and his left hand upon Manasseh's head, guiding his hands wittingly; for Manasseh was the firstborn.

α.48.15 
E.48.15 And he blessed Joseph, and said, God, before whom my fathers Abraham and Isaac did walk, the God which fed me all my life long unto this day,

α.48.16 
E.48.16 The Angel which redeemed me from all evil, bless the lads; and let my name be named on them, and the name of my fathers Abraham and Isaac; and let them grow into a multitude in the midst of the earth.

α.48.17 
E.48.17 And when Joseph saw that his father laid his right hand upon the head of Ephraim, it displeased him: and he held up his father's hand, to remove it from Ephraim's head unto Manasseh's head.

α.48.18 
E.48.18 And Joseph said unto his father, Not so, my father: for this is the firstborn; put thy right hand upon his head.

α.48.19 
E.48.19 And his father refused, and said, I know it, my son, I know it: he also shall become a people, and he also shall be great: but truly his younger brother shall be greater than he, and his seed shall become a multitude of nations.

α.48.20 
E.48.20 And he blessed them that day, saying, In thee shall Israel bless, saying, God make thee as Ephraim and as Manasseh: and he set Ephraim before Manasseh.

α.48.21 
E.48.21 And Israel said unto Joseph, Behold, I die: but God shall be with you, and bring you again unto the land of your fathers.

α.48.22 
E.48.22 Moreover I have given to thee one portion above thy brethren, which I took out of the hand of the Amorite with my sword and with my bow.

α.49.1 
E.49.1 And Jacob called unto his sons, and said, Gather yourselves together, that I may tell you that which shall befall you in the last days.

α.49.2 
E.49.2 Gather yourselves together, and hear, ye sons of Jacob; and hearken unto Israel your father.

α.49.3 
E.49.3 Reuben, thou art my firstborn, my might, and the beginning of my strength, the excellency of dignity, and the excellency of power:

α.49.4 
E.49.4 Unstable as water, thou shalt not excel; because thou wentest up to thy father's bed; then defiledst thou it: he went up to my couch.

α.49.5 
E.49.5 Simeon and Levi are brethren; instruments of cruelty are in their habitations.

α.49.6 
E.49.6 O my soul, come not thou into their secret; unto their assembly, mine honour, be not thou united: for in their anger they slew a man, and in their selfwill they digged down a wall.

α.49.7 
E.49.7 Cursed be their anger, for it was fierce; and their wrath, for it was cruel: I will divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel.

α.49.8 
E.49.8 Judah, thou art he whom thy brethren shall praise: thy hand shall be in the neck of thine enemies; thy father's children shall bow down before thee.

α.49.9 
E.49.9 Judah is a lion's whelp: from the prey, my son, thou art gone up: he stooped down, he couched as a lion, and as an old lion; who shall rouse him up?

α.49.10 
E.49.10 The sceptre shall not depart from Judah, nor a lawgiver from between his feet, until Shiloh come; and unto him shall the gathering of the people be.

α.49.11 
E.49.11 Binding his foal unto the vine, and his ass's colt unto the choice vine; he washed his garments in wine, and his clothes in the blood of grapes:

α.49.12 
E.49.12 His eyes shall be red with wine, and his teeth white with milk.

α.49.13 
E.49.13 Zebulun shall dwell at the haven of the sea; and he shall be for an haven of ships; and his border shall be unto Zidon.

α.49.14 
E.49.14 Issachar is a strong ass couching down between two burdens:

α.49.15 
E.49.15 And he saw that rest was good, and the land that it was pleasant; and bowed his shoulder to bear, and became a servant unto tribute.

α.49.16 
E.49.16 Dan shall judge his people, as one of the tribes of Israel.

α.49.17 
E.49.17 Dan shall be a serpent by the way, an adder in the path, that biteth the horse heels, so that his rider shall fall backward.

α.49.18 
E.49.18 I have waited for thy salvation, O LORD.

α.49.19 
E.49.19 Gad, a troop shall overcome him: but he shall overcome at the last.

α.49.20 
E.49.20 Out of Asher his bread shall be fat, and he shall yield royal dainties.

α.49.21 
E.49.21 Naphtali is a hind let loose: he giveth goodly words.

α.49.22 
E.49.22 Joseph is a fruitful bough, even a fruitful bough by a well; whose branches run over the wall:

α.49.23 
E.49.23 The archers have sorely grieved him, and shot at him, and hated him:

α.49.24 
E.49.24 But his bow abode in strength, and the arms of his hands were made strong by the hands of the mighty God of Jacob; (from thence is the shepherd, the stone of Israel:)

α.49.25 
E.49.25 Even by the God of thy father, who shall help thee; and by the Almighty, who shall bless thee with blessings of heaven above, blessings of the deep that lieth under, blessings of the breasts, and of the womb:

α.49.26 
E.49.26 The blessings of thy father have prevailed above the blessings of my progenitors unto the utmost bound of the everlasting hills: they shall be on the head of Joseph, and on the crown of the head of him that was separate from his brethren.

α.49.27 Benjamin pish nehnehteap8 onatuh mummugquoshum, nompoaeu m8hwhau neh nashóncheh, kah wunnonk88k pish chachapenau ne macheoncheh.
E.49.27 Benjamin shall ravin as a wolf: in the morning he shall devour the prey, and at night he shall divide the spoil.

α.49.28 Wame yeug naboneese chippan8og Israel, kah yeu 8sh8oh anukquehettit, kah nah 8naneteaong noh 8nanumoh.
E.49.28 All these are the twelve tribes of Israel: and this is it that their father spake unto them, and blessed them; every one according to his blessing he blessed them.

α.49.29 Kah nah ummeechumuhkonuh, kah wuttinuh: nen w[ô]h ummukinit ut nummissinninneumut, pósekenneg weeche n8shut, ut hassunnegit ne wutohteakonit Ephron wut-Hittite.
E.49.29 And he charged them, and said unto them, I am to be gathered unto my people: bury me with my fathers in the cave that is in the field of Ephron the Hittite,

α.49.30 Ut hassunnegit wutohteakonit Makpelah, ne anaquohtag Mamre, ut ohkit Kanaan, ne Abraham adtôap weeche ohteuk, wutch Ephronoh wut-hittitoh, wutche ohtoonk posekinnetue ohke.
E.49.30 In the cave that is in the field of Machpelah, which is before Mamre, in the land of Canaan, which Abraham bought with the field of Ephron the Hittite for a possession of a buryingplace.

α.49.31 Na posekinnoneau Abraham kah Saraihoh ummittamwussoh: na posekinnoneau Isaakoh kah Rebekahhoh ummittamwusṣoh, kah na nupposekinnonah Leah.
E.49.31 There they buried Abraham and Sarah his wife; there they buried Isaac and Rebekah his wife; and there I buried Leah.

α.49.32 Ut adtôómukup ohteuk, kah hasṣunneg ne na ohtag, wutch wunnaumonuh Heth.
E.49.32 The purchase of the field and of the cave that is therein was from the children of Heth.

α.49.33 Kah Jakob maht8adt ann8nonat wunnaumonuh, kah wutontamun wusṣetash en apinneat, kah nashomau ukketeahogkôunoh, kah mukkinneu ut ummissinninneumoh
E.49.33 And when Jacob had made an end of commanding his sons, he gathered up his feet into the bed, and yielded up the ghost, and was gathered unto his people.

α.50.1 KAH Joseph kepshau wuskesukqut 8shoh & ummauemoh, & wutchipwutt8napoh
E.50.1 And Joseph fell upon his father's face, and wept upon him, and kissed him.

α.50.2 Kah Joseph ann8nau ponaskehtuaenue wuttinneumoh susṣequnonat 8shoh, kah ponaskehtuaenuog susṣequnaog Israeloh.
E.50.2 And Joseph commanded his servants the physicians to embalm his father: and the physicians embalmed Israel.

α.50.3 Kah yauunchatikquinne wunnumwohtauon, newutche nemehkuh numwohtauunaoash kesukodtash wutche neg sasequnoncheg, kah wut-Egyptianeog ummauemouh nesausuk tahshinchatikquinne.
E.50.3 And forty days were fulfilled for him; for so are fulfilled the days of those which are embalmed: and the Egyptians mourned for him threescore and ten days.

α.50.4 Kah maumuttamwae kesukodtash pamushunk, kah Joseph ken8nau apinitcheh Pharoh wekit, n8wau, namehteauon kitteamonteanittuonk ut kuskesuk8òut ket8hkunk k8wehquetumonumw8 ut wuhtauogut Pharoh, n8wagk.
E.50.4 And when the days of his mourning were past, Joseph spake unto the house of Pharaoh, saying, If now I have found grace in your eyes, speak, I pray you, in the ears of Pharaoh, saying,

α.50.5 N8sh nutchadchekeyeuwahik, n8wau, kusṣeh nunnup, n8wenohkit w[ò]nohkoaogkup nuhhog, ut ohkit Kanaan, na pish kuttit posekinneau: kah yeuyeu monchetoi, k8wéhquetumoush posekinonat n8sh, kah wonk nuppeyam.
E.50.5 My father made me swear, saying, Lo, I die: in my grave which I have digged for me in the land of Canaan, there shalt thou bury me. Now therefore let me go up, I pray thee, and bury my father, and I will come again.

α.50.6 Kah Pharoh n8wau, kuhkuhquish kah posekin k8sh, neane chadchekeyeuwáhikquean.
E.50.6 And Pharaoh said, Go up, and bury thy father, according as he made thee swear.

α.50.7 Kah Joseph kuhkuhqueu posekinonat 8shoh, kah weechóg wame wuttinneumoh Pharoh, masugkenutcheh ut weekit, kah wame matikkenukeg ut wame ohkit Egypt.
E.50.7 And Joseph went up to bury his father: and with him went up all the servants of Pharaoh, the elders of his house, and all the elders of the land of Egypt,

α.50.8 Kah wame wekit Joseph, kah wematoh, kah 8shoh week: webe uppeissesumouh, kah ufloksumoh, kah wutherdsumoh wunnukkonóuh Goshen.
E.50.8 And all the house of Joseph, and his brethren, and his father's house: only their little ones, and their flocks, and their herds, they left in the land of Goshen.

α.50.9 Kah weechog tatuppequanumugkaash, kâh horsesoh na8mukqutcheg, kah m8chequshaog.
E.50.9 And there went up with him both chariots and horsemen: and it was a very great company.

α.50.10 Kah peyaog ahhut pogkohhamuk A[r]ad, ne ongkoue Jordan, kah ne wuttit mauwunneau mishe mauonk, kah mauemau 8shoh nesausuk tahshikquinne.
E.50.10 And they came to the threshingfloor of Atad, which is beyond Jordan, and there they mourned with a great and very sore lamentation: and he made a mourning for his father seven days.

α.50.11 Kah na wadohkitcheg ne ohkit ukkananitsog, naumwog[:] mauonk ahhut-pogkohhamuk A[r]ad, kah n8waog mishaumuttam8onk wut-Egyptianeog: newajeh héttamuk ummaumuttam8ongan8óut wut-Egyptianeog, ne onkouwe Jordan.
E.50.11 And when the inhabitants of the land, the Canaanites, saw the mourning in the floor of Atad, they said, This is a grievous mourning to the Egyptians: wherefore the name of it was called Abelmizraim, which is beyond Jordan.

α.50.12 Kah wunnaumonuh wuttinhukqun nean ann8nomp,
E.50.12 And his sons did unto him according as he commanded them:

α.50.13 Kah wunnaumonuh uss8unuk en ohkit Kanaan, kah upposekinouh hassunegit wutohteakonit Makpelah, ne Abraham adtòop, weeche ohteuk, wutche ohtóonk posekinnetue ohke, wutch Ephron wuthittit anaquohtag Mamre.
E.50.13 For his sons carried him into the land of Canaan, and buried him in the cave of the field of Machpelah, which Abraham bought with the field for a possession of a buryingplace of Ephron the Hittite, before Mamre.

α.50.14 Kah Joseph qushkeu en Egypt, nagum kah wematuh, kah wame ne weechogqutcheh posekinnonut 8shoh, mahche posekinont 8shoh.
E.50.14 And Joseph returned into Egypt, he, and his brethren, and all that went up with him to bury his father, after he had buried his father.

α.50.15 Kah Joseph wematoh namohettit 8shuóuh nupp8oh, kah n8waog Joseph paguodche kussekeneunkqun, kah onkatunke kutonkquatunkqun, wame nemachuk ne neanheogkutup.
E.50.15 And when Joseph's brethren saw that their father was dead, they said, Joseph will peradventure hate us, and will certainly requite us all the evil which we did unto him.

α.50.16 Kah nag an8naog en Josephut n8w[à]og, k8sh n8wop asquam napok n8wau.
E.50.16 And they sent a messenger unto Joseph, saying, Thy father did command before he died, saying,

α.50.17 Yeu psh kuttinnoneau Joseph, k8wehquetumoush, ahquonamau yeuyeu kummatchenehuk8ongan8 kematog, kah ummattcheseonganu, newutche nag kummatchenehukuppanneg, kah yeuyeu k8wehquetumauunum ahquontash ummatcheseongan8 wuttinneumoh ummanitt[t]8moh k8shinnonog: kah Joseph mau ken8nahettit.
E.50.17 So shall ye say unto Joseph, Forgive, I pray thee now, the trespass of thy brethren, and their sin; for they did unto thee evil: and now, we pray thee, forgive the trespass of the servants of the God of thy father. And Joseph wept when they spake unto him.

α.50.18 Kah wonk wematoh naauoh, kah penushaoh anaquabenit, kah n8waog, kusseh nenawun kittinneumog.
E.50.18 And his brethren also went and fell down before his face; and they said, Behold, we be thy servants.

α.50.19 Kah Joseph wuttinuh nahog, ahque wabesek newutche sun nen nunnompi[n] God?
E.50.19 And Joseph said unto them, Fear not: for am I in the place of God?

α.50.20 Kah kenaau kutauwuttamúmwop wutche ne machuk, God wuttiñauwuttamun wanegik, ussenat neane yeu kesukok, pomantamwae wadchanonat monaog missiñinnuog.
E.50.20 But as for you, ye thought evil against me; but God meant it unto good, to bring to pass, as it is this day, to save much people alive.

α.50.21 Kah yeuyeu ahque wabesek: kutassamunumw8, kah kummukkiésum8óog, onk nah wuttapheuh, kah 8che ken8nuh wuttahhut.
E.50.21 Now therefore fear ye not: I will nourish you, and your little ones. And he comforted them, and spake kindly unto them.

α.50.22 Kah Joseph 8tahtu Egypt, nagum kah 8shoh week, kah Joseph pomantam nequt pasuk8e kah piukque kodtumwae.
E.50.22 And Joseph dwelt in Egypt, he, and his father's house: and Joseph lived an hundred and ten years.

α.50.23 Kah Joseph naum wutch Ephraim, wunnaumonuh nishwudt ontseonganit, wonk wunnaumonuh Machir, wunnaumonuh Manasses, neetuog, ut Joseph wehquaut.
E.50.23 And Joseph saw Ephraim's children of the third generation: the children also of Machir the son of Manasseh were brought up upon Joseph's knees.

α.50.24 Kah Joseph unnau wematoh, nunnup, kah God natauwahuadt kenatauwáhukou, kah kummoncheahukou yeu wutch ohkit, en ohkit chadchekéimop Abrahamoh, kah Isaakoh kah Jakoboh.
E.50.24 And Joseph said unto his brethren, I die: and God will surely visit you, and bring you out of this land unto the land which he sware to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob.

α.50.25 Kah Joseph chadchékeyeuwáheau wunnaumonuh Israel, n8wau, God natauwaheadt pish kenatauwahukou, kah pish k8wche tahshinnumuñeau nuskonash yeuwutche
E.50.25 And Joseph took an oath of the children of Israel, saying, God will surely visit you, and ye shall carry up my bones from hence.

α.50.26 Kah Joseph nupp8, nequt pasuk8e kah piukque kodtumwohkom, kah wusṣesequnouh, kah ponan arkut, ut Egypt.
E.50.26 So Joseph died, being an hundred and ten years old: and they embalmed him, and he was put in a coffin in Egypt.