
α.1.1 UMmonomansuonk Isaiah wunnaumonuh Amoz, ne nag* papaume Judah kah Jerusalem, pâmontog Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, kah Hezekiah Judae ketass8tamwog.
E.1.1 The vision of Isaiah the son of Amoz, which he saw concerning Judah and Jerusalem in the days of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, kings of Judah.

α.1.2 N8tam8k woi kesukquog, & kuhkeitash woi ohke: newutche Jehovah ket8hkau, nummahche sohkomm8s8wam, kah nukkésukeh mukkiésog, kah nag nutcheketunkquog.
E.1.2 Hear, O heavens, and give ear, O earth: for the LORD hath spoken, I have nourished and brought up children, and they have rebelled against me.

α.1.3 Ox waheau[m]eh wadtihéunitcheh wuhhog, kah asse wahteoh wussontimomuh ne ahhut assamukqut: qut Israel matta wahteóou, nummissinninneumog matta natwontam8[o]g.
E.1.3 The ox knoweth his owner, and the ass his master's crib: but Israel doth not know, my people doth not consider.

α.1.4 Yea matcheseáe wutohtimóin, missinninnúog neg nayeutogig matcheseongash, 8skannémune8h matchesécheg: mukki[ó]g neg ánusséhuácheg, nag ohquanumáog Jehovah, nag m8m8sqhe[á]og 8neetupanatam8moh Israel, musquánittamunat, nag qushkée amaéog.
E.1.4 Ah sinful nation, a people laden with iniquity, a seed of evildoers, children that are corrupters: they have forsaken the LORD, they have provoked the Holy One of Israel unto anger, they are gone away backward.

α.1.5 Toh$waj wonk woh tattogkomitteaog? pish nano kutassaemw8: mamusse muppuhkuk mahchimom8, kah mamússe metah sauu[X]um8m8.
E.1.5 Why should ye be stricken any more? ye will revolt more and more: the whole head is sick, and the whole heart faint.

α.1.6 Wutch agwusseet, wehque muppuhkukqut, na wanne menuhkano, qut annehikanash, kah woskissinn8ongash, kah ánue kehkechésuongash, matta yanémun8ash, asuh weesquabi[n]i[nn]8ash, asuh matta wutogkunnum8unash nashpe pummee.
E.1.6 From the sole of the foot even unto the head there is no soundness in it; but wounds, and bruises, and putrifying sores: they have not been closed, neither bound up, neither mollified with ointment.

α.1.7 Kutohk8 touushin, kutotanáoash chikoht[á]ash n8taut, kutohke, penuwohteáog ummatchteauuneau ut anaquabeóg kah ne touushin, onatuh sohkomuk nashpe penuwohteáog.
E.1.7 Your country is desolate, your cities are burned with fire: your land, strangers devour it in your presence, and it is desolate, as overthrown by strangers.

α.1.8 Kah Zione wuttaunin nukkonau onatuh wetuomémesut ut seenominneohtekonit, onatuh kohkouémuk ut cucumbere tanohketeaonganit, onatuh wéenuhkausik keitotan.
E.1.8 And the daughter of Zion is left as a cottage in a vineyard, as a lodge in a garden of cucumbers, as a besieged city.

α.1.9 Kuttumma Jehovah ayeuhteáanit sequnnumunkqueog peásin sequnittuonk, woh keáneyeu8mun Sodom, kah woh kutogqueneunkqussimun Gomorrah.
E.1.9 Except the LORD of hosts had left unto us a very small remnant, we should have been as Sodom, and we should have been like unto Gomorrah.

α.1.10 N8tam8k wuttinn8wâonk Jehovah, kenaau Sodome nanawunnuaenúog, kukkeitam8k wuttinnaumatuonk kut$Jehovahumun, woi Gomorrahe missinninnúog.
E.1.10 Hear the word of the LORD, ye rulers of Sodom; give ear unto the law of our God, ye people of Gomorrah.

α.1.11 Ne teag wutch mataáneum kussephammayeuongan8, n8wau Jehovah? nunnumwohtóh ramse chikohtáe mag8ongash, kah 8weesum8 wunogque puppinashimwog, kah matta nuttapeneam8 8sqheongan8 oxinog, asuh lambsog, asuh namposhimwe goatsog.
E.1.11 To what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices unto me? saith the LORD: I am full of the burnt offerings of rams, and the fat of fed beasts; and I delight not in the blood of bullocks, or of lambs, or of he goats.

α.1.12 Peyôog kenógqussinneaóut ut anaquabeh, [h]owan yeu wunnat8tamuhkon ut kenutcheganit, tattashkukomuneat, nutchippinneutungash.
E.1.12 When ye come to appear before me, who hath required this at your hand, to tread my courts?

α.1.13 Padtauúhteogk wonk tahn8che mag8ongash, incense ne nehchanumukquodt ut nuhhogkat, wuske nepâuzsaog, kah sabbathaash, moáe wehkomonát nutjishontamun, ne matcheseonk, ne moáe miya[é]onk.
E.1.13 Bring no more vain oblations; incense is an abomination unto me; the new moons and sabbaths, the calling of assemblies, I cannot away with; it is iniquity, even the solemn meeting.

α.1.14 K8ske kenepâuzs8m8óog, kah kukkuhquttum8we mishadtupp8ongan8oash, nukketeahogkou nish wutjishontamunash: nish n8tamêhikqunash, nussauunum nish nutchequnehtamunat.
E.1.14 Your new moons and your appointed feasts my soul hateth: they are a trouble unto me; I am weary to bear them.

α.1.15 Kah sepagenumog kenutch[e]gan8oash, pish nutadtahtóh nuskesukquash wutch kuhhogkaout, nux, ayimog monatash peantam8ongash, matta pish nunn8tam8h, kenutchegan8out numwohte[á]u wusqueheongash. 
E.1.15 And when ye spread forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you: yea, when ye make many prayers, I will not hear: your hands are full of blood.

α.1.16 Kutchessumók, pahkheuk kuhhogkóog, amaunum8k kum̃atcheseongan8oash wutch anaquabeh, netahshe matchesek,
E.1.16 Wash you, make you clean; put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes; cease to do evil;

α.1.17 Kodnetuhtau8k wunnésen, natinneham8k wussittumóonk, aninnumok noh sonkqutchahwhut, wussumok touwies, ken8tamwa[n]sheuk sekousq.
E.1.17 Learn to do well; seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for the widow.

α.1.18 Yeuyeu peyunk, kah moáe ennóm[á]iyeuhteadtuh, n8wau Lord; t[ô]hkonogque k[u]m̃atcheseongan8ash onatuhheyeu8 skarletut, nish pish ogque wompiyeuash k8nit: tôhkonogque nish unnemusqui crimson, nish pish onatuhyeu8ash w8lut.
E.1.18 Come now, and let us reason together, saith the LORD: though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool.

α.1.19 Unnantamóg kah n8swehtamóg, pish kummeechum8 ohkée wunnummeechum.
E.1.19 If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good of the land:

α.1.20 Qut sekeneamóg, kah cheketamóg, pish kummohtuppaémo nashpe togkodt[e]g: newutche wutt8n Jehovah ket8hkontamun.
E.1.20 But if ye refuse and rebel, ye shall be devoured with the sword: for the mouth of the LORD hath spoken it.

α.1.21 Uttôh en pâbuhtantam8e keitotan nanwun8dsquaáesuenúin? ne numwohtop wussittumóonk, sampweusseonk ne ayeum8, qut yeuyeu nushehteaenúog.
E.1.21 How is the faithful city become an harlot! it was full of judgment; righteousness lodged in it; but now murderers.

α.1.22 Kus$silverum p[e]htóou, k8winum kenuksheau nippe.
E.1.22 Thy silver is become dross, thy wine mixed with water:

α.1.23 Kussontimomog cheketamwog, kah weechayemá[h]etticheh kumm8towa[é]nuog, nishnoh pasuk womantam mag8ongash; kah asuhkom kemunkquatungash: nag matta wussumauóog touwiesoh, kah wuttinniyeuonk sekousq matta uppeyógk8uneau.
E.1.23 Thy princes are rebellious, and companions of thieves: every one loveth gifts, and followeth after rewards: they judge not the fatherless, neither doth the cause of the widow come unto them.

α.1.24 Newaj n8wadt Lord, Jehovah ayeuhteaanit, noh masugkenuk ut Israel, yâ nunnunkeh nuhhog wutch yeu ay8kausitcheg, kah nutann8tau nummatwomog.
E.1.24 Therefore saith the LORD, the LORD of hosts, the mighty One of Israel, Ah, I will ease me of mine adversaries, and avenge me of mine enemies:

α.1.25 Kah nukquinnuppinnum nunnutcheg en kuhhogkat, kah nuppannuppe pahketeoh kuppehtom, kah nutamaúnum wame kuttinnum.
E.1.25 And I will turn my hand upon thee, and purely purge away thy dross, and take away all thy tin:

α.1.26 Kah kenompenumoush k8sittumwaéneumwog neáne negonne, kah ken8snaéneumog neáne waj kutchissik: ompetak pish kuttéhenit, sampweusseáe keitotan, pabahtanumwe keitotan.
E.1.26 And I will restore thy judges as at the first, and thy counsellors as at the beginning: afterward thou shalt be called, The city of righteousness, the faithful city.

α.1.27 Zion pish pohquohwhuttauun, nashpe wussittumóonk, kah n[e]g ne adt quinnuppecheg, nashpe sampweusséonk.
E.1.27 Zion shall be redeemed with judgment, and her converts with righteousness.

α.1.28 Kah pagwanoungan8 panneseaénûog, kah matcheseaenúog pish moeyeu88: kah nág ohquanumoncheg Jehovah pish mohtuppaéog.
E.1.28 And the destruction of the transgressors and of the sinners shall be together, and they that forsake the LORD shall be consumed.

α.1.29 Newutche nag pish akodchuog n8timisseash nish kodtantogish, kah pish kukquequenauánumumw8, newutche tanohketeaongash nish pepenamogish.
E.1.29 For they shall be ashamed of the oaks which ye have desired, and ye shall be confounded for the gardens that ye have chosen.

α.1.30 Newutche pish kutogqueneunkqussum8 n8timisseit noh 8neepóg pánshunk, kah onatuh tanohketeáonk ne mat napén8g
E.1.30 For ye shall be as an oak whose leaf fadeth, and as a garden that hath no water.

α.1.31 Káh manuhkésitcheg pish onatuhyeu8og hashabput, kah noh ayik, onatuh chikinn[a]sit, kah nag pish neeswe moeu chikossuog, kah wanne pish howan wutontáhwoh.
E.1.31 And the strong shall be as tow, and the maker of it as a spark, and they shall both burn together, and none shall quench them.

α.2.1 WUttinn8waonk ne Isayah wunnaumonuh Amoz nag*, papaume Judah kah Jerusalem.
E.2.1 The word that Isaiah the son of Amoz saw concerning Judah and Jerusalem.

α.2.2 Kah pish n$nih majish kesukodtash, wek Jehovah 8wadcheum, ne pish menehketeauun ut koduhkô[á]e wadchukontu, kah pish anue tahshinausu onk wadchuash, kah wame wutohtimóineash uppeyaont[á]muneau.
E.2.2 And it shall come to pass in the last days, that the mountain of the LORD's house shall be established in the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills; and all nations shall flow unto it.

α.2.3 Kah monaog missinninn[u]og pish moncheog[;] kah n8waog, peyunk, kuhkuhquehtuh 8wadcheum Jehovah, en wekit um-Manitt8moh Jakob, kah noh pish nuppomushamun ummayut: newutche Zion wutch sohham ennaumatuonk, kah wuttinn8waonk Jehovah wutch Jerusalem.
E.2.3 And many people shall go and say, Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain of the LORD, to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths: for out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the LORD from Jerusalem.

α.2.4 Kah noh pish wussittum ut kenugke wutohtim[o]inneat, kah pish áushkomau mónaoh missinninnuh: kah nag pish plowshearehteáog wuttogkodtegan8óash, kah pish tisaskwheganéhteáog ukqunuhtugquash: wutohtimóin matta pish ayeuuhkonit[t]ue tohshinnumauóou togkodteg wutohtimóiñeuh, kah matta pish wonk netuhtauóog ayeuwuttuonk.
E.2.4 And he shall judge among the nations, and shall rebuke many people: and they shall beat their swords into plowshares, and their spears into pruninghooks: nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more.

α.2.5 Woi wek Jakob, peyunk, kah pomushadtuh 8wequaiyeumut Jehovah.
E.2.5 O house of Jacob, come ye, and let us walk in the light of the LORD.

α.2.6 Newaj nukkonadt kummissinninneumog, wek Jakob: newutche tapauwaméog wutch wutchepwoiyeu, kah ogquonnetuog Philistiansut, kah tapheaog wuhhogkauh nashpe wunneechan8oh penuwohteáog.
E.2.6 Therefore thou hast forsaken thy people the house of Jacob, because they be replenished from the east, and are soothsayers like the Philistines, and they please themselves in the children of strangers.

α.2.7 Kah nag wutohkou numwohteau silver kah gold, kah matta wohkukquoshininn8 wunnompakounn8ash; wonk wutohkeeu wunnumwábeneau horsesoh, kah matta wohkukquos[n]in8 wut-chariotsumash.
E.2.7 Their land also is full of silver and gold, neither is there any end of their treasures; their land is also full of horses, neither is there any end of their chariots:

α.2.8 Kah wonk wutohkéim8 wunnumwábeneau nunneukontunkanog, wowussittumwog néhenwonche wunnutchegane anakausuongan8oash, ne nehenwonche wuttinwhunnitche8 kestoum8uk.
E.2.8 Their land also is full of idols; they worship the work of their own hands, that which their own fingers have made:

α.2.9 Kah noh peississit, nauwáeu, kah noh masugkenuk hohppáheau wuhhogkuh, newutche ahquontamauúhkon.
E.2.9 And the mean man boweth down, and the great man humbleth himself: therefore forgive them not.

α.2.10 Petutteah qussukquanit, kah puttogqush ut puppissiyeuut wutche qushaonk Jehovah, kah wutche wussohsumóe maumuttanussuonk.
E.2.10 Enter into the rock, and hide thee in the dust, for fear of the LORD, and for the glory of his majesty.

α.2.11 Ukqunuhqunneunkqussuonk wosketomp pish hohpóm8, kah uppehtuánum8ongan8 missinninnúog pish nauwa[é]m[X], kah Jehovah nussu pish misheh[e]au ne kesukok.
E.2.11 The lofty looks of man shall be humbled, and the haughtiness of men shall be bowed down, and the LORD alone shall be exalted in that day.

α.2.12 Newutche ukkesukodtum Jehovah ayeuhteáanit, pish nuhkuhkauau nish$noh howane noh pahtuánumit, kah noh pohtuanumwinneunkqussit, kah nish$noh pasuk noh tahshinit, kah noh pish tiuhquon[a]heuh.
E.2.12 For the day of the LORD of hosts shall be upon every one that is proud and lofty, and upon every one that is lifted up; and he shall be brought low:

α.2.13 Kah ut wame Lebanone Cedaro[h], nish quanunkquokish kah tohshiná[unk]ish, kah ut wame Bashanne n8time[s]éash.
E.2.13 And upon all the cedars of Lebanon, that are high and lifted up, and upon all the oaks of Bashan,

α.2.14 Kah ut wame qu[n]u[h]qui wadchuuhkontu, kah ut wame wadchuuhkontu nish tahshinaúsikish.
E.2.14 And upon all the high mountains, and upon all the hills that are lifted up,

α.2.15 Kah ut nish$noh qunuhqui tower, kah ut nish$noh pummeneutausue pummeneútunk.
E.2.15 And upon every high tower, and upon every fenced wall,

α.2.16 Kah ut wame Tarshish-kuht8nogquehtu, kah ut wame tapeneunkquotte nunneukontu[n]kanéhtu.
E.2.16 And upon all the ships of Tarshish, and upon all pleasant pictures.

α.2.17 Kah uppehtuanumwunneunkqussuonk wosketomp pish nauwaemo, kah tiuhquonkqutteau: kah Jehovah nussu pish tahshinau ne kesukok.
E.2.17 And the loftiness of man shall be bowed down, and the haughtiness of men shall be made low: and the LORD alone shall be exalted in that day.

α.2.18 Kah nunneukontunkoh papuhquáne matcheheau.
E.2.18 And the idols he shall utterly abolish.

α.2.19 Kah nag pish petutteáog qussukquanónogqut, kah puhpohkohteaiyeuut, newutch qusháonk Jehovah, kah newutch sussohsum8ongane maumutta[n]suonk, noh omohkit unkquanumwe nunnukshadtunk ohke.
E.2.19 And they shall go into the holes of the rocks, and into the caves of the earth, for fear of the LORD, and for the glory of his majesty, when he ariseth to shake terribly the earth.

α.2.20 Ne kesukok wosketomp pish amaúhteau wussilvere nunneukontunkoh, kah uk-golde nunneukontunkoh, neh ayimáhetticheh nish$noh pasuk nehenwonche wowussumónat, en molsut, kah en mattabashquásit.
E.2.20 In that day a man shall cast his idols of silver, and his idols of gold, which they made each one for himself to worship, to the moles and to the bats;

α.2.21 Petukonat passipskodtut, kah woskeche passipskodtut, wutche qusháonk Lord, kah wutche wussohsumóemaumuttá[u]suonk omohkeit wutunkquánume nunnukshadtauunat ohke
E.2.21 To go into the clefts of the rocks, and into the tops of the ragged rocks, for fear of the LORD, and for the glory of his majesty, when he ariseth to shake terribly the earth.

α.2.22 Ahqueteau8k wutch wosketompaut, noh wunnasháonk ohtag wutchanit newutche, uttoh ut ogquanumon?
E.2.22 Cease ye from man, whose breath is in his nostrils: for wherein is he to be accounted of ?

α.3.1 NEwutche kusseh, Lord, Lord ayeuhteáanit amaunum wutch Jerusalem, kah wutch Judah, ompatissun8 kah anwohhou, mamusse petukqunnegane ompatissun8onk, kah mámusse nippee ompatissun8onk
E.3.1 For, behold, the Lord, the LORD of hosts, doth take away from Jerusalem and from Judah the stay and the staff, the whole stay of bread, and the whole stay of water.

α.3.2 Menuhkésuénin, kah ayeuteaénin, wussittumwaénin, kah quoshodtumwaènin, kah waantamwen kah kehchisog.
E.3.2 The mighty man, and the man of war, the judge, and the prophet, and the prudent, and the ancient,

α.3.3 Napanna adtahshinchagkussitcheg kah quohtiánumukqussuénin, kah ken8suaénin, nehtóanakausuénin, kah wowúnonuhk8waénin.
E.3.3 The captain of fifty, and the honourable man, and the counsellor, and the cunning artificer, and the eloquent orator.

α.3.4 Kah nussontimôhteam mukkiésog, kah peissesog pish wunnánauwunóuh.
E.3.4 And I will give children to be their princes, and babes shall rule over them.

α.3.5 Kah missinninnúog nish$noh pasuk, pish sonkqutchahwhuttuog, kah, nishnoh pasuk nashpe weetatteamungoh: mukkies pish ayeuuhkonittue pehchuánumwe ussehtauau kehchisoh, kah meshananumukqussit ayeuuhkonittue quohtianumukqussinitcheh.
E.3.5 And the people shall be oppressed, every one by another, and every one by his neighbour: the child shall behave himself proudly against the ancient, and the base against the honourable.

α.3.6 Wosketomp tohqunont wematoh, wutch wekit 8shoh, n8wadt, k8htogk8in, nanawi[n]yean, kah yeu matchehteoonk ohtaj agw[é] kenutcheganit.
E.3.6 When a man shall take hold of his brother of the house of his father, saying, Thou hast clothing, be thou our ruler, and let this ruin be under thy hand:

α.3.7 Ne kesukok noh pish chadchekeyeuau, n8wau, matta neetskehuwáenu8: newutche ut nekit matta petukquanegan8 asuh hogk8unun8: ahque nanawunnumw[á]heh ut missinninnútu.
E.3.7 In that day shall he swear, saying, I will not be an healer; for in my house is neither bread nor clothing: make me not a ruler of the people.

α.3.8 Newutche Jerusalem paguatauun, kah Judah penusheau, newutche weenaneu, kah wutusseongan8oash wutayeuuhkonukquanash Jehovah, m8m8squeteauunat wussohsum8e wuskesukquash.
E.3.8 For Jerusalem is ruined, and Judah is fallen: because their tongue and their doings are against the LORD, to provoke the eyes of his glory.

α.3.9 Ne[-]anompamukqussimuk ne 8wauwaónukquneau, kah nag ogque wahteauwáhuwaog ummatcheseongan8 Sodom, matta wutadtahtau8uneau: pish onkapunnaoh ukketeahogkôun8oh, newutche matonkquottauáog wuhhogkauh.
E.3.9 The shew of their countenance doth witness against them; and they declare their sin as Sodom, they hide it not. Woe unto their soul! for they have rewarded evil unto themselves.

α.3.10 Unnok sampwesecheg, nag pish 8niyeuwontamuneau: newutche nag pish meechwog wutanakausuongane meechummuonganóash.
E.3.10 Say ye to the righteous, that it shall be well with him: for they shall eat the fruit of their doings.

α.3.11 Pish onkapunáog matcheetowog, pish ummatchiyeuôntamun: newutche wunnutchegane onkquatunk pish aninnumau[ó]n.
E.3.11 Woe unto the wicked! it shall be ill with him: for the reward of his hands shall be given him.

α.3.12 Papaume nummissinninneumog, mukkiog neh wussonkqutchahwhóuh, kah mittamwussissog nanawunóuh, woi nummissinninneumog, neg sogkompagunukquéaneg kuppanneáhikquog, kah nag paguatoog kuppomushaongane mayash.
E.3.12 As for my people, children are their oppressors, and women rule over them. O my people, they which lead thee cause thee to err, and destroy the way of thy paths.

α.3.13 Jehovah neepau ukken8tamunat, kah neepau 8sumónat missinninnúh.
E.3.13 The LORD standeth up to plead, and standeth to judge the people.

α.3.14 Jehovah pish uppas8oh wussittum8onganit ummissinninneum8e ke[h]chisumoh, kah wussontimom8[ó]h: newutche kummahchepumw8 weenominneohteuk, sequttahhamauáonk matcheku, ut kekuóut.
E.3.14 The LORD will enter into judgment with the ancients of his people, and the princes thereof: for ye have eaten up the vineyard; the spoil of the poor is in your houses.

α.3.15 Toh kuttin nauwuttamumw8, kussukquéhtahwhônaóont nummissinninneumog, kah togguhhamunat wuskesuk8oash matchekuog, n8wau Lord Jehovah ayeuhteaanit.
E.3.15 What mean ye that ye beat my people to pieces, and grind the faces of the poor? saith the Lord GOD of hosts.

α.3.16 Nano Jehovah n8wau, newutche Sione wuttauneunk, pehtuánumóog, kah sekoushquáusháog, kah nanwun8dsquaeskesukquáog, pomushaog, kah wowunnomâusháog pomusháhettit, kah papónshittáusháog.
E.3.16 Moreover the LORD saith, Because the daughters of Zion are haughty, and walk with stretched forth necks and wanton eyes, walking and mincing as they go, and making a tinkling with their feet:

α.3.17 Newaj Lord pish tádteadt mukkeontupaonk ut kodto[n]tupont wuttaunoh Zion; kah Jehovah pish poshkinum ukkôsuonganú8ash.
E.3.17 Therefore the LORD will smite with a scab the crown of the head of the daughters of Zion, and the LORD will discover their secret parts.

α.3.18 Ne kesukok Lord pish amaunum wunn8whôsue wanegukish ut wusseetut, kah ukkaulsum8ash, kah woweeyôwe wunn8whosuongash onatuh nahnepâush[á]dtaut.
E.3.18 In that day the Lord will take away the bravery of their tinkling ornaments about their feet, and their cauls, and their round tires like the moon,

α.3.19 Chainsash, kah kehtippittenápeash, kah mufflersash,
E.3.19 The chains, and the bracelets, and the mufflers,

α.3.20 Bonnetsash, kah muhkontee wunnuhwhosuongash, kah assuhquabeash, kah tabletsash, kah soggussohhouunash,
E.3.20 The bonnets, and the ornaments of the legs, and the headbands, and the tablets, and the earrings,

α.3.21 Pehtehhennitchabheash, kah mutchâne hogqunnu[m]aongash.
E.3.21 The rings, and nose jewels,

α.3.22 Os8ogk8unaongash kah m8[na]kinash, kah wimplsash, kah 8wutchippussum8e auwohteaongash,
E.3.22 The changeable suits of apparel, and the mantles, and the wimples, and the crisping pins,

α.3.23 Pepenauutchitchunkquongash, kah wunne hashabponak, kah h8dsash, kah onkquequohh8unash.
E.3.23 The glasses, and the fine linen, and the hoods, and the vails.

α.3.24 Kah pish n$nih, nompe ne weetemungquok, pish annimmungquot: kah nompe puttukquobpus, nehneksh[á]eu, kah nompe wanoht[ó]e muhpuhkuk, mukukkontupáonk; kah nompe mohpanôganit ahhohtag man8t[i]ónak puttukquobpissinneat, kah chikkossuonk nompe wunnetuonganit.
E.3.24 And it shall come to pass, that instead of sweet smell there shall be stink; and instead of a girdle a rent; and instead of well set hair baldness; and instead of a stomacher a girding of sackcloth; and burning instead of beauty.

α.3.25 K8wosketompomog pish penusháog nashpe togkodteg, kah kummenuhkesuene[ú]mog ut ayeuwuttineat.
E.3.25 Thy men shall fall by the sword, and thy mighty in the war.

α.3.26 Kah 8squontamash pish neuantam8m8ash, kah noh nâsiit, pish appu ohkeit.
E.3.26 And her gates shall lament and mourn; and she being desolate shall sit upon the ground.

α.4.1 KAh ne kesukok nesausuk tahsuog mittamwussissog pish togqunáog pasuk8 wosketompuh, n8waog, nummeechimun nehenwonche nuppetukqunneganun, kah nuth[o]gkumun nehenwonche nuthogk8onganun: webe k8wesuonk uss8wésitteaongunan, nutamaunumunnanónut nukkekómitteaonganun.
E.4.1 And in that day seven women shall take hold of one man, saying, We will eat our own bread, and wear our own apparel: only let us be called by thy name, to take away our reproach.

α.4.2 Ne kesukok, 8tuhqunnum Jehovah pish pahkeneunkquot, kah sohsum8eyeu8, kah ummeechummúonk ohke pish wunnegen kah tapeneunkquot, wutche yeug Israelitsog pohquohhogig.
E.4.2 In that day shall the branch of the LORD be beautiful and glorious, and the fruit of the earth shall be excellent and comely for them that are escaped of Israel.

α.4.3 Kah pish n$nih noh ashqunit ut Zion, kah noh ashqunit ut Jerusalem, pish hennau wunneetupanatamwen, nishnoh pasuk noh wâsukuhwhôsit kenugke neg pâmontogig ut Jerusalem
E.4.3 And it shall come to pass, that he that is left in Zion, and he that remaineth in Jerusalem, shall be called holy, even every one that is written among the living in Jerusalem:

α.4.4 Lord amâpadtunk wunnishkeneunkquodt8m8 Zione wuttauneunk, kah pahketeunk Jerusaleme wusqueheonk, wutch ne nôeu, nashpe wussittum8e nashauanit, kah nashpe nashqunnae nashauanit.
E.4.4 When the Lord shall have washed away the filth of the daughters of Zion, and shall have purged the blood of Jerusalem from the midst thereof by the spirit of judgment, and by the spirit of burning.

α.4.5 Kah Jehovah pish kesteau ut nishnoh ayeuonganit ut wadchuut Zion, kah ut umm[ó]eonganéhtu, matokqs kah pukut kesukodáe, kah wôhsum8e n8n8náe n8teau nukkonáeu, newutche ut wame sohsum8onganit pish onk8wôhkussú8nú8.
E.4.5 And the LORD will create upon every dwelling place of mount Zion, and upon her assemblies, a cloud and smoke by day, and the shining of a flaming fire by night: for upon all the glory shall be a defence.

α.4.6 Kah na pish tabernakle, wutch wutonka[u]óhtóm8 wutch kesukodáe kussittaut, kah wutche spuhh8aé ayeuonk, kah wutch abohquos mehshittahshik kah sokanon.
E.4.6 And there shall be a tabernacle for a shadow in the day time from the heat, and for a place of refuge, and for a covert from storm and from rain.

α.5.1 YEuyeu nukket8homau wâmonog, an8homáonk, papaume n8womonog, papaume 8weenominneohteuk: n8womónog 8weenominneohtekoneu ahche mishummeechummúe wadchuut.
E.5.1 Now will I sing to my wellbeloved a song of my beloved touching his vineyard. My wellbeloved hath a vineyard in a very fruitful hill:

α.5.2 Kah uppummeneutauun, kah mukkinnum nish qussukquanash, kah wutohtekontamuneash pepenamwe weenomwussippagwash, kah ayim towér ut nashaue, kah wonk ne wuttittannehteauun wine-presse: kah ukkenompadtamun woh paudtau[ó]m8t weenominneash, kah tannegen touohkomukque weenominneash.
E.5.2 And he fenced it, and gathered out the stones thereof, and planted it with the choicest vine, and built a tower in the midst of it, and also made a winepress therein: and he looked that it should bring forth grapes, and it brought forth wild grapes.

α.5.3 Kah yeuyeu, woi kenaau wadohkeógish Jerusalem, kah Judae wosketompaog, wussittum8k k8wehquetumauonumw8, nashaue nen kah n8weenominneohteuk?
E.5.3 And now, O inhabitants of Jerusalem, and men of Judah, judge, I pray you, betwixt me and my vineyard.

α.5.4 Toh woh wonk uñehteauun n8weenominneohteuk, ne matta á[h]teau8? tohwutch, ashkauwompadtamon woh paudtauóm8 weenominneash, paudtauóm8uk tauohkomukque weenominneash.
E.5.4 What could have been done more to my vineyard, that I have not done in it? wherefore, when I looked that it should bring forth grapes, brought it forth wild grapes?

α.5.5 Kah yeuyeu éhha, kuttinnonuneau uttoh a[h]teáu n8weenominneohteuk: nutamaunum ne pumme[n]eutunk, kah pish mahchipun; kah nussukqunnum ne pummeneutunk kah pish tahtashkuhkomun
E.5.5 And now go to; I will tell you what I will do to my vineyard: I will take away the hedge thereof, and it shall be eaten up; and break down the wall thereof, and it shall be trodden down:

α.5.6 Kah pish n8wôhshwushittea[n]un, kah matta pish wunnehteauun, asuh wônuhkontam8un, qut na pish wutut neekineau kôussog kah asinnekôussog: kah wonk nutann8tam matokqs woh matta missippano sokanunk.
E.5.6 And I will lay it waste: it shall not be pruned, nor digged; but there shall come up briers and thorns: I will also command the clouds that they rain no rain upon it.

α.5.7 Newutche 8weenominneohteuk Jehovah ayeu[t]eaanit, ne wek Israel, kah Judae wosketompoh ne wuttapeneam8e ohketeaonk: kah askauwompattam wussittumóonk, qut kusseh s[o]nkqutcha[w]huttuonk, sampweseonk qut kusseh mauonk.
E.5.7 For the vineyard of the LORD of hosts is the house of Israel, and the men of Judah his pleasant plant: and he looked for judgment, but behold oppression; for righteousness, but behold a cry.

α.5.8 Onkapunáhettich neg ahasuhkauunukeg wetuómash, kah ahasuhkauunukeg ohteuhkonash, noh pajeh matta ayeuonga[n]in8g, onk woh nag nussiyeuog ut nôeu ohkeit.
E.5.8 Woe unto them that join house to house, that lay field to field, till there be no place, that they may be placed alone in the midst of the earth!

α.5.9 Ut nuhtauogut n8wau Jehovah ayeuhteanit, wunnamuhkut monatash wetuómash pish touushin, mogkiyeuash, kah wowunnegenash matta ayéin.
E.5.9 In mine ears said the LORD of hosts, Of a truth many houses shall be desolate, even great and fair, without inhabitant.

α.5.10 Nux, piukque akerseu8 weenominneohteuk, pish wutchegen pasuk bath, kah homere wuskannem pish wutchegen ephah.
E.5.10 Yea, ten acres of vineyard shall yield one bath, and the seed of an homer shall yield an ephah.

α.5.11 Onkapunáhettich neg nompoáe o[X]ohkécheg, onk woh nag asuhkomwog onkup, nag wunnagwutteanumuneau nô pajeh wunnonk88k, nô pajeh wine kussopposikqhettit.
E.5.11 Woe unto them that rise up early in the morning, that they may follow strong drink; that continue until night, till wine inflame them!

α.5.12 Kah harp, kah viol, kah tabret, kah puhpegq, kah wine wutohtauuneau ut mishadtupp8onganit, qut nag matta wutt8antamóog wutanakausuonk Lord, kah matta natwontamóog wunnetchegane anakausuonk
E.5.12 And the harp, and the viol, the tabret, and pipe, and wine, are in their feasts: but they regard not the work of the LORD, neither consider the operation of his hands.

α.5.13 Newaj missináhettit nummissinninneumog, newutche matta 8wahteauonganéog: kah ukquttiánumweneum8uh paskonontamwoh, kah ummuttaán8m8uh nunnassuoh nashpe kûhkuht8[n]8onk.
E.5.13 Therefore my people are gone into captivity, because they have no knowledge: and their honourable men are famished, and their multitude dried up with thirst.

α.5.14 Newaj chepiohkomuk mishe kishkeheont wuhhogkuh, kah mishe wôshwunnum wutt8n, wanne quttuhham8e: kah wussohsum8ongan8 kah umm[u]ttaán8ongan8, kah 8nauwámeongan8, kah noh mashkouá[n]atog, pish na wuttin w8ms[i]u.
E.5.14 Therefore hell hath enlarged herself, and opened her mouth without measure: and their glory, and their multitude, and their pomp, and he that rejoiceth, shall descend into it.

α.5.15 Kah peississitcheg pish tiohquonkhéaog, kah masukenuk pish hohpáheau, k[á]h wuskesuk8oash pehtuánumóog pish hohpóm8ash.
E.5.15 And the mean man shall be brought down, and the mighty man shall be humbled, and the eyes of the lofty shall be humbled:

α.5.16 Qut Jehovah ayeuhteaanit pish misheheau ut wussittum8onganit, kah wunneetupanatamwe God pish wunneetupanatamwe ogquanumau ut sampweusseonganit.
E.5.16 But the LORD of hosts shall be exalted in judgment, and God that is holy shall be sanctified in righteousness.

α.5.17 Neit lambsog pish unnadtupp8og ne áhhunnadtupwéhettit, kah wuttouwashinneume wutayeuongan[ó]ash pen8wohteáog pish wuttit meetsinneau.
E.5.17 Then shall the lambs feed after their manner, and the waste places of the fat ones shall strangers eat.

α.5.18 Onkapunáhettich neg wádto[ntn]uk[e]g panneseonk nashpe tahn8che pemeneohtanash, kah matcheseonk onatuh nashp[é] carte pemeneohtanit.
E.5.18 Woe unto them that draw iniquity with cords of vanity, and sin as it were with a cart rope:

α.5.19 Neg án8wacheg, kenuppe usseitch, kenupanakausitch, onk woh naumunán: kah ukeen8s8wáonk 8neetupanatam8moh Israel, pas8tsh[a]úm8utch, kah peyaum8utch, onk woh n8wahteauuna[n].
E.5.19 That say, Let him make speed, and hasten his work, that we may see it: and let the counsel of the Holy One of Israel draw nigh and come, that we may know it!

α.5.20 Onkapunâhettich nag an8wacheg papaume machuk, ne wunnegen, kah wanegik ne matchet, neg nompatunkig pohkenái wutch wequai, kah wequai wutch pohkenái, neg nompatunkig weesogkon wutch weekon, kah weekon wutch weesogkon.
E.5.20 Woe unto them that call evil good, and good evil; that put darkness for light, and light for darkness; that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter!

α.5.21 Onkapunáhettich nag waantogig ut nehenwonche wuskesuk8óut, kah napwóncheg ut nehenwonche anaquabhettit.
E.5.21 Woe unto them that are wise in their own eyes, and prudent in their own sight!

α.5.22 Onkapun[á]hettich neg manuhke wuttattogig wine, kah menuhk[é]suenuog kenukkeaumunat onkup.
E.5.22 Woe unto them that are mighty to drink wine, and men of strength to mingle strong drink:

α.5.23 Neg sampweogquanumoncheg matcheet8oh wutche onkquatunk, kah amaunumauoncheg wussampweusseongan8 sampwesécheg.
E.5.23 Which justify the wicked for reward, and take away the righteousness of the righteous from him!

α.5.24 Newaj onatuh n8teau mahchukkissuk sequekepunneg, kah n8n8uneau mahchukki[ss]um wussadteámuneash, ne ne 8wadchabuk8 pish anit, kah wunnet8nunk pish o[g]que us[h]pém8 puppissiyeuut, newutche pogketamwog wuttinnaumatuonk Jehovah ayeuhteáanit, kah jishantamwog wuttinn8wáonk 8neetupanatam8moh Israel.
E.5.24 Therefore as the fire devoureth the stubble, and the flame consumeth the chaff, so their root shall be as rottenness, and their blossom shall go up as dust: because they have cast away the law of the LORD of hosts, and despised the word of the Holy One of Israel.

α.5.25 Newaj ummusquantam8onk Jehovah ayeuuhkonittue nashqunneau en ummissininneumut, kah mahche ayeuuhkonittue summagunúmauau wunnutcheg, na[h] wuttogkomuh: kah wadchuash nunnukshaash, kah nupp8e wuhhogkáuh nehnehkohkou[X]uh ut nôeu toumaogqu[e]htu: wutch wame yeu, ummusquanittam8onk matta ámaémun8, qut wunnutcheg ashpumme summagunum. 
E.5.25 Therefore is the anger of the LORD kindled against his people, and he hath stretched forth his hand against them, and hath smitten them: and the hills did tremble, and their carcases were torn in the midst of the streets. For all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still.

α.5.26 Kah noh pish tahshinum ensigne wutch nôadtit wutohtimóneat, kah pish ukkehke[m]womuh, wutch wehqshik ohke, kah kusseh, nag pish kenuppe kenupsháe peyaog.
E.5.26 And he will lift up an ensign to the nations from far, and will hiss unto them from the end of the earth: and, behold, they shall come with speed swiftly:

α.5.27 Matta howan pish sauunnum8, asuh togkussittassun8 ut nah kenugke: wanne pish howan ukkogkou[ó]quoh, asuh koueu, kah matta pish mussuk[q]unádtikame puttukquobpus ompenum8un, kah mattógquonápeash matta pish poshkishán8ash.
E.5.27 None shall be weary nor stumble among them; none shall slumber nor sleep; neither shall the girdle of their loins be loosed, nor the latchet of their shoes be broken:

α.5.28 Ukkouhquodt8oash kenag, kah wame wutahtompeyeumoh wutonkqunosuoh, wuthorsese 8kossum8oh pish ogquanumukqussuoh qussukquanit, kah 8wheelum8 ogqueneunkqusseum8 pemsquahut.
E.5.28 Whose arrows are sharp, and all their bows bent, their horses' hoofs shall be counted like flint, and their wheels like a whirlwind:

α.5.29 OOwadtauatonkqussuongan8 pish tatuppeyeu8 qunnonouut, nag pish ogquont8aog wuske qunnonouut: nux, nag pish mishont8waog, & togqunumwog sequttahhamukeh, kah pish 8wohque moncha[u]ouh, kah wanne howan pish uppohquohwhunuh.
E.5.29 Their roaring shall be like a lion, they shall roar like young lions: yea, they shall roar, and lay hold of the prey, and shall carry it away safe, and none shall deliver it.

α.5.30 Kah ne kesukok nah pish ummishont8waounouh, onatuh mashont8wom8uk keitoh: kah howan monunneog ohke, kusseh pohkenai kah unkquanumoonk, kah wequáei pohkenahteauun ut ukkesukquehteaum8ouh.
E.5.30 And in that day they shall roar against them like the roaring of the sea: and if one look unto the land, behold darkness and sorrow, and the light is darkened in the heavens thereof.

α.6.1 NE kodtum8k ketass8t Uzziah napuk, wonk nunnauomp Lord quenappu appuonganit, qunuhque kah tahshinau: kah ne asukunkqut numwohteau templeut.
E.6.1 In the year that king Uzziah died I saw also the LORD sitting upon a throne, high and lifted up, and his train filled the temple.

α.6.2 Wa[a]be neepoog seraphimsog, nish$noh pasuk nequtta tahshe nuppohwhunau, nashpe nees8oh onkquequohhou, nashpe nees8oh onkhum wusseetash, kah nashpe nees8oh pt8wu.
E.6.2 Above it stood the seraphims: each one had six wings; with twain he covered his face, and with twain he covered his feet, and with twain he did fly.

α.6.3 Kah pasuk mishont8wohtauau onkatogeh, kah n8wau wunneetupantam, wunneetupantam, wunneetupantam Jehovah ayeuhteaanit, mamusse ohke numwohteau wussohsumoonk.
E.6.3 And one cried unto another, and said, Holy, holy, holy, is the LORD of hosts: the whole earth is full of his glory.

α.6.4 Kah squontame nepattunkquongash o[n]tahtaash nahspe 8wadtauatonkqussuonk noh mashont8adt, & wetuomut numwohta pukut
E.6.4 And the posts of the door moved at the voice of him that cried, and the house was filled with smoke.

α.6.5 Neit nussip nutonkapunam, newutche nuttammetahwhit, newutche nen nishkeneungwe mussissitt8ne wosketomp kah nuttai nashaue nishkeneungque mussissitt8ne missinninnuog: newutche nuskesukquash naau ketass8t, Jehovah ayeuteaanit.
E.6.5 Then said I, Woe is me! for I am undone; because I am a man of unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips: for mine eyes have seen the King, the LORD of hosts.

α.6.6 Neit pasuk Seraphim unnunau nuhhogkat, n8tae mohkus ohteau wunnutcheganit ne nemunuk nashpe tongs wutch Altarut.
E.6.6 Then flew one of the seraphims unto me, having a live coal in his hand, which he had taken with the tongs from off the altar:

α.6.7 Kah mussikquomwahtou nutt8n, kah n8wau, kusseh, yeu mussuhkom8m8 kussisset8nash, kah kummatcheseonk amaunumun; kah kuppanneseonk pahketeauun.
E.6.7 And he laid it upon my mouth, and said, Lo, this hath touched thy lips; and thine iniquity is taken away, and thy sin purged.

α.6.8 Wonk nunn8tam 8wadtauatonkqussuonk Lord, n8wau, howan woh negont8waeh, kah howan woh moncheaunshikqueog? neit nussip, nen yeu, ann8neh.
E.6.8 Also I heard the voice of the Lord, saying, Whom shall I send, and who will go for us? Then said I, Here am I; send me.

α.6.9 Kah n8wau, monchish, us yeug missinninnuog, wunnamuhkut n8tam8k, qut wohtam8hteogk: kah wunnamuhkut naum8k, qut wahteau8hteogk.
E.6.9 And he said, Go, and tell this people, Hear ye indeed, but understand not; and see ye indeed, but perceive not.

α.6.10 Wunogquehteaha yeug missinninnuog, kah tuhkequtteauush  wuhtauog8oash, kah yanunush wuskesuk8oash: ishkont nag wutch naumwog wuskesuk8out, kah n8tamwog wutch wuhtauog8oash, kah wohtamwog wutch wuttahhou, kah woh quinnuppeog kah neetskeheaog.
E.6.10 Make the heart of this people fat, and make their ears heavy, and shut their eyes; lest they see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their heart, and convert, and be healed.

α.6.11 Neit nussip, Lord, toh utt8che? kah namp8ham, nô pajeh keitotanash mohtupp[a]em8ug, ne toh ut wanne wutohkenat, kah weetuomash wanne wosketompaun8it, kah ohke tóuushinée touushinit.
E.6.11 Then said I, Lord, how long? And he answered, Until the cities be wasted without inhabitant, and the houses without man, and the land be utterly desolate,

α.6.12 Kah Jehovah amaunont missinninnuh en nôadtit, kah na mishe nukkodtum8onganu8uk ut nashaue ohkeit.
E.6.12 And the LORD have removed men far away, and there be a great forsaking in the midst of the land.

α.6.13 Qut onch pish piogque chippag ohteau, kah pish quinnuppem8, kah pish ogque meechin Tyluhtugqut, kah onatuh n8times ashkunkquamuuk mahchippogkok: netatuppe wunneetupanatamwe wuskannem ne pish wutashkunkquamuonk.
E.6.13 But yet in it shall be a tenth, and it shall return, and shall be eaten: as a teil tree, and as an oak, whose substance is in them, when they cast their leaves: so the holy seed shall be the substance thereof.

α.7.1 KAh nniyeup pamontog Ahaz wunnaumonuh Jotham, wunnaumonuh Uzziah Judae ketass8t, Rezin Syriae ketass8t, kah Pekah wunnaumonuh Remaliah Israelle ketass8t, kuhkuhqueog nogque en Jerusalem, wutayeuuhkontamunaoont, qut wunn8numuneau sohkomunat.
E.7.1 And it came to pass in the days of Ahaz the son of Jotham, the son of Uzziah, king of Judah, that Rezin the king of Syria, and Pekah the son of Remaliah, king of Israel, went up toward Jerusalem to war against it, but could not prevail against it.

α.7.2 Kah unnon wek David, n8wo[u], Siria wet8womau Ephraimoh, kah wuttah ontohteau, kah wuttahhou ummissinninneumoh, onatuh touohkomukque mehtugquash mamontanuhtog waban.
E.7.2 And it was told the house of David, saying, Syria is confederate with Ephraim. And his heart was moved, and the heart of his people, as the trees of the wood are moved with the wind.

α.7.3 Neit Jehovah unnau Isaiáhoh, sohhash yeuyeu nogkushkauonat Ahaz, ken, kah Shearjashub, kenaumon, wutchehtanniyeu kuhkuhqueeu nippessepagwe Conduit$ut, kehchemayog fullerse wutohteakonit.
E.7.3 Then said the LORD unto Isaiah, Go forth now to meet Ahaz, thou, and Shearjashub thy son, at the end of the conduit of the upper pool in the highway of the fuller's field;

α.7.4 Kah us; nunnikqusish, kah chequnapsh: wabes[e]hkon asuh wabesuitteahuhkon newutche neesukqunnom8ugish yeush pukuttae pohquttaash, newutche ummishe musquantam8onk Rezin weeche Siria, kah wunnaumonuh Remaliah.
E.7.4 And say unto him, Take heed, and be quiet; fear not, neither be fainthearted for the two tails of these smoking firebrands, for the fierce anger of Rezin with Syria, and of the son of Remaliah.

α.7.5 Newutche Syria, Ephraim Kah wunnaumonuh Remaliah, matche ken8nittuog ayeuuhkonittue ken, n8waog,
E.7.5 Because Syria, Ephraim, and the son of Remaliah, have taken evil counsel against thee, saying,

α.7.6 Ayeuuhkonittue kuhkuhquehtauontuh Judah, kah n8chumwehteadtuh, kah naut ayimontuh to[u]wutchahtham8onk, kah ketass8t ponontuh nashaue, wunnaumonuh Tabeal.
E.7.6 Let us go up against Judah, and vex it, and let us make a breach therein for us, and set a king in the midst of it, even the son of Tabeal:

α.7.7 Kah yeu wussin Lord Jehovah, matta pish menuhkohtano, kah matta pish nnano,
E.7.7 Thus saith the Lord GOD, It shall not stand, neither shall it come to pass.

α.7.8 Newutche uppuhkuk Syria, ne Damascus, kah uppuhkuk Damascus noh Rezin, kah wuttúhshit nequtta tahshinchage kodtum8it kah napanna, Ephraim pish sohquttahwhau, matta ummissinninnu8uneat.
E.7.8 For the head of Syria is Damascus, and the head of Damascus is Rezin; and within threescore and five years shall Ephraim be broken, that it be not a people.

α.7.9 Kah uppuhkuk Ephraim, ne Samaria, kah uppuhkuk Samaria, noh wunnaumonuh Remaliah: matta wunnamptam8óg wunnamuhkut matta pish kummenuhkappe[u]mw8.
E.7.9 And the head of Ephraim is Samaria, and the head of Samaria is Remaliah's son. If ye will not believe, surely ye shall not be established.

α.7.10 Nano wonk Jehovah ken8nau Ahazoh n8wau,
E.7.10 Moreover the LORD spake again unto Ahaz, saying,

α.7.11 Wehquetumau Jehovah kuhkinneasuonk wutche ken; wehquetush asuh ut m8n[ó]iyeuut, asuh qunuhqueé ut wóhqut.
E.7.11 Ask thee a sign of the LORD thy God; ask it either in the depth, or in the height above.

α.7.12 Qut Ahaz n8wau, matta n8wehquetum8, kah matta nukqutchheau Jehovah.
E.7.12 But Ahaz said, I will not ask, neither will I tempt the LORD.

α.7.13 Kah n8wau, n8tam8k yeuyeu, woi wek David; sun peásin ken kussauunonat wosketompaog, qut wonk kussauunnumw8 num-Manitt8m?
E.7.13 And he said, Hear ye now, O house of David; Is it a small thing for you to weary men, but will ye weary my God also?

α.7.14 Newaj Lord nehenwonche nagum aninnumunkqueóg kuhkinneasuonk: Kusseh, penomp pish wompequoou, kah neechau wunnaumoniinneuh, & pish wuttissowenuh Immanuel.
E.7.14 Therefore the Lord himself shall give you a sign; Behold, a virgin shall conceive, and bear a son, and shall call his name Immanuel.

α.7.15 Butter kah hony pish peech, onk woh wahteou sekeneamunat machuk, kah pepenamunat wanegik.
E.7.15 Butter and honey shall he eat, that he may know to refuse the evil, and choose the good.

α.7.16 Newutche asquam mukkies wahteou sekeneamunat machuk, kah pepenamunat wanegik, ohke ne jishantaman, pish ohquanumau naneeswe ukketass8tamómuh.
E.7.16 For before the child shall know to refuse the evil, and choose the good, the land that thou abhorrest shall be forsaken of both her kings.

α.7.17 Jehovah pish kuppaudtunk, kah ut kummissinninneumut, kah ut k8sh weekit, kesukodtash nish asq paómun8gish, wutch na kesukok Ephraim chabeit wutch Judah; noh Assyriae ketass8t.
E.7.17 The LORD shall bring upon thee, and upon thy people, and upon thy father's house, days that have not come, from the day that Ephraim departed from Judah; even the king of Assyria.

α.7.18 Kah pish nnih, ne kesukok Jehovah pish quekqsumau 8cháussoh, noh aongkoue Egypte sepuésut, kah Bee noh Assyriae ohkeit.
E.7.18 And it shall come to pass in that day, that the LORD shall hiss for the fly that is in the uttermost part of the rivers of Egypt, and for the bee that is in the land of Assyria.

α.7.19 Kah nag pish peyaog, kah wame pish appuog ut touushinne 8nôuhkóiyeuut, kah en hassinn[ê]kómukqut, kah ut wame assinn[e]kôussehtu, kah ut wame chipishinneuhtugquehtu.
E.7.19 And they shall come, and shall rest all of them in the desolate valleys, and in the holes of the rocks, and upon all thorns, and upon all bushes.

α.7.20 Ne$nan kesukok, Lord pish chequodtweyaheau nashpe chequodtweyáheg, n[e]h onkquattauoncheh nashpe neg ogkomut apitcheg, nashpe Assyriae ketass8t, muppuhkuk kah wusseete wishagkinash: kah pish wonk mohtupanum weeshitt8unash.
E.7.20 In the same day shall the Lord shave with a razor that is hired, namely, by them beyond the river, by the king of Assyria, the head, and the hair of the feet: and it shall also consume the beard.

α.7.21 Kah pish nnih ne kesukok, wosketomp pish wadch[a]nau wuske cowishinneoh, kah nes8oh sheepsoh.
E.7.21 And it shall come to pass in that day, that a man shall nourish a young cow, and two sheep;

α.7.22 Kah pish nnih, newutche madtaaneuk sogkodtunk ne adtahshipagsehettit, pish meech butter; newutche butter kah hony, nishnoh pasuk pish ummeechin noh sequnit ut ohkeit.
E.7.22 And it shall come to pass, for the abundance of milk that they shall give he shall eat butter: for butter and honey shall every one eat that is left in the land.

α.7.23 Kah pish nnih ne kesukok, nishnoh ayeuonk, uttoh adt nequt muttannonganogok weenomwussippagwash anôadtik silvere nequt muttannonganogkodtash, ne pish kôussu8 kah asinnekôussu8.
E.7.23 And it shall come to pass in that day, that every place shall be, where there were a thousand vines at a thousand silverlings, it shall even be for briers and thorns.

α.7.24 Nashpe kôuhquodtash kah ahtompeh wosketompaog na pish wuttit peyoneau, newutche wame ohke pish kôussu8, kah asinnekôussu8.
E.7.24 With arrows and with bows shall men come thither; because all the land shall become briers and thorns.

α.7.25 Kah wame wadchuash nish pish kodhamukish nashpe mattock, na matta pish peyomun8 qushaonk k[ó]ussog kah asinnekóussog: qut ne pish sohwhun[ó]naóont oxinog, kah wuttattashkuhkomunaóont papeississitcheg neetasuog.
E.7.25 And on all hills that shall be digged with the mattock, there shall not come thither the fear of briers and thorns: but it shall be for the sending forth of oxen, and for the treading of lesser cattle.

α.8.1 NAno, Jehovah nuttinuk, neemunush mishe tuttuppagenausu, kah ne wussukwhush nashpe wosketompae pen, papaume Maher-shal$al$hash-baz.
E.8.1 Moreover the LORD said unto me, Take thee a great roll, and write in it with a man's pen concerning Mahershalalhashbaz.

α.8.2 Kah nunneemunnumom pabuhtanumwe wauwaénuog mehquontamunat, Uriah sephausuen kah Zechariah wunnaumonuh Jeberechiah.
E.8.2 And I took unto me faithful witnesses to record, Uriah the priest, and Zechariah the son of Jeberechiah.

α.8.3 Kah nuppas8sukauomp mittamwossisse quoshodtumwáen, kah wompequoou, kah neechau wunnaumonuh: neit Jehovah nuttinuk, uss8wes Maher-shal-al-hash-baz.
E.8.3 And I went unto the prophetess; and she conceived, and bare a son. Then said the LORD to me, Call his name Mahershalalhashbaz.

α.8.4 Newutche mukkies asquam wahteau8gkup n8wónat, n8sh kah nokas, Damascusse weenauwetuongash, kah Samariae sequttahamóonk, pish amaunau ut anaquabit Assyriae ketass8t.
E.8.4 For before the child shall have knowledge to cry, My father, and my mother, the riches of Damascus and the spoil of Samaria shall be taken away before the king of Assyria.

α.8.5 Jehovah wonk nukken8nuk n8wau,
E.8.5 The LORD spake also unto me again, saying,

α.8.6 Newutche yeug missinninnúog sekeneamwog Shiloahe nippeash, nish mánunnutch[uo]gish, kah weekontamwog ut Rezin, kah wunnaumonat Remaliah:
E.8.6 Forasmuch as this people refuseth the waters of Shiloah that go softly, and rejoice in Rezin and Remaliah's son;

α.8.7 
E.8.7 Now therefore, behold, the Lord bringeth up upon them the waters of the river, strong and many, even the king of Assyria, and all his glory: and he shall come up over all his channels, and go over all his banks:

α.8.8 Kah noh pish paumushau Judah, noh pish anúpadto, kah pish anúchuan, pish sokkoshkittuk8, kah nean sep[á]ginont wunnuppuhwhunash, pish numwohteau ne koshkag kutohke, woi Immanuel.
E.8.8 And he shall pass through Judah; he shall overflow and go over, he shall reach even to the neck; and the stretching out of his wings shall fill the breadth of thy land, O Immanuel.

α.8.9 Miyán8k kuhhogkaóog, woi kenaau missinninnúog, kah pish kussukqutteawhuteamw8, kah n8tam8k, wame kenaau nôohtáe wutohtimóneash, puttukquobpissegk, kah pish kussukqutteawhutteamw8, puttukquobpissegk, kah pish kussukqutteawhutteamw8.
E.8.9 Associate yourselves, O ye people, and ye shall be broken in pieces; and give ear, all ye of far countries: gird yourselves, and ye shall be broken in pieces; gird yourselves, and ye shall be broken in pieces.

α.8.10 Moáe ken8nittegk, kah pish matteagwunninno: n8wagk kutt8wonk, kah matta menuhkotano: newutche God k8weetomukqun.
E.8.10 Take counsel together, and it shall come to nought; speak the word, and it shall not stand: for God is with us.

α.8.11 Newutche Lord yeu nuttin ken8nukqun, nashpe menuhki menutcheg, kah nukkuhk8tomunk matta woh nuppomushóunat ummayeuóut yeug missinninnúog, n8wau,
E.8.11 For the LORD spake thus to me with a strong hand, and instructed me that I should not walk in the way of this people, saying,

α.8.12 N8wáhteogk, weetuódtuonk en wame nag, n[e]h pish ánoncheh yeuh missinninnuh, weetu[u]ódtuonk: kah ahque quihtam8k nag qushaongan8, asuh wabesehteogk.
E.8.12 Say ye not, A confederacy, to all them to whom this people shall say, A confederacy; neither fear ye their fear, nor be afraid.

α.8.13 Wunneetupanatamwe ogquanumok Jehovah ayeuteaanit nagum, kah noh qush8k, k[a]h noh wabesu[óm]8k.
E.8.13 Sanctify the LORD of hosts himself; and let him be your fear, and let him be your dread.

α.8.14 Kah noh pish Sanctuarih88, togkussittass[im]8e qussuk, kah chamsquassunóe hassun, en naneeswe Israelle wekuóo[n]t: wutch appeh, kah sinnukkeg wutch neg wadóhkitcheg Jerusalem.
E.8.14 And he shall be for a sanctuary; but for a stone of stumbling and for a rock of offence to both the houses of Israel, for a gin and for a snare to the inhabitants of Jerusalem.

α.8.15 Kah monaog na ut kenugke pish togkussittassunwog, kah kepshaog, kah pish sohqussunwog, kah pish puttahhamwog, kah pish togqunóog.
E.8.15 And many among them shall stumble, and fall, and be broken, and be snared, and be taken.

α.8.16 Weesquabenuash wauwaonk, sealoh naumatuonk ut kenugke nunnetuhtauw[á]en[e]umut.
E.8.16 Bind up the testimony, seal the law among my disciples.

α.8.17 Kah nuppah Lord, noh padtogguhhuk wuskesuk wutch Jakob, kah nutaskauwompam[,]
E.8.17 And I will wait upon the LORD, that hideth his face from the house of Jacob, and I will look for him.

α.8.18 Kusseh, nen kah mukkiog neh Jehovah anummiitcheh, nukkehkinneásuonganeumun, kah nummonchanatam8onganeumun ut Israelut: wutch Jehovah ayeuteaanit, noh ayit wadchuut Zion.
E.8.18 Behold, I and the children whom the LORD hath given me are for signs and for wonders in Israel from the LORD of hosts, which dwelleth in mount Zion.

α.8.19 Kah nag unnukqueog, natinneah8k neg wámatchinahshaóngan[ú]mitcheg, kah mamontamáog, neg peant8wácheg, kah tadtumwácheg: sunnummatta woh missinninnuog natinnewhauóog um-Manitt8m8oh? wutch pomontamunutcheh en neh napunutcheh?
E.8.19 And when they shall say unto you, Seek unto them that have familiar spirits, and unto wizards that peep, and that mutter: should not a people seek unto their God? for the living to the dead?

α.8.20 En naumatuonganit, kah en wauwaonganit: matta n8wahetteg neaunak yeu kutt8wonk, yeu, newutche matta wequaiyeumu.
E.8.20 To the law and to the testimony: if they speak not according to this word, it is because there is no light in them.

α.8.21 Kah nag pish auwakonche kah kodtupp8e uppannupushoneau: kah pish nnih, nag kodtupwehettit, nag pish m8m8skumáog wuhhogkauh, kah matanumaog ukketass8tam8m8oh, kah um$Manitt8m8oh kah pish ushpuhquaéog.
E.8.21 And they shall pass through it, hardly bestead and hungry: and it shall come to pass, that when they shall be hungry, they shall fret themselves, and curse their king and their God, and look upward.

α.8.22 Kah nag pish monunneamwog ohke, kah kusseh wuttamehpunáonk, kah pohkenái, pogkenum[ó]e wuttamehpunáonk, kah nag pish n8hkauôog en pohkenahtu.
E.8.22 And they shall look unto the earth; and behold trouble and darkness, dimness of anguish; and they shall be driven to darkness.

α.9.1 QUt onch, pohkennumóonk matta pish neanéinn8, wunn8wadtaméhpunadt, negonne ogguhse onkapunadtunk Zebulone ohke, kah Naphtalie ohke, kah ompetak, wutúhque onkquanu[m]wéheuh, ut kehtahhanne mayit, ogkomut Jordan, ut wutohtimóinne Galile.
E.9.1 Nevertheless the dimness shall not be such as was in her vexation, when at the first he lightly afflicted the land of Zebulun and the land of Naphtali, and afterward did more grievously afflict her by the way of the sea, beyond Jordan, in Galilee of the nations.

α.9.2 Missinninnúog neg pomushácheg pohkenahtu naumwog mishe wequai: neg wadohkitcheg nupp8ongane onkauohtáe ohkeit, neh 8wôhsumauoh.
E.9.2 The people that walked in darkness have seen a great light: they that dwell in the land of the shadow of death, upon them hath the light shined.

α.9.3 Kummuttaanteóh wutohtimóneas, kah matta nano mishehteaou wekontamóonk: weekontamwog ut anaquabean, neaunak kepenumwe weekontamóonk, kah neáhhenn8weekontamwéhettit wosketompaog, chachabenumohetticheh sequttahhamóonk.
E.9.3 Thou hast multiplied the nation, and not increased the joy: they joy before thee according to the joy in harvest, and as men rejoice when they divide the spoil.

α.9.4 Newutche kussohqutahham 8wéassue yoakumoh, kah wuttippomóne anwohhou: wussonkqutchóh8wae pogkommunk, neane ut Midiane kesukodtut.
E.9.4 For thou hast broken the yoke of his burden, and the staff of his shoulder, the rod of his oppressor, as in the day of Midian.

α.9.5 Newutche nishnoh wutayeuwuttuonk ayeuhteaen, ne wodtauatonkquodt, kah hogk8unash unuhkónash ut wusqueheonganit, qut yeu pish nashpe chikkósuonk, kah n8tae wuttuhqunash.
E.9.5 For every battle of the warrior is with confused noise, and garments rolled in blood; but this shall be with burning and fuel of fire.

α.9.6 Newutche ut kuhhogkanónut mukkies neetu, ut en kuhhogkanónut Wunnaumoniin magun, kah nanaánittuonk pish ohteau ut wuttukeit: kah pish ussowesu Monchanu nukqussuaen Ken8s8waénin, Manuhkésit God, Machemapit Wut8shimau, Wunohteáe Sontim.
E.9.6 For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given: and the government shall be upon his shoulder: and his name shall be called Wonderful, Counsellor, The mighty God, The everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace.

α.9.7 Kah matta pish wohkukquoshininno nano missáe wunnanawunnum[o]onk, kah wunohteáonk, ut wutâppuonganit David, kah ut wutass8tam8onganit, wunohtauunat, kah menehkheonat, nashpe wussittumóonk kah s[á]mpweseonk, yeu$wutch onk yean micheme: wus$zealum Lord ayeuhtea[a]nit yeu pish wutussen. 
E.9.7 Of the increase of his government and peace there shall be no end, upon the throne of David, and upon his kingdom, to order it, and to establish it with judgment and with justice from henceforth even for ever. The zeal of the LORD of hosts will perform this.

α.9.8 Lord negonshhuau kutt8onk en Jakobut, kah upp[a]gs8kqun Israel.
E.9.8 The Lord sent a word into Jacob, and it hath lighted upon Israel.

α.9.9 Kah wame missinninnúog pish wahteauog, Ephraim kah wadohkitcheg Samaria, neg pi[t]uánumóe kah menehketeaháe an8wacheg.
E.9.9 And all the people shall know, even Ephraim and the inhabitant of Samaria, that say in the pride and stoutness of heart,

α.9.10 Briksash penushaash, qut pish n8weekitteahtómun wunnáguttahham8e qussukquanash: Sycomorúhtugquash tummehthamunash, qut pish nutôs8wunnununnánonash en cedaruhtugqut.
E.9.10 The bricks are fallen down, but we will build with hewn stones: the sycomores are cut down, but we will change them into cedars.

α.9.11 Newaj Jehovah pish ayeuuhkonittue wunoht[a]uou ummatwomoh Rezinoh, kah weech8hamau ummatwomoh.
E.9.11 Therefore the LORD shall set up the adversaries of Rezin against him, and join his enemies together;

α.9.12 Syriansog negonáeu, kah Philistiansog wuttát, kah nag mahchipp8og Israeloh nashpe woshwohtáe mutt8n: newutche yeu waame, ummusquanittam8onk matta am[a]émun8, qut wunnutcheg ashpumme su[n]maguna[u]sh.
E.9.12 The Syrians before, and the Philistines behind; and they shall devour Israel with open mouth. For all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still.

α.9.13 Ne[u]utche missinninnuog matta quinnuppeog en néh togkomukquehetticheh, kah matta natinneahwho8og Jehovah ayeuhteaanit.
E.9.13 For the people turneth not unto him that smiteth them, neither do they seek the LORD of hosts.

α.9.14 Newaj Jehovah tummehthog wutch Israelut muhpuhkuk, kah wussukqun, wuhtuk puppishashquash ut pasuk kesukodtut.
E.9.14 Therefore the LORD will cut off from Israel head and tail, branch and rush, in one day.

α.9.15 Kohchisu8it, kah quohtianumukqussit, noh muppuhkuk88; kah quoshodtumwaen noh kohk8tomwehteadt pann8waongash, noh wussukqu[n]eiyeu.
E.9.15 The ancient and honourable, he is the head; and the prophet that teacheth lies, he is the tail.

α.9.16 Newutche sampshano[n]cheg yeuh missinninnuh uppanneseaheouh, kah neg neh sagkompagunukqhetticheh paguanuoh.
E.9.16 For the leaders of this people cause them to err; and they that are led of them are destroyed.

α.9.17 Newaj matta Lord woh weekontamuonunk wuskeneuh, asuh matta pish monanumôou touwyesoh, kah sekousquoh, newutche nish$noh p[a]suk eiantogkei, kah matcheseaenin, kah nish$noh mutt8n as8tueyeum8: newutche yeu wame, matta ummusquanittam8onk qushkemun8, qut ash s[um]ogohteau wunnutcheg.
E.9.17 Therefore the LORD shall have no joy in their young men, neither shall have mercy on their fatherless and widows: for every one is an hypocrite and an evildoer, and every mouth speaketh folly. For all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still.

α.9.18 Newutche matcheseonk ogque chikohteau n8taut: pish mahchukiswau kôussoh kah assinnekôussoh, kah pish nashqunneau touo[h]komukque kuppahtu, kah neg pish ogque waabpem8uk pukuttau.
E.9.18 For wickedness burneth as the fire: it shall devour the briers and thorns, and shall kindle in the thickets of the forest, and they shall mount up like the lifting up of smoke.

α.9.19 Nashpe ummusquanittam8onk Jehovah ayeuteaunit ohke pohkenai kah pish missinninnuog ogqunneunkqussuog ne woh chogkohtag: wanne pish howan kushpaoou weematuh.
E.9.19 Through the wrath of the LORD of hosts is the land darkened, and the people shall be as the fuel of the fire: no man shall spare his brother.

α.9.20 Kah pish wuttinnohkounit wutch neemp8au kah pish onch kodtupp8, k[a]h pish menadchipp8, kah matta pish tap[e]p8og, nag pish meechwog nish$noh pasuk wuhpitteanue weyaus.
E.9.20 And he shall snatch on the right hand, and be hungry; and he shall eat on the left hand, and they shall not be satisfied: they shall eat every man the flesh of his own arm:

α.9.21 M[e]nasseh, Ephraimoh, kah Ephraim Manassehoh: kah nag na moeu pish ayeuuhkon[á]og Judahoh.
E.9.21 Manasseh, Ephraim; and Ephraim, Manasseh: and they together shall be against Judah. For all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still.


α.9.22 Newutche yeu$wutch wame, ummusquantam8onk matta qushkemun8h, qut ash sumogohteau wunnutcheg.

α.10.1 MIssi wutonkapunnaongan8 kohk8wachég mat sampweusseae naumatuongash: kah wosukuhh8keg ûhquanum8ongash, nash kohkinnum8hettichish.
E.10.1 Woe unto them that decree unrighteous decrees, and that write grievousness which they have prescribed;

α.10.2 Qushkeheonao[u]t quenahukqutcheg wutch wussittum8onganit, kah ama[u]numauonat wussampwohtoongan8 wutch machekitcheg: onk woh sekousquoh tohquomáog: onk woh nag mukk8ki[n]ó[o]g touwiêsoh.
E.10.2 To turn aside the needy from judgment, and to take away the right from the poor of my people, that widows may be their prey, and that they may rob the fatherless!

α.10.3 Kah toh woh kutussemw8 natauwahuwae kesukok, kah pagu[a]nuonk peyont wutch n8adtut? howan pish kutushphouonomw8 wutch kuttannumunkqunnaout? kah uttoh pish kénukkodtumunneau kussohsumoongan8?
E.10.3 And what will ye do in the day of visitation, and in the desolation which shall come from far? to whom will ye flee for help? and where will ye leave your glory?

α.10.4 M[e]hcheu nen, nag pish n[à]uwaehtauaog kuppishagkinnuw[h]enuh, kah nag pish penushaog agwu nohshitcheg: yeu nashpu wame, asquam qushkemun8 ummusqu[an]tam8onk qut askq wuñutcheg sussumohogteau.
E.10.4 Without me they shall bow down under the prisoners, and they shall fall under the slain. For all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still.

α.10.5 Woi wut-Assyrian nummusquantam8e sasamatuhh8waontug, kah ne anwohhou ut wunnutchegan8wout, ne nummusquanittam8onk.
E.10.5 O Assyrian, the rod of mine anger, and the staff in their hand is mine indignation.

α.10.6 Nutann8noog ayuuhkontamunat eiantukeiyeue wutohtimoin, kah ayeuuhkononat missinninnuog n[e]g musquanumogig nuttinninnumau meechummuonk nemunnumunat sequehtahhamukish, kah nemunnumunat wutohqu[a]muwaongan8, kah tahtasku[h]kauonaoont onatuh matehchuogkok tau8maogwash.
E.10.6 I will send him against an hypocritical nation, and against the people of my wrath will I give him a charge, to take the spoil, and to take the prey, and to tread them down like the mire of the streets.

α.10.7 Qut matta ne ukkodsei[n], onk wuttah maata ne wuttenamam8un: qut ne wuttahh8wout, paguanonat, kah koshksumunat wutohtimoneash matta ogguhsinash.
E.10.7 Howbeit he meaneth not so, neither doth his heart think so; but it is in his heart to destroy and cut off nations not a few.

α.10.8 Newutche n8w[a]u sunnummatta nussontimomog pannuppe kehtass8tam8og?
E.10.8 For he saith, Are not my princes altogether kings?

α.10.9 Suñummatta Calmo, neane Carchemish? Sunnummatta Hamath neane Arphad? sunnummatta Samaria neane Damaskus?
E.10.9 Is not Calno as Carchemish? is not Hamath as Arpad? is not Samaria as Damascus?

α.10.10 Neane nunnutcheg namehteau nunneukontungane kehtass8tam8ongash; kah neg unnunneukontunkanog anue mishanumukqussuog, onk neg wadchiitcheg Jerusalem kah Samaria
E.10.10 As my hand hath found the kingdoms of the idols, and whose graven images did excel them of Jerusalem and of Samaria;

α.10.11 Neane nea[n]teau Samaria kah neh wuttinneu[x]o[h]tunkanoh, Sunnummatta ne nan woh nuttinteauouun Jerusalem, kah wuttinneukontunkanoh? 
E.10.11 Shall I not, as I have done unto Samaria and her idols, so do to Jerusalem and her idols?

α.10.12 Newajeh pish n$nahk, ne Lord pogkojteunk wame wutanakausuonk ut wadchuut Sion, kah ut Jerusalem, nussasamatuhham ummeechummuonk máhshetahh8wae ketass8t ut Assyria, kah wussohsumóe quonohquttauwompuonk.
E.10.12 Wherefore it shall come to pass, that when the Lord hath performed his whole work upon mount Zion and on Jerusalem, I will punish the fruit of the stout heart of the king of Assyria, and the glory of his high looks.

α.10.13 Newutche n8wau, nashpe nunnutchegane menuhkesuonk yeu nutussen, kah nashpe n8waantamóonk, newutche nutompuwussuénúh: kah nutontahtoh ukkuhkinonkanóash missinninnuog, kah nummukk8kinóog wunnompak8unóash, kah nuttinnuhkauóog neg noh wadohkitcheg, onatuh menuhkesuenuut.
E.10.13 For he saith, By the strength of my hand I have done it, and by my wisdom; for I am prudent: and I have removed the bounds of the people, and have robbed their treasures, and I have put down the inhabitants like a valiant man:

α.10.14 Kah nunnutcheg mehqunum 8weenauwetuongan8ash misinninnuog, neáne wadchishadt: & neáne mohmounuk wôanash, uttiyeush sequnumukish, nuttinne mohmóunumun wame ohke, kah wanne howan wutt8we wuttauóuunash, asuh wôhshinum8 wutt8n, asuh sesék8.
E.10.14 And my hand hath found as a nest the riches of the people: and as one gathereth eggs that are left, have I gathered all the earth; and there was none that moved the wing, or opened the mouth, or peeped.

α.10.15 Sun togkunk woh waenomau wuhhogkuh ayuuhkononat neh kauhunkquahukqutche: asuh poksunkquonk sun woh mishehheau wuhhogkuh ayeuuhkonau neh mâmamóntinukqutcheh? neáne sauobpunk nehenwonche mâmamo[n]tshont ayeuuhkonónát ashpunukqutcheh, asuh neàne anwohhou nehenwonche ushpéit, neane matta mahtugk88uk. 
E.10.15 Shall the axe boast itself against him that heweth therewith? or shall the saw magnify itself against him that shaketh it? as if the rod should shake itself against them that lift it up, or as if the staff should lift up itself, as if it were no wood.

α.10.16 Newajeh Lord, um-Manitt8m8uh kehche8shaog, pish ununau ônauwussinutcheh, ut kenugke waonogqutcheg, kah ut agwe wussohsum8onganit, pish pasqunnánum ch[i]kohsumóo[n]k, neane n8tae chiko[k]sum8ongánit.
E.10.16 Therefore shall the Lord, the Lord of hosts, send among his fat ones leanness; and under his glory he shall kindle a burning like the burning of a fire.

α.10.17 Kah 8wequa8m Israel ne pish n8to8, kah 8neetupanatam8moh noh n8n8uneau: kah pish nashqutteau, kah mahchekuswau wutásinnekôsumoh, kah ukkôussumoh ut pasuk kesukodtut.
E.10.17 And the light of Israel shall be for a fire, and his Holy One for a flame: and it shall burn and devour his thorns and his briers in one day;

α.10.18 Kah pish mahchikussum wuttouohkomukque sohsumóonk, kah ummissegane ohteuk, naneeswe keteahogkou kah muhhog: kah nag pish ogqueneungqussuog noh kôunuk muttô[a]gk, sauwunuk.
E.10.18 And shall consume the glory of his forest, and of his fruitful field, both soul and body: and they shall be as when a standard-bearer fainteth.

α.10.19 Kah sequeneádtunkish wuttouohkomukque mehtugquash pish ogguhsinash, onk woh mukkies 8sukuhhumunash.
E.10.19 And the rest of the trees of his forest shall be few, that a child may write them.

α.10.20 Kah pish n$nih ne kesukok, neg sequttahwhutcheg Israel, kah neg wadchiitcheg Jakob wekit neg pohquohhukeg, matta pish wonk wutompattussun8unah noh togkomo[n]t, qut pish ompatussen Jehovah, 8neetupanatam8moh Israel, wunnamuhkutée.
E.10.20 And it shall come to pass in that day, that the remnant of Israel, and such as are escaped of the house of Jacob, shall no more again stay upon him that smote them; but shall stay upon the LORD, the Holy One of Israel, in truth.

α.10.21 Neg sequttahwhutcheg pish qushkeog, sequttahhamauutcheh Jakob, en masugkenuk Manit.
E.10.21 The remnant shall return, even the remnant of Jacob, unto the mighty God.

α.10.22 Newutche tókonogque kummissinninneumog Israel wutteas8unneáont ketahhane nagu[n]tuut, neg aguhsikeg pish qushkeog: mahchekonaéonk noh káhtimit, pish tomogkeu ut sampweusseonganit.
E.10.22 For though thy people Israel be as the sand of the sea, yet a remnant of them shall return: the consumption decreed shall overflow with righteousness.

α.10.23 Newutche Lord wut-Jehovanum8oh ayeuteaog, pish ayeuau mahchekonae onkoh, noh kahtimit ut nashaue wame ohkeit.
E.10.23 For the Lord GOD of hosts shall make a consumption, even determined, in the midst of all the land.

α.10.24 Newutche yeu wussin Lord God ayeuwutteaunit, woi nummissinninneumog wadohkéogish Sion, ahque wabesuón8k wut-Assyrian: noh pish kuttogkomuk pogkomunk, kah pish kutayeuuhkonittue tahshinumunk wutanwohhou, ne asehetteup Egyptianéog.
E.10.24 Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD of hosts, O my people that dwellest in Zion, be not afraid of the Assyrian: he shall smite thee with a rod, and shall lift up his staff against thee, after the manner of Egypt.

α.10.25 Newutche ogguhsese sepe, kah unkque m8squanetam8onk pish ahquohteau kah nummusquanittam8onk ut uppaguanuongan8óut.
E.10.25 For yet a very little while, and the indignation shall cease, and mine anger in their destruction.

α.10.26 Kah Jehovah ayeuteaunit pish 8wogkauunumauoh sasamatahwhuttuonk netatupe paguanáonk Midian, kishke Orebe qussukquanit: kah onatuh ne ônohtagkup uppogkomunk woskeche kehtahanit, ne pish wuttinne tahshinumun neanheomp wut-Egyptianeh.
E.10.26 And the LORD of hosts shall stir up a scourge for him according to the slaughter of Midian at the rock of Oreb: and as his rod was upon the sea, so shall he lift it up after the manner of Egypt.

α.10.27 Kah pish n$nih ne kesukok, 8wéanun pish amaunumun wutch kuttugkeet, kah weyoakumoh wutch kussittipukanit, kah yoak pish matcheheau newutche sesequnáonk.
E.10.27 And it shall come to pass in that day, that his burden shall be taken away from off thy shoulder, and his yoke from off thy neck, and the yoke shall be destroyed because of the anointing.

α.10.28 Noh peyau Ajath, noh pahmohkom Migron, ut Michmash na upponamun ukkenúm8ongash.
E.10.28 He is come to Aiath, he is passed to Migron; at Michmash he hath laid up his carriages:

α.10.29 Qushkodteáog ósukongkanit, nag kaueneau Geba, Ramah wabesu, uk-Gibeahum Saul wussem8.
E.10.29 They are gone over the passage: they have taken up their lodging at Geba; Ramah is afraid; Gibeah of Saul is fled.

α.10.30 Mishont8ash, woi wuttaunoh Gallim: n8tamwah Laish, woi kuttamunge Anathoth.
E.10.30 Lift up thy voice, O daughter of Gallim: cause it to be heard unto Laish, O poor Anathoth.

α.10.31 Madmenah ontsum, wadohkitcheg Gebim moèog wussemuneát.
E.10.31 Madmenah is removed; the inhabitants of Gebim gather themselves to flee.

α.10.32 Ashpume pish appu ut Nob ne kesukok: pish ayeuuhkonittue tattauunkauau wunnutcheg 8wadcheum wuttaunoh Zion; Jerusaleme wadchu.
E.10.32 As yet shall he remain at Nob that day: he shall shake his hand against the mount of the daughter of Zion, the hill of Jerusalem.

α.10.33 Kusseh; Lord, Jehovah ayeuteaanit pish tumehtham wuttuhqunash nashpe wabesuonk, kah quaquonunkquokish pish kouwehthamunash, kah pahtuánumweenunkqussit pish hohpaheau.
E.10.33 Behold, the Lord, the LORD of hosts, shall lop the bough with terror: and the high ones of stature shall be hewn down, and the haughty shall be humbled.

α.10.34 Kah noh pish tumehtham touohkomukque kókuppagish, nashpe m8uhshog, kah Lebanon pish penushau wutch masukkenuk.
E.10.34 And he shall cut down the thickets of the forest with iron, and Lebanon shall fall by a mighty one.

α.11.1 KAh sauobpunk pish wutchegen 8wepunkquamut Jesse, kah Wuttuhk pish wutchegen 8wadchabukqut.
E.11.1 And there shall come forth a rod out of the stem of Jesse, and a Branch shall grow out of his roots:

α.11.2 Kah wunnashauanitt8moh Jehovah pish wutapehtunkquoh, wa[a]ntamóe kah wohwohtamóe nashauanit, kuhquttue kah menuhkesue nashauanit, wahteóe nashauanit, kah qushónat Jehovah.
E.11.2 And the spirit of the LORD shall rest upon him, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and might, the spirit of knowledge and of the fear of the LORD;

α.11.3 Kah pish wutayimunkquoh kogkinne wohtamu[m] ut quoshonat Jehovah, kah noh matta pish unne wussittum8 neaunak wuskesukque naum8onk, asuh áushkomuóou neane wohtog wutch wehtauogkut.
E.11.3 And shall make him of quick understanding in the fear of the LORD: and he shall not judge after the sight of his eyes, neither reprove after the hearing of his ears:

α.11.4 Qut nashpe sampweusseonk pish wussumau matchekuoh, kah pish áushkomuau nashpe sampwagk, wutche manunnissitcheg ut ohkeit: kah noh pish togkodtam ohke nashpe wutt8n8e pogkomunk, kah nashpe wussissitt8n8e nashauonk pish nushau matchet8oh.
E.11.4 But with righteousness shall he judge the poor, and reprove with equity for the meek of the earth: and he shall smite the earth: with the rod of his mouth, and with the breath of his lips shall he slay the wicked.

α.11.5 Kah sampweusseonk ne pish uppetukquobpis ut wusseganit: kah pabahtanumukqussuonk ne pish uppetukquobpis ut wutt8unussit.
E.11.5 And righteousness shall be the girdle of his loins, and faithfulness the girdle of his reins.

α.11.6 Kah wonk mukquoshom pish weetomau lamboh, kah leopard pish sepsinn8wehtauau kidsoh, kah kalfsoh, kah qunnonouwem, kah wanogqunutcheh moeu, kah mukkies pish wussagkompanoh
E.11.6 The wolf also shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie down with the kid; and the calf and the young lion and the fatling together; and a little child shall lead them.

α.11.7 Kah cow kah mosk pish weetatup8tuog, wunnechan8oh pish neesinwoh, kah qunnonou pish meech sékupoghegash onatuh ox.
E.11.7 And the cow and the bear shall feed; their young ones shall lie down together: and the lion shall eat straw like the ox.

α.11.8 Kah n8n8e mukkies pish tannuppompu 8wonogqut asp, kah 8chininnáe mukkies pish pethennum wunnutcheg sesegq 8wonogqut.
E.11.8 And the sucking child shall play on the hole of the asp, and the weaned child shall put his hand on the cockatrice' den.

α.11.9 Matta nag pish woskehuwau8og asuh pagwahteau8og ut wame n8neetupanatamwe wadcheumut: newutche ohke pish numwohteau wahheáonk Jehovah, onatuh nippe nuhkokkog keihtoh.
E.11.9 They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain: for the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the LORD, as the waters cover the sea.

α.11.10 Kah ne kesukok na pish 8wadchabuk Jesse ne pish nepatag wutch muttaagk kônunumauont missinninneuh; nehhoh Gentils pish wunnatinneahwhoh, kah wutanwôhsin8onk pish sohsum88.
E.11.10 And in that day there shall be a root of Jesse, which shall stand for an ensign of the people; to it shall the Gentiles seek: and his rest shall be glorious.

α.11.11 Kah pish nnih ne kesukok, Lord pish wunnutcheg nahohtoeu ne ponumun, uppohquohwhunonat asquttawhutcheh ummissinninneumoh wutch Assyria, kah wutch Egypt, kah wutch Pathros, kah wutch Cush, kah wutch Elam, kah wutch Shinar, kah wutch Hamath, kah wutch kehtahhanne aquidnehtu.
E.11.11 And it shall come to pass in that day, that the Lord shall set his hand again the second time to recover the remnant of his people, which shall be left, from Assyria, and from Egypt, and from Pathros, and from Cush, and from Elam, and from Shinar, and from Hamath, and from the islands of the sea.

α.11.12 Kah noh pish wunnashau muttaagk kohkinnunnumunutcheh wutche wutohtimoneash, kah pish miyanau Israelle pagkenitcheg, kah pish miyanau Judahe nanwisinitcheh, wutch yaue p8chag muttaohke.
E.11.12 And he shall set up an ensign for the nations, and shall assemble the outcasts of Israel, and gather together the dispersed of Judah from the four corners of the earth.

α.11.13 Wutiskauanittuonk Ephraim pish amaem8, kah ummatwomoh Judah pish tummehtahwhoog, Ephraim matta pish iskauonoou Judahoh, kah Judah matta pish m8m8sqheoou Ephraimoh.
E.11.13 The envy also of Ephraim shall depart, and the adversaries of Judah shall be cut off: Ephraim shall not envy Judah, and Judah shall not vex Ephraim.

α.11.14 Qut nag pish ushpuhh8waog, ut wuttugkeout Philistinsog, nogque en wutcheksuiyeu, nag pish matcheheaog neg wadohkitcheg wutchepwoieu moaeu nag pish ponamwog wunnutchegan8 ut Edom kah Moab: kah wunneechanoh Ammon pish wunn8swehtauouh.
E.11.14 But they shall fly upon the shoulders of the Philistines toward the west; they shall spoil them of the east together: they shall lay their hand upon Edom and Moab; and the children of Ammon shall obey them.

α.11.15 Kah Jehovah pish papuhquanne paguanau ketahanne Egyptiane meenan, kah nashpe ummishetahshinneumoh pish tattauohteau wunnutcheg waabe sepuut, kah pish wuttogkodtamun ut nesausuk tahshe po[m]utchuanit, kah pish qushkodteaheau missinninnuh nobohteaouut.
E.11.15 And the LORD shall utterly destroy the tongue of the Egyptian sea; and with his mighty wind shall he shake his hand over the river, and shall smite it in the seven streams, and make men go over dryshod.

α.11.16 Kah ne pish nanwe ummayou asquttahwhutcheh ummissinninneumoh, nég asquttawhutcheg wutch Assyria, neanagkup wutch Israel ne kesukok waj sohhog ohkeit Egypt.
E.11.16 And there shall be an highway for the remnant of his people, which shall be left, from Assyria; like as it was to Israel in the day that he came up out of the land of Egypt.

α.12.1 KAh nekesukok pish kussim, woi Jehovah, k8waeenomush: tohkonogque kummusquanuminneah, kummusquantam8onk qushkem8, kah kuttapheh.
E.12.1 And in that day thou shalt say, O LORD, I will praise thee: though thou wast angry with me, thine anger is turned away, and thou comfortedst me.

α.12.2 Kusseh God noh n8wadchanitteaonk: nuppabuhtanum, kah matta n8wabesuh, newutche Lord Jehovah noh nummenuhkesuonk, kah nukket8homaonk, noh wonk n8wadchanitteaonkanin.
E.12.2 Behold, God is my salvation; I will trust, and not be afraid: for the LORD JEHOVAH is my strength and my song; he also is become my salvation.

α.12.3 Newutche wekontamoe pish k8thuppam8 wutch wadchanittuae wuttahhamonganit.
E.12.3 Therefore with joy shall ye draw water out of the wells of salvation.

α.12.4 Kah ne kesukok pish kussimw8 wowussumok Jehovah, wehquetumok 8wesuonk, wahteauwahuwagk wutusseongash ut kenugke missinninnutu, missohham8k 8weesuonk mishehteauun.
E.12.4 And in that day shall ye say, Praise the LORD, call upon his name, declare his doings among the people, make mention that his name is exalted.

α.12.5 Ket8hamok Jehovah newutche noh usseu waunnegukish, yeu wahteauun ut wame ohkeit.
E.12.5 Sing unto the LORD; for he hath done excellent things: this is known in all the earth.

α.12.6 Wuttauate[u]kqussek, kah mishont8wagk ken wadohkean Zion, newutche masugkenuk 8neetupanatam8moh Israel ut kenashomut.
E.12.6 Cry out and shout, thou inhabitant of Zion: for great is the Holy One of Israel in the midst of thee.

α.13.1 OOWeanun Babilon, ne Isaiah wunnaumonuh Amoz nagkup.
E.13.1 The burden of Babylon, which Isaiah the son of Amoz did see.

α.13.2 Tahshinum8k muttaagk ut kussòhkôiyeuut, mishont8wanumok, tattauwunnumok kenutcheg onk petutteaog wuttusquontam8out puhponkompoog.
E.13.2 Lift ye up a banner upon the high mountain, exalt the voice unto them, shake the hand, that they may go into the gates of the nobles.

α.13.3 Nuttaann8nomp n8neetupanatam8mog: kah n8wehomomp nummenuhkeseumog, wutche nummusquanittam8onk, neg weekontogeg ut nukqununkqussuonganit
E.13.3 I have commanded my sanctified ones, I have also called my mighty ones for mine anger, even them that rejoice in my highness.

α.13.4 OOwadtauatonkqussuongan8 monacheg ut wadchuuhkontu, ogqunneunkqussu[o]g mutta[a]nukeg missinninnuog wogkouee wuttauatonkqussuonganu8 wutohtim[ô]unne tass8tam8ongash miyaé[m]8ash: Jehovah ay[e]uteaunit 8sukkomp[a]nh mattompagwe ayeuteuh.
E.13.4 The noise of a multitude in the mountains, like as of a great people; a tumultuous noise of the kingdoms of nations gathered together: the LORD of hosts mustereth the host of the battle.

α.13.5 Nag 8mwog nôadtit wutohtimóneat, wutch weekqshik kesuk, noh Jehovah, kah ummusquantamwe auwohteaongash, pagwohtauunat mamusse ohke.
E.13.5 They come from a far country, from the end of heaven, even the LORD, and the weapons of his indignation, to destroy the whole land.

α.13.6 Mau8k, newutche ukkesukkodtum Jehovah paswohteau: pish ogque peyau pagwanuonganit wutch wame manuhkesitteáut.
E.13.6 Howl ye; for the day of the LORD is at hand; it shall come as a destruction from the Almighty.

α.13.7 Newutche wame menutchegash pish sauunum8m8ash, kah nishnoh wosketomp wuttah pish mohtupohteau.
E.13.7 Therefore shall all hands be faint, and every man's heart shall melt:

α.13.8 Kah nag pish wabesuog: onkquommom8ongash kah unkquanum8ongash pish wuttohqunóuh; nag pish unúhquommom8og mittamwossis neechadt, nag pish chepsh[á]ettuog, wuskesuk8oash pish onatuh n8hn8unag.
E.13.8 And they shall be afraid: pangs and sorrows shall take hold of them; they shall be in pain as a woman that travaileth: they shall be amazed one at another; their faces shall be as flames.

α.13.9 Kusseh ukkesukodtum Jehovah peyom8, onkuppunohteáe naneeswe nashpe unkque musquanittam8onk kah mishe musquantam8onk, touwishinneat ohke, kah noh pish paguanau ummatcheseaéneumoh na$wutch.
E.13.9 Behold, the day of the LORD cometh, cruel both with wrath and fierce anger, to lay the land desolate: and he shall destroy the sinners thereof out of it.

α.13.10 Newutche kesukque anogqsog kah chippanogqussog matta pish wóhsumóog: nepauz pish pogkenum sohhog, kah nanepâushadt matta pish 8wequai wohsum8mun8.
E.13.10 For the stars of heaven and the constellations thereof shall not give their light: the sun shall be darkened in his going forth, and the moon shall not cause her light to shine.

α.13.11 Kah pish nussasamatahham muttaok, wutche uppaneseongan8, kah matchetoog wutch ummatcheseongan8oash: kah uppehtuánúmweenungqussuongan8 pehtuánum8og, n8wohkuhquôshitteauwahtauun: kah nutti[u]hquonkqutteoh uppehtuánumwenunkqussuongan8 uhqueneunkqussitcheg.
E.13.11 And I will punish the world for their evil, and the wicked for their iniquity; and I will cause the arrogancy of the proud to cease, and will lay low the haughtiness of the terrible.

α.13.12 Kah wosketomp nutanue mish[ô]adteh onk ne wanegik gold: nux wosketomp onk ne Ophire golde wedge.
E.13.12 I will make a man more precious than fine gold; even a man than the golden wedge of Ophir.

α.13.13 Newutche nuttattauwohteam kesukquash, kah o[h]ke pish ontohteau wutch wutayeuonganit, ut ummusquanittam8onganit Jehovah ayeuteaunit, kah ne kesukok uhque musquantog.
E.13.13 Therefore I will shake the heavens, and the earth shall remove out of her place, in the wrath of the LORD of hosts, and in the day of his fierce anger.

α.13.14 Kah pish tatuppeyeu8 key8hkauut ayomp, kah ontauh sheeput, ne matta howan wadchanunkeh, nishnoh pasuk qushkeu en nehenwonche missinninneumut, kah pish spuhh8waog nishnoh pasuk en nehenwonche wutohket.
E.13.14 And it shall be as the chased roe, and as a sheep that no man taketh up: they shall every man turn to his own people, and flee every one into his own land.

α.13.15 Nishnoh pasuk noh namhit pish asishahtahwh[á]u: kah nishnoh pasuk noh weetomont pish penushau nashpe togkodteg.
E.13.15 Every one that is found shall be thrust through; and every one that is joined unto them shall fall by the sword.

α.13.16 Kah wonk ummukkieseum8uh pish sukquóhkônunk an[a]quabhettit, week8oash pish mukkinumwó[n]tamunash, kah ummittamwuss8oh pish chekehéonunneoh.
E.13.16 Their children also shall be dashed to pieces before their eyes; their houses shall be spoiled, and their wives ravished.

α.13.17 Kusseh, n8wogkouun Medsog ayeuuhkonittue n[a]goh, neg matta pish tohhe[n]tup anatam8gig silver: kah wonk gold matta wuttapeneam8uneau.
E.13.17 Behold, I will stir up the Medes against them, which shall not regard silver; and as for gold, they shall not delight in it.

α.13.18 Wutahtompeyeuoh pish sukquehtahwaog 8skeneum8uh, kah nag pish matta kitteamonteanumau8og ummeechu[m̃]uonk ôontomuk: wuskesuk88ash matta pish wohquanumauôog mukkiesoh.
E.13.18 Their bows also shall dash the young men to pieces; and they shall have no pity on the fruit of the womb; their eyes shall not spare children.

α.13.19 Kah Babylon wussohsum8wongan8oash ass8tam8onganog, 8neetuonk Caldeansog, ummissugken8ongan8 pish onatuh God kepuhteadt Sodom kah Gomorrah.
E.13.19 And Babylon, the glory of kingdoms, the beauty of the Chaldees' excellency, shall be as when God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah.

α.13.20 Matta pish wonk wutohkein, asuh matta pish ayéin wutch pometuonganit onk ye[á]n pometuonganit: kah Arabian matta pish na 8weekéin, kah nanawesheepsaenuog matta pish na ponam8uneau wekuòash.
E.13.20 It shall never be inhabited, neither shall it be dwelt in from generation to generation: neither shall the Arabian pitch tent there; neither shall the shepherds make their fold there.

α.13.21 Qut touohkomukque puppinashimwog na pish wusseepsineau, kah wekuoash pish wunn[á]numw[à]pine u[t] [n]ishkeneunkque ow[à]asineg, kah k8k8khôsog na pish 8tohkineau, kah Satyrsog ka pish wuttit pumukoneau
E.13.21 But wild beasts of the desert shall lie there; and their houses shall be full of doleful creatures; and owls shall dwell there, and satyrs shall dance there.

α.13.22 Kah munnohhanne puppinashimwog pish 8n8og ut mahchikomukque wekuout, kah Dragonsog ut 8nekomuk8out: kah wutaquompiyeum pas8che peyaum8, kah ukkesukodtum8oash matta pish sepohtan8ash.
E.13.22 And the wild beasts of the islands shall cry in their desolate houses, and dragons in their pleasant palaces: and her time is near to come, and her days shall not be prolonged.

α.14.1 NEwutche Jehovah pish monanumau Jakoboh kah ohnch pish pepenauau Israeloh, kah pish upponuh nehenwonche wutohkeyeu[o]ut: kah pen8wot pish weetomuk: kah pish menuhkappuog wekit Jakob.
E.14.1 For the LORD will have mercy on Jacob, and will yet choose Israel, and set them in their own land: and the strangers shall be joined with them, and they shall cleave to the house of Jacob.

α.14.2 Kah missinninnuog pish nag wuneemunnouh, kah uppas8ouh ut wutayeuongan8out, kah wek Israel nag pish 8tohtauonganinnéauh ut wutohkit Jehovah wutche wuttinneumuonk, kah mittamwossisse wuttinneumineunk, kah pish ummissi[n]uhkonauh nag neh masinohteacheg: kah pish nanawunaog neh woskhikqhettipoh.
E.14.2 And the people shall take them, and bring them to their place: and the house of Israel shall possess them in the land of the LORD for servants and handmaids: and they shall take them captives, whose captives they were; and they shall rule over their oppressors.

α.14.3 Kah pish n$nih, ne kesukok Jehovah anwosumwahikquean wutch kutungquanumwinneat, kah wutch k8wabesuonganit, kah wutch siogke missinnainneat ut$toh adt wuttinneumuhkonuninumukup.
E.14.3 And it shall come to pass in the day that the LORD shall give thee rest from thy sorrow, and from thy fear, and from the hard bondage wherein thou wast made to serve,

α.14.4 Neit pish kussim yeu woweenuhwh[á]muae kutt8wonk ayeuuhkonittue Babylone ketass8t: uttoh in woskehuwaenin wôhkuhquosinin?
E.14.4 That thou shalt take up this proverb against the king of Babylon, and say, How hath the oppressor ceased! the golden city ceased!

α.14.5 Jehovah pohquetahham wutánwohh8un8 matchet8og, kah uppiuhquttumwe anwoh8un8 nananuwach[e]g.
E.14.5 The LORD hath broken the staff of the wicked, and the sceptre of the rulers.

α.14.6 Noh musquantamwe togkomont missinninnuh nagwutteauhshine, moh musquantamwe nanawunuk wutohtimoneash, noh woskeheau, kah matta howan wuttamehh[u]waunuh.
E.14.6 He who smote the people in wrath with a continual stroke, he that ruled the nations in anger, is persecuted, and none hindereth.

α.14.7 Mamusse ohke anwohsin, kah chequnohteau: nag pohqua8homaog
E.14.7 The whole earth is at rest, and is quiet: they break forth into singing.

α.14.8 Nux qunonuhquaog kummuskauanatam8[ó]nukquog, Lebannonne chikupog n8waog, nadteuh pagkenumuk, matta kouuhkukquaenin ayeuuhkonittue nukkuhkuhquéhtunk8un.
E.14.8 Yea, the fir trees rejoice at thee, and the cedars of Lebanon, saying, Since thou art laid down, no feller is come up against us.

α.14.9 Chepiohkomuk wutch agwe ontohteau wutche ken, kenogskunkqunat peyôa[n], wogkouineau n[á]pinitche wutche ken, wame puppunkompóog muttaohkit, wutomohkinuh wutch wutappuonganehtu, wame wutohtimóinne ketass8tamwog.
E.14.9 Hell from beneath is moved for thee to meet thee at thy coming: it stirreth up the dead for thee, even all the chief ones of the earth; it hath raised up from their thrones all the kings of the nations.

α.14.10 Wame nag pish ket8kaog, kah kuttukquog, ken wonk sun ken8chumwes netatupe nenawun? ken k[ù]ttatuppinneunkqusseumumun?
E.14.10 All they shall speak and say unto thee, Art thou also become weak as we? art thou become like unto us?

α.14.11 K8nadchéseum paudtauun weenohkeit, kah k8wadtauatonkqussue wanont8wagk: 8hqua[ó]g sepakéog ut kutagwéiyeumut, kah 8hquaog kenuhkuhkunk.
E.14.11 Thy pomp is brought down to the grave, and the noise of thy viols: the worm is spread under thee, and the worms cover thee.

α.14.12 Uttoh kuttinne penushon wutch kesukqut, woi Lucifer, wunnaumonuh mohtompan? uttoh kittin tummehtawhuttean en ohkeit, ken n8chumwehteauop wutohtimóneash?
E.14.12 How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer, son of the morning! how art thou cut down to the ground, which didst weaken the nations!

α.14.13 Newutche kussip ut kuttahhut, nukkuhkuhquem en kesukqut, pish nuttahshinum nutappuonk anue wutannogqusseumut God: kah wonk nukquenáp mukkinneáe wadchuut nannumiy[ê]u.
E.14.13 For thou hast said in thine heart, I will ascend into heaven, I will exalt my throne above the stars of God: I will sit also upon the mount of the congregation, in the sides of the north:

α.14.14 Nukkuhkuhquem anue ne sohkunkquok mahtókqs, pish ne[a]nenunkqus noh anue quanunkquapit.
E.14.14 I will ascend above the heights of the clouds; I will be like the most High.

α.14.15 Qut pish ken8t[n]init en chepiohkomukqut, ut sussippôe psahtheganit. 
E.14.15 Yet thou shalt be brought down to hell, to the sides of the pit.

α.14.16 Neg nogqueáneg pish kuppapásinunk kah kenatwánumuk, n8waog, sun yeuoh wosketomp noh nunkshadtauwahtunkup ohke, noh nánukkishadtunkup ketass8tam8ongash?
E.14.16 They that see thee shall narrowly look upon thee, and consider thee, saying, Is this the man that made the earth to tremble, that did shake kingdoms;

α.14.17 Noh áyikup muttaok onatuh touohkomuk, kah pagwatunkup wutotanash? noh matta wohshinumauonk wek8 ukkupshagki[n]omuh?
E.14.17 That made the world as a wilderness, and destroyed the cities thereof; that opened not the house of his prisoners?

α.14.18 Wame wutohtimóinne wuttahs8timwog, nag wame sohsumohteásinwog, nishnoh pasuk nehenwonceh wekit.
E.14.18 All the kings of the nations, even all of them, lie in glory, every one in his own house.

α.14.19 Qut ken kussohwhôhkonit wutch weenohkeit, onatuh nishkeungque wuttuhqunit, kah onatuh wuthogk8un8oash neg na[h]shitcheg, papashpetahwhut togkodteg, neg w8mussitcheg psahthegane qussukquanéhtu, ontuh nupp8e muhhog tahtashkuhka[ú]ut ut musseetut.
E.14.19 But thou art cast out of thy grave like an abominable branch, and as the raiment of those that are slain, thrust through with a sword, that go down to the stones of the pit; as a carcase trodden under feet.

α.14.20 Matta pish nag k8weechayeumôog posekinitteóg, newutche kuppagquadtoh kutohke, kah nushonat kummissinninnúmog; 8skannémunnu matchet8g matta pish w[a]eenódtum8un.
E.14.20 Thou shalt not be joined with them in burial, because thou hast destroyed thy land, and slain thy people: the seed of evildoers shall never be renowned.

α.14.21 Quoshauwehtau wunneechanoh shehteaénuh wutche ummatcheseongan88ash 8sh8oh, nag woh matta wutomohkéinnaout, kah matta wutohta8unaóut ohke, kah matta numwohtau8unat wuskesukqut muttaok 8tanash.
E.14.21 Prepare slaughter for his children for the iniquity of their fathers; that they do not rise, nor possess the land, nor fill the face of the world with cities.

α.14.22 Newutche nag ayeuuhkonittue n8waabehtauóog, n8wau Jehovah ayeuteaunit: kah pish nuttummetahham wutch Babylon, wesuonk, wunnaumoniin, kah 8w[á]dtunkquassin, n8wau Jehovah.
E.14.22 For I will rise up against them, saith the LORD of hosts, and cut off from Babylon the name, and remnant, and son, and nephew, saith the LORD.

α.14.23 Kah wonk n8ta[h]tauonga[n]éhheon Bittern, kah nippissepagwash, kah nutchekhamun nashpe paguanue chekhikunk, n8wau Jehovah ayeuteaunit.
E.14.23 I will also make it a possession for the bittern, and pools of water: and I will sweep it with the besom of destruction, saith the LORD of hosts.

α.14.24 Jehovah ayeuteaunit chadchekeyeuau, n8wau, wunnamuhkut, neanantamup, ne pish n$nih,, kah ne pakodtantamup, ne pish unne menehketeauun.
E.14.24 The LORD of hosts hath sworn, saying, Surely as I have thought, so shall it come to pass; and as I have purposed, so shall it stand:

α.14.25 Nuppokshan wut-Assyrian ut nutohkit, kah ut n8wadchumehtu nuttahtashkuhkau ut agwe nusseetut, neit pish weyoakum8oh âmaehtunkquog, kah 8weanun pish amaem8 wutch wuttugkeit.
E.14.25 That I will break the Assyrian in my land, and upon my mountains tread him under foot: then shall his yoke depart from off them, and his burden depart from off their shoulders.

α.14.26 Yeu pogkodtantam[ó]onk ne pakodtantamuk ut mamusse ohkeit, kah yeu menutcheg ne samogkinumuk en wame wutohtimóneat.
E.14.26 This is the purpose that is purposed upon the whole earth: and this is the hand that is stretched out upon all the nations.

α.14.27 Newutche Jehovah ayeuhteaanit uppogkodtanatamun, kah howan woh uppanshadta[u]wahtauun? kah wunnutcheg summagohteau, & howan woh ukqushkinnumun?
E.14.27 For the LORD of hosts hath purposed, and who shall disannul it? and his hand is stretched out, and who shall turn it back?

α.14.28 Ne kodtum8k ketass8t Ahaz napuk, yeu wéanunúo8p.
E.14.28 In the year that king Ahaz died was this burden.

α.14.29 Ahque muskouantash ken mamusse Palestina, newutche uppogkomunk noh togkomukqueóp pokshau: newutche wutch 8wadchaubukqut ask8k pish 8tsohhamu[n] sesekq, kah ummechummuonk pish n8tae pt8wée ask8k.
E.14.29 Rejoice not thou, whole Palestina, because the rod of him that smote thee is broken: for out of the serpent's root shall come forth a cockatrice, and his fruit shall be a fiery flying serpent.

α.14.30 Kah ummohtommegitteomoh noh machekit pish meetsuoh, kah quenauhikquit pish wunniyeue sepsin[,] kah nunnehto k8wadchabuk nashpe mashshagquot, kah noh pish nushau sequttahhamaúúnumukeh.
E.14.30 And the firstborn of the poor shall feed, and the needy shall lie down in safety: and I will kill thy root with famine, and he shall slay thy remnant.

α.14.31 OO[n]sh, woi squont, maush, woi keitotan, ken mamusse Palestina kussukqunit, newutche pukuttau pish 8m88 naunummiyeu, kah wanne pish nussiyeoh ut ukkuhquttumoe aquompiyeumut.
E.14.31 Howl, O gate; cry, O city; thou, whole Palestina, art dissolved: for there shall come from the north a smoke, and none shall be alone in his appointed times.

α.14.32 Neit toh pish unneu namp8hamauau wutann8teamweneum8uh wutohtimmoneunk? Jehovah ummenuhkehteauun Zion, kah ummissinninnúme matchekeumoh, pish uppanuhtantamunin.
E.14.32 What shall one then answer the messengers of the nation? That the LORD hath founded Zion, and the poor of his people shall trust in it.

α.15.1 OWeanun Moab: newutche nukonáeu Ar ut Moab mohtupohsin, kah chequnapheau, newutche nukonàeu Kir ut Moab moh[tu]pohsin, kah chequnapheau.
E.15.1 The burden of Moab. Because in the night Ar of Moab is laid waste, and brought to silence; because in the night Kir of Moab is laid waste, and brought to silence;

α.15.2 Kuhkuhquéi en Bajith kah en Dibon, qunuhqui ayeuonganéhtu, mauunat: Moab pish 8nowontam Nabo, kah Medeba: wame uppuhkukquash pish mukukkiyeuash, kah nishnoh weeshitt8n tummuhs[ô]su.
E.15.2 He is gone up to Bajith, and to Dibon, the high places, to weep: Moab shall howl over Nebo, and over Medeba: on all their heads shall be baldness, and every beard cut off.

α.15.3 Ut wutaumaogk8out, pish puttukquobpissuwontamog man8tionak: ut woskechekomukquehtu kah ut wutaumaogk8out, nish$noh pasuk pish 8n8, m8cheke mauun.
E.15.3 In their streets they shall gird themselves with sackcloth: on the tops of their houses, and in their streets, every one shall howl, weeping abundantly.

α.15.4 Kah Heshbon pish mau kah Elealeh 8wadtauatonkqussuonk pish n8tamun weehque Jahaz, newaj ukkenauwamee matwomoh pish mishont8wauh, uppomantamoonk pish uhquanittamhik.
E.15.4 And Heshbon shall cry, and Elealeh: their voice shall be heard even unto Jahaz: therefore the armed soldiers of Moab shall cry out; his life shall be grievous unto him.

α.15.5 Nuttah pish mishont8wau wutche Moab, 8sem8moh pish usishauh Zoar, nashwe kodtumohkog kouwashinem; newutche adt kutóhkoag Luhith[.] nashpe mauonk pish kuhkuhqueog, newutche ut Haronaimme mayut, na pish wutch waapem8 paguanue mauonk.
E.15.5 My heart shall cry out for Moab; his fugitives shall flee unto Zoar, an heifer of three years old: for by the mounting up of Luhith with weeping shall they go it up; for in the way of Horonaim they shall raise up a cry of destruction.

α.15.6 Newutche Nimrimme nippeash pish touwushinneash: newutche moskehtuash ohp8htaash, askoshquosh wanne ohtan8ash, wanne ashkoshqun8.
E.15.6 For the waters of Nimrim shall be desolate: for the hay is withered away, the grass faileth, there is no green thing.

α.15.7 Newutche madtauneuk ne ohtauwehettit, kah ne wadchanumohettit, pish ummonchadtauunneau, en anumussikkuppeyeue sepuwussut.
E.15.7 Therefore the abundance they have gotten, and that which they have laid up, shall they carry away to the brook of the willows.

α.15.8 Newutche wuttauatonkqussuonk quinnuppem8 en wame wussissippoiyeumut Moab: 8n8onk weehque Eglaim kah 8n8onk weque wussissippoiyeumut Be[o]r$Elim.
E.15.8 For the cry is gone round about the borders of Moab; the howling thereof unto Eglaim, and the howling thereof unto Beerelim.

α.15.9 Newutche wunnuppeimash Dimon pish numwohteau musqueheonk, newutche nukk8tne pas8 ut Dimon qunn8n8óh quentunkqutch noh pohquohhogkup wutch Moab, kah neg asquttahwhutcheg ut ohkeit.
E.15.9 For the waters of Dimon shall be full of blood: for I will bring more upon Dimon, lions upon him that escapeth of Moab, and upon the remnant of the land.

α.16.1 NEgonshhuagk lamb en noh nanawunuk ohke, wutch Sela wehque touohkomukqut, wehque 8wadchumut wuttaunoh Zion.
E.16.1 Send ye the lamb to the ruler of the land from Sela to the wilderness, unto the mount of the daughter of Zion.

α.16.2 Newutche pish n$nih, onatuh kogkeish[á]e psukses: ne pish wuttattúppeyeuwunneau wuttaunoh Moab, ut Arnone t8skeonganit.
E.16.2 For it shall be, that, as a wandering bird cast out of the nest, so the daughters of Moab shall be at the fords of Arnon.

α.16.3 Kogkáhquttegk, ussek wussittum8onk, ogquehteaush kutonkauohtom nohkog, ut noeu pohshequaut, puttogquehtog neg sohwohteamukeg, ahque wa[n]shan8k noh nánwushadt.
E.16.3 Take counsel, execute judgment; make thy shadow as the night in the midst of the noonday; hide the outcasts; bewray not him that wandereth.

α.16.4 Neg pakenogeg wutch ontogkit weetomukqush Moab, ken wunnenéhuwaéneush wutch wuskesukqut woskhuadt, newutche mukk8kinnuwaenúh wohkuhquosinwoh, matchehuwaenin áhquappu, woskehuw[à]enuog mahchekussuog wutch ohkeit.
E.16.4 Let mine outcasts dwell with thee, Moab; be thou a covert to them from the face of the spoiler: for the extortioner is at an end, the spoiler ceaseth, the oppressors are consumed out of the land.

α.16.5 Kah monaneteáe appeuonk pish menehketeauun; kah pish ukquenappin ut wunnamuhkuteyeu8ut, ut wut-tabernaklumut David, wussittum kah natinneham wussittumóonk kah kenuppeteau sampweusseonk.
E.16.5 And in mercy shall the throne be established: and he shall sit upon it in truth in the tabernacle of David, judging, and seeking judgment, and hasting righteousness.

α.16.6 Nunn8tamumu[n] uppehtuanumôonk Moab (noh mishe pittuánum8) ukqunuhqunneunkqussuonk, kah uppehtuánumóonk, kah ummusquantamóonk: qut uppann8waongash matta pish ne nano.
E.16.6 We have heard of the pride of Moab; he is very proud: even of his haughtiness, and his pride, and his wrath: but his lies shall not be so.

α.16.7 Newaj pish Moab 8n8wonont Moaboh, nishnoh pasuk pish 8n8, wutch ukquenohtag8mash Kir-hareseth, pish kummaum8 wunnamuhkut togkomóog.
E.16.7 Therefore shall Moab howl for Moab, every one shall howl: for the foundations of Kirhareseth shall ye mourn; surely they are stricken.

α.16.8 Newutche Heshbone ohteuhkonash kôhkutt[a]ash, 8wenomassippog Sibmah, wussontim8m8oh penuwohteaog pokshadtóog negonneyeugish wutohkehte[a]ongash, peyaog wehque Jazer, nanwushaog pannuppe touohkomuk, wuttuhqunash summagnunumunash, qushkodteaog keitoh.
E.16.8 For the fields of Heshbon languish, and the vine of Sibmah: the lords of the heathen have broken down the principal plants thereof, they are come even unto Jazer, they wandered through the wilderness: her branches are stretched out, they are gone over the sea.

α.16.9 Newutche nummauwétam nashpe Jazere mauonk, 8wenomussippog Sibmah, kutogquechipanash nussippeguash, woi Heshbon, kah Elealeth: newutche mishontowaonk wutche sequ[a]nnáe kummeechum8mash, kah wutche kukkepenum8onk penusheau.
E.16.9 Therefore I will bewail with the weeping of Jazer the vine of Sibmah: I will water thee with my tears, O Heshbon, and Elealeh: for the shouting for thy summer fruits and for thy harvest is fallen.

α.16.10 Kah wekontamóonk amaunumun, kah muskouantam8onk wutch mishummeechume ohteuhkonit, kah ut weenominneohtekontu, na matta pish ket8hammaonganunn8, kah matta pish mishont8waonganunn8: tahtashkuhkomwenuog pish matta tahtashkuhkom8og wine ut wine$pressut, n8wohkuhquoshitteop ummishont8waonk.
E.16.10 And gladness is taken away, and joy out of the plentiful field; and in the vineyards there shall be no singing, neither shall there be shouting: the treaders shall tread out no wine in their presses; I have made their vintage shouting to cease.

α.16.11 Newutche nunnogkus pish wunnont8wanshau Moaboh onatuh Harp: kah nuttinnomiyeum Kirha[r]esh.
E.16.11 Wherefore my bowels shall sound like an harp for Moab, and mine inward parts for Kirharesh.

α.16.12 Kah pish nnih, naumuk Moab sauwunum ut qunuhque ayeuonganit, neit pish peyau ut wus$Sanctuareumut peantamunat: qut matta pish sohkohseu.
E.16.12 And it shall come to pass, when it is seen that Moab is weary on the high place, that he shall come to his sanctuary to pray; but he shall not prevail.

α.16.13 Yeu kutt8onk ne an8wop Jehovah papaume Moab, nádteuh na ahquompak.
E.16.13 This is the word that the LORD hath spoken concerning Moab since that time.

α.16.14 Qut yeuyeu Jehovah ukket8kontamun, n8wau, ash nanshwu kodtumun8gkup, onatuh ukkodtum8ut wahwuttinninneumuk, kah wuss[ô]hsum8onk Moab pish pogkodchimau, nashpe mamusse neg mataanukeg: kah neg asquttahwhutcheg pish ogguhsesuog kah n8chumwesuog.
E.16.14 But now the LORD hath spoken, saying, Within three years, as the years of an hireling, and the glory of Moab shall be contemned, with all that great multitude; and the remnant shall be very small and feeble.

α.17.1 OWeanun Damascus, kusseh, Damascus amaunôi wutch wut8tanau[n]neat, kah pish webe weep8toou,
E.17.1 The burden of Damascus. Behold, Damascus is taken away from being a city, and it shall be a ruinous heap.

α.17.2 Ukkeitotanash Aroer ahquontamunash, nish pish wutch puppinashimwog, neg pish sepsukeg, kah matta pish howan 8wabesuwaheuh.
E.17.2 The cities of Aroer are forsaken: they shall be for flocks, which shall lie down, and none shall make them afraid.

α.17.3 Wonkônous wonk pish wohkukquoshin wutch Ephraimut, kah ass8tamoonk wutch Damaskus, kah Syriae sequttahwhutceg: nag pish tatuppeyeu8og wussohsum8ongan8out wunnaumonuh Israel, n8wau Jehovah ayeuteaunit.
E.17.3 The fortress also shall cease from Ephraim, and the kingdom from Damascus, and the remnant of Syria: they shall be as the glory of the children of Israel, saith the LORD of hosts.

α.17.4 Kah ne kesukok pish nnih, wussohsumóonk Jakob pish woss[à]ppeteáuun, kah 8weeyauseé wees pish ônauwuss[é]um8.
E.17.4 And in that day it shall come to pass, that the glory of Jacob shall be made thin, and the fatness of his flesh shall wax lean.

α.17.5 Kah pish yáneyéu8 kepenumwaenúut kepenuk weatchiminneash, kah kepenuk missunkquaminash wutch wuhputteit, kah pish yaneyeu8 noh kepenuk missunkquaminnash ut Rephaimme 8n[ó]uhkôi.
E.17.5 And it shall be as when the harvestman gathereth the corn, and reapeth the ears with his arm; and it shall be as he that gathereth ears in the valley of Rephaim.

α.17.6 Qut onch pish mukupashquae weenominneash na$ut sequnumunash: onatuh né[u]emonteamuk olivuhtug, neesinash asuh nishwinásh berrisash ut wanashquonk: yauunash asuh napanna onkouee mishummeechummue wuttuhqunash, wussin Lord um-Manitt8moh Israel.
E.17.6 Yet gleaning grapes shall be left in it, as the shaking of an olive tree, two or three berries in the top of the uppermost bough, four or five in the outmost fruitful branches thereof, saith the LORD God of Israel.

α.17.7 Ne kesukok wosketomp pish monunnea[n]au neh kezhukqutcheh, kah wuskesukquash pish k[e]nompamau 8neetupanatam8m[ó]h Israel.
E.17.7 At that day shall a man look to his Maker, and his eyes shall have respect to the Holy One of Israel.

α.17.8 Kah matta pish monunneauôou Altarsash wunnutchegane anakaus[ú]onk, kah matta pish kenompattam8 ne wuttinwhunnutcheash kezteunkupash, asuh kuppahtu, asuh nunneukontunkanog.
E.17.8 And he shall not look to the altars, the work of his hands, neither shall respect that which his fingers have made, either the groves, or the images.

α.17.9 Ne kesukok ummenuhke 8tanash pish tatuppeyeu8ash ahquontam8e wuttuhkq, kah wanaskkunkquame wuttuhq, ne sequenum[o]hettit, newutche wunnaumonuh Israel: kah na pish tauwushin.
E.17.9 In that day shall his strong cities be as a forsaken bough, and an uppermost branch, which they left because of the children of Israel: and there shall be desolation.

α.17.10 Newutche k8wanánum k8wadchanuae Manit, kah matta kummehqutonam8 kumme[n]uhkesue qussukquanum, newaj pish ohkehteaan wunneohkehteaongash, & pish kutohteuhkon penowe ontsohkodtoongash.
E.17.10 Because thou hast forgotten the God of thy salvation, and hast not been mindful of the rock of thy strength, therefore shalt thou plant pleasant plants, and shalt set it with strange slips:

α.17.11 Ne kesukok pish kenetuwohto kutohketeaonk, kah mohtompanáeu pish kenekitteáuun k8skannem: qut kepenumoonk pish numwunkquae ut unkquanu[mo]e kesukodtut mat anno[ó]sue unkquanumwi[t].
E.17.11 In the day shalt thou make thy plant to grow, and in the morning shalt thou make thy seed to flourish: but the harvest shall be a heap in the day of grief and of desperate sorrow.

α.17.12 Missi wut[o]nkapunnaongan8 monacheg missinninnuog, ogque wadtauatonkqussuog kehtah, 8wadtauatonkqussuonk, kah wutohtimoinne munnumuhkeonk onatuh manumuhkem8uk menuhkee nippeash.
E.17.12 Woe to the multitude of many people, which make a noise like the noise of the seas; and to the rushing of nations, that make a rushing like the rushing of mighty waters!

α.17.13 Wutohtimoinash pish munumuhkem8ash, onatuh manumuhkem8ut monatash nippeash: qut God pish nah wutaushkomuh, kah nag pish nóadtit spuhh8waog, kah pish wunnaumatuhkauóog onatuh ut wuss[a]dtreamunne wadchuut ut anaquabit waban, kah onatuhyeu8 tatuppequashunk ut anaquabit pemsquoh.
E.17.13 The nations shall rush like the rushing of many waters: but God shall rebuke them, and they shall flee far off, and shall be chased as the chaff of the mountains before the wind, and like a rolling thing before the whirlwind.

α.17.14 Kah kusseh, wunnonk88k wuttamehpunáonk kah asquam mamohtompan8gkup, matta ohtan8, né wutchippiyeum8 neg waskhikqueagig, kah wuttittanohtôadtuongan8 neg mag8kqunukqueagig.
E.17.14 And behold at eveningtide trouble; and before the morning he is not. This is the portion of them that spoil us, and the lot of them that rob us.

α.18.1 MIssi wutonkapunnaongan8 ne ohke wunnuppawhunne onkauuhtohhup, ne ogkomut Ethiopiáe sepuut.
E.18.1 Woe to the land shadowing with wings, which is beyond the rivers of Ethiopia:

α.18.2 Neg ann8noncheg ann8naénuh en ketahhanniyeu, ut misa[ssi]que kuht8nogquash ut wosketupam: n8waog, monchek kenupshae ann8nutcheg en naswae kah pissagkinnumwe wutohimoneat, en uhqueneunkque missinninnúut wutch wadj kutchissik yeu pajeh,; kuhkohhamwe kah tahtashkuhkôsue wutohtimoineat, noh wutohke sepu[á]sh matchehteauunash. 
E.18.2 That sendeth ambassadors by the sea, even in vessels of bulrushes upon the waters, saying, Go, ye swift messengers, to a nation scattered and peeled, to a people terrible from their beginning hitherto; a nation meted out and trodden down, whose land the rivers have spoiled!

α.18.3 Wame kenaau wadohkeógish muttaohket, kah wadohkitcheg ohkeit, naum8k, tahshinuk muttôag ut wadchutu, puhpequohtunk monopupeg, n8tok.
E.18.3 All ye inhabitants of the world, and dwellers on the earth, see ye, when he lifteth up an ensign on the mountains; and when he bloweth a trumpet, hear ye.

α.18.4 Newutche ne nuttukqunah Jehovah, nutanwôhsin, kah nunnatwontam ut n[ú]tayeuonganit, onatuh pohkôntag wunnepogquehtu, kah onatuh matokqse neechippog k[ô]soppittag kepenum8onk.
E.18.4 For so the LORD said unto me, I will take my rest, and I will consider in my dwelling place like a clear heat upon herbs, and like a cloud of dew in the heat of harvest.

α.18.5 Newutche asquam kakepenumómukup[,] wunn[e]ht8nunk pakodcheyeu88k, kah seane wenom kesan8htag tanohketeaonganit, pish wunnaneeswe tummussumunash wuttuhqunesash nashpe mukk8kussauwae h8ksash, kah amaunumunash, kah kouwehthamunash wuttuhqunash.
E.18.5 For afore the harvest, when the bud is perfect, and the sour grape is ripening in the flower, he shall both cut off the sprigs with pruning hooks, and take away and cut down the branches.

α.18.6 Nish pish moae nukkodtumunash wutche wadchue puppinshasog, kah ohkee puppinashimwut, kah puppinshasog pish wussequannussinuneau, kah wame ohkee puppinashimwog pish uppopónamineau.
E.18.6 They shall be left together unto the fowls of the mountains, and to the beasts of the earth: and the fowls shall summer upon them, and all the beasts of the earth shall winter upon them.

α.18.7 Ne ahquompak mag8onk pish paudtauun Jehovah ayeuteaunit, wutch nasw[á]yeue kah pissagkinnumwe missinninnuut, wutch unkqueneúnkqué missinninnúog wutch waj kûtchissik yeu pajeh, kuhkohhum8e wutohtimoin kah tahtashkuhkôsue ut musseetut, noh wutohke sepúash máchtteómuk, wehque wutayeuonganit Jehovah áyeuhteaunit, wadchuut Zion.
E.18.7 In that time shall the present be brought unto the LORD of hosts of a people scattered and peeled, and from a people terrible from their beginning hitherto; a nation meted out and trodden under foot, whose land the rivers have spoiled, to the place of the name of the LORD of hosts, the mount Zion.

α.19.1 OOWeanun Egypt, kusseh, Lord naiyeumuk kenupshae matokqs, kah pish peyaum8 Egypt, kah Egyptie nuuneukontúnkanog pish ontappúog ut anaquabit, kah wuttah Egypt pish mohtupohteau ut nôeu. 
E.19.1 The burden of Egypt. Behold, the LORD rideth upon a swift cloud, and shall come into Egypt: and the idols of Egypt shall be moved at his presence, and the heart of Egypt shall melt in the midst of it.

α.19.2 Kah Egyptiansog nummekonitteh Egyptiansog, kah nag nishnoh pasuk pish ayeuuhkonau wematoh; kah nishnoh pasuk ayeuuhkonittue weetatteamungoh, otan ayeuuhkonnittue otan, kah ass8tamóonk ayeuuhkonittue ass8tamóonk.
E.19.2 And I will set the Egyptians against the Egyptians: and they shall fight every one against his brother, and every one against his neighbour; city against city, and kingdom against kingdom.

α.19.3 Kah wunnashauonguh Egypt pish sauunumwoh ut nashauwe, kah pish nuppaguan ukkogkáhquttuongan8, kah nag pish natinnewhaog enineuhkontungoh, & mamontomoh kah pauwaoh, kah kôsukquomoh.
E.19.3 And the spirit of Egypt shall fail in the midst thereof; and I will destroy the counsel thereof: and they shall seek to the idols, and to the charmers, and to them that have familiar spirits, and to the wizards.

α.19.4 Kah nukkuppoh Egyptiansog en wunnutcheganit unkapinohteae sontimoh, kah chenauausu ketass8t pish nah wunnanawunuh, n8wau Lord, Jehvoah ayeuhteaunit.
E.19.4 And the Egyptians will I give over into the hand of a cruel lord; and a fierce king shall rule over them, saith the Lord, the LORD of hosts.

α.19.5 Kah nippe pish mahtsheau wutch ketahhanit, kah seip pish mahchim8 kah nunohteau.
E.19.5 And the waters shall fail from the sea, and the river shall be wasted and dried up.

α.19.6 Kah pish quinnuppechu[i]numwog seip en nôadtut, kah pummeneutonkane sepuash pish mohchiyeuash kah nunohtaash: wekinashquash, kah uppeanashkonog pish upp8taash.
E.19.6 And they shall turn the rivers far away; and the brooks of defence shall be emptied and dried up: the reeds and flags shall wither.

α.19.7 Wussukhum8e wekinashquash ut kishke sepuwussit, ut kutt8n8out sepuwussash, kah nishnoh teag ohteuhkon ut kishke sepuwussit pish uhp8taash, kah t8hanash, kah matta wonk ohtan8ash.
E.19.7 The paper reeds by the brooks, by the mouth of the brooks, and every thing sown by the brooks, shall wither, be driven away, and be no more.

α.19.8 Káh wonk n8tamogquaenuog pish mauog, kah neg wame omácheg sepuwussehtu pish mauog, kah nag sepagkenoncheg quomphunkoh ut nippekontu pish mahchimóog.
E.19.8 The fishers also shall mourn, and all they that cast angle into the brooks shall lament, and they that spread nets upon the waters shall languish.

α.19.9 Kah wonk neg anakausitcheg ut wunne hashabput, kah neg quompho[n]kônehteácheg, pish wohwohkukquianumóog,
E.19.9 Moreover they that work in fine flax, and they that weave networks, shall be confounded.

α.19.10 Kah nag pish pohquetahhamauóog uppogkodtantam8ongan8oash, wame neg ayigeg pahsohthegash kah nuppesash wutche nomohsog.
E.19.10 And they shall be broken in the purposes thereof, all that make sluices and ponds for fish.

α.19.11 Wunnamuhkut Zoane sontimóog as8tuog, kogahquttuonk 8waantamwe Pharo kogagqutteam8moh, puppinashimweyeu8: toh woh kuttin unnomw8 Pharoh, nen wunnau[m]onuh waantog, wunnaumonuh kehchiyeue ket[à]ss8tamwog?
E.19.11 Surely the princes of Zoan are fools, the counsel of the wise counsellors of Pharaoh is become brutish: how say ye unto Pharaoh, I am the son of the wise, the son of ancient kings?

α.19.12 Uttoh nag wutapinneau? uttiyeug waantamwog, kah nag yeuyeu unnukqush, kah wahteauhettich uttoh Jehovah ayeuhteaanit en pogkodtantog ut Egypt.
E.19.12 Where are they? where are thy wise men? and let them tell thee now, and let them know what the LORD of hosts hath purposed upon Egypt.

α.19.13 Zoane sontimóog as8tuog, Nophe sontimóog neg as8kekomóog, nag wonk panne[n]osheaog Egyptiansog, neg k[ô]namunoncheh ut wuchipán8ongan8out.
E.19.13 The princes of Zoan are become fools, the princes of Noph are deceived; they have also seduced Egypt, even they that are the stay of the tribes thereof.

α.19.14 Jehovah kenukunau wonke nashauonguh ut nôe, kah panneseaheáog Egyptiansoh nishnoh pasuk wutanakausuonganit, onatuh kogkeussippamwenin kehkepshont ut ummenadtam8onganit.
E.19.14 The LORD hath mingled a perverse spirit in the midst thereof: and they have caused Egypt to err in every work thereof, as a drunken man staggereth in his vomit.

α.19.15 Kah matta pish na anakausuonganinno wutch Egipt, ne muhpuhkuk asuh wussukqun, wuttuhkq asuh rush woh wutussen.
E.19.15 Neither shall there be any work for Egypt, which the head or tail, branch or rush, may do.

α.19.16 Ne kesukok Egypt pish ogqueneunkqussu mittamwossissut, kah pish wabesu, kah nag pish wabesuog newutch wuttattauwunnumóonk wunnutcheg Jehovah, ayeuteaanit, neh ogkomáe tattauwunnumauumpoh.
E.19.16 In that day shall Egypt be like unto women: and it shall be afraid and fear because of the shaking of the hand of the LORD of hosts, which he shaketh over it.

α.19.17 Kah Judae ohke pish ukquohquaquênauwanum8onganin en Egypt, nishnoh pasuk ne weogqutuk noh pish wabesu, wutche ukken8n8waonk Jehovah ayeuteaunit neh ayeuuhkonittue pakodtantog,
E.19.17 And the land of Judah shall be a terror unto Egypt, every one that maketh mention thereof shall be afraid in himself, because of the counsel of the LORD of hosts, which he hath determined against it.

α.19.18 Ne kesukok napanna tahshinash keitotanash, ut ohkit Egypt, unnont8waog Canaane unnont8w[à]onk, kah chadchekeimau Jehovah ayeuhteaanit, pasuk pish hennau, pagwanue keitotan.
E.19.18 In that day shall five cities in the land of Egypt speak the language of Canaan, and swear to the LORD of hosts; one shall be called, The city of destruction.

α.19.19 Ne kesukok na pish Altareu8 en Jehovahut ut nôeu Egypte ohkeit, kah pogkomuhquonk sussippôeu en Lord$ut.
E.19.19 In that day shall there be an altar to the LORD in the midst of the land of Egypt, and a pillar at the border thereof to the LORD.

α.19.20 Kah ne pish kuhkinneasuonganu8, kah wauwaonganu8 en Jehovah ayeute[à]anit ut ohkeit Egypt, newutche neg pish mauunitteauaog Jehovah wutche woskhuwacheg, kah noh pish ann8nau wadchanuwaenu[h], kah missugken, kah noh pish uppohquohwhunoh.
E.19.20 And it shall be for a sign and for a witness unto the LORD of hosts in the land of Egypt: for they shall cry unto the LORD because of the oppressors, and he shall send them a saviour, and a great one, and he shall deliver them.

α.19.21 Kah Jehovah pish waheau ut Egypt, kah Egyptiansog pish wahheaog Jehovah ne kesukok, kah pish sephausuog, kah mag8og, nux pish nag quoshauwaog quoshauwaonk en Jehovahut, kah pish wutusseneau.
E.19.21 And the LORD shall be known to Egypt, and the Egyptians shall know the LORD in that day, and shall do sacrifice and oblation; yea, they shall vow a vow unto the LORD, and perform it.

α.19.22 Kah Jehovah pish togkodtam Egypt, pish wuttogkodtamun, kah wunnetskehteauun: kah nag pish qushkeog en Jehovahut, kah noh pish nupweshanau, kah pish wunnetskeheuh.
E.19.22 And the LORD shall smite Egypt: he shall smite and heal it: and they shall return even to the LORD, and he shall be intreated of them, and shall heal them.

α.19.23 Ne kesukok na pish wunne may wutch Egypt en Assyria, kah wut-Assyrian pish petutteau Egypt, kah wut-Egy[g]tian en Assyria, kah Egyptiansog pish wuttinneumuhkauóog Assyriansoh.
E.19.23 In that day shall there be a highway out of Egypt to Assyria, and the Assyrian shall come into Egypt, and the Egyptian into Assyria, and the Egyptians shall serve with the Assyrians.

α.19.24 Ne kesukok, Israel noh pish nash8it weeche Egypt, kah weeche Assyria, wunanitteaonk ut nashaue ohkeit.
E.19.24 In that day shall Israel be the third with Egypt and with Assyria, even a blessing in the midst of the land:

α.19.25 Jehovah ayeuteaunit neh pish wunánumuh, n8wadt, Wunnánumunaj Egypt nummissinninneumog, kah Assyria nunnutchegane anakausuonk, kah Israel nutohtóonk.
E.19.25 Whom the LORD of hosts shall bless, saying, Blessed be Egypt my people, and Assyria the work of my hands, and Israel mine inheritance.

α.20.1 NE kôdtum8k Tartan paont Ashdod (Sargon Assyriae ketass8t ann8nont) kah mátomppagwuhkontog Ashdod, kah sohkog.
E.20.1 In the year that Tartan came unto Ashdod, (when Sargon the king of Assyria sent him,) and fought against Ashdod, and took it;

α.20.2 Kah ne na[n] ahquompi Jehovah ket8kau Isaiahoh wunnaumonuh Amoz, n8wau, Monchish ompanish man8tionak wutch kusseganit, kah kodokkussináish, kah ne wutussenáh, pòsqushau, kah mamóhchishkussitteau.
E.20.2 At the same time spake the LORD by Isaiah the son of Amoz, saying, Go and loose the sackcloth from off thy loins, and put off thy shoe from thy foot. And he did so, walking naked and barefoot.

α.20.3 Kah Jehovah n8wop, neane nuttinneum Isaiah posqushadt, kah mamóhchishkussitteadt nishwe kodtumwae wutche kuhkinneasuonk kah monchanatam8onk ut Egypt, kah ut Ethiopia.
E.20.3 And the LORD said, Like as my servant Isaiah hath walked naked and barefoot three years for a sign and wonder upon Egypt and upon Ethiopia;

α.20.4 Ne pish wuttinne Assyriae ketass8t missinóhko[uh] Egyptiansoh kah Ethiopiansoh, wuskênúh kah kutchisoh, poskissue kah mamohchishkussittaeu, kah poskitteáeu wutakodchinat Egypt.
E.20.4 So shall the king of Assyria lead away the Egyptians prisoners, and the Ethiopians captives, young and old, naked and barefoot, even with their buttocks uncovered, to the shame of Egypt.

α.20.5 Kah nag pish wabesuonóuh kah akodchuwóunóuh Ethiopia, annóonáhetticheh, kah Egypt wussohsum8ongan8uh.
E.20.5 And they shall be afraid and ashamed of Ethiopia their expectation, and of Egypt their glory.

α.20.6 Kah neg wadohkitcheg yeu ohkeit pish n8waog ne kesukok, kusseh, ne n$nih annoósuontamog uttoh asph8aogkup wutch nontummóadtuonk, pohquohwhunnittinneat wutch Assyriae ketass8t: kah uttoh woh kuttin pohquohhamunan?
E.20.6 And the inhabitant of this isle shall say in that day, Behold, such is our expectation, whither we flee for help to be delivered from the king of Assyria: and how shall we escape?

α.21.1 OWeanan ketahhanue touohkomuk: onatuh sowanishinne pemsquoh paumshadt, ne ne 8m88 touohkomuk, wutch u[n]kqunneunkquotte ohkeit.
E.21.1 The burden of the desert of the sea. As whirlwinds in the south pass through; so it cometh from the desert, from a terrible land.

α.21.2 Uhqunneunkquotte unnaumanissuonk n8wahteauwahit: wunass8muwaénin wanass8muwae unnéhhuau, kah matchehuwaénin matchehuau, kuhkuhquish, woi Elam: weenussumwehtok, woi Media; wame ummishanóm8ongan8 n8wohkukquoshitteauun.
E.21.2 A grievous vision is declared unto me; the treacherous dealer dealeth treacherously, and the spoiler spoileth. Go up, O Elam: besiege, O Media; all the sighing thereof have I made to cease.

α.21.3 Newaj nusséganit numwohteau onkquomom8onk, onkquomom8ongsh nuttohqunuk, onatuh wutonkquomom8onk mittumwussis neechadt, nunnauwáeep n8tamon, kah nutchepshomp naumon.
E.21.3 Therefore are my loins filled with pain: pangs have taken hold upon me, as the pangs of a woman that travaileth: I was bowed down at the hearing of it; I was dismayed at the seeing of it.

α.21.4 Nuttah nunnuksheau, wabesuonk n8w[a]buwunuk: n8wekontam8e nuhkon8m, ukquinnuppinnumun en 8wabesuontamunut.
E.21.4 My heart panted, fearfulness affrighted me: the night of my pleasure hath he turned into fear unto me.

α.21.5 Quashauwehtam8k table, askuhwekontam8k askuhwete[à]e$komukqut, meetsek kah wuttattam8k: omohkek sontim[ó]og, sussequnnumok ogqunneg.
E.21.5 Prepare the table, watch in the watchtower, eat, drink: arise, ye princes, and anoint the shield.

α.21.6 Newutche yeu nuttugqunah Lord, monchish askuhwheteaénin wunnash, wahteauwahuwaj uttoh [án] nag*.
E.21.6 For thus hath the LORD said unto me, Go, set a watchman, let him declare what he seeth.

α.21.7 Kah naum chariot, kah neesuog horsesoh nay8mukqutcheg, assese chariot, kah kamelse chariot; kah menuhke ahchuwussittámup.
E.21.7 And he saw a chariot with a couple of horsemen, a chariot of asses, and a chariot of camels; and he hearkened diligently with much heed:

α.21.8 Kah mishont8wop, qunnónou: nussontimom nunnagwutteae neepoh ut askuhwheteáe komukqut: kesukodtáe, kah askuhwhekonat n8nashit wowompannu.
E.21.8 And he cried, A lion: My lord, I stand continually upon the watchtower in the daytime, and I am set in my ward whole nights:

α.21.9 Kah kusseh, yeu ut peyom8 wosketompàe chariot, nes8og horsesoh nay8mukqutcheg, kah namp8ham kah n8wau, Babylon penushau, penushau, kah wame ummanitt8mue nunnukontunkanouh, uppohquttahwhoh en ohkeit. 
E.21.9 And, behold, here cometh a chariot of men, with a couple of horsemen. And he answered and said, Babylon is fallen, is fallen; and all the graven images of her gods he hath broken unto the ground.

α.21.10 Woi nuppogham8onk, kah ahhuttanuppoghamuk weatchiminneash, ne n8tamauogkup Lord ayeuteaanit, um$Manitt8moh Israel, k8wahteauwáhununeau.
E.21.10 O my threshing, and the corn of my floor: that which I have heard of the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel, have I declared unto you.

α.21.11 OOweanun Dumah: n8wehkomuk wutch Seir, askuhwheteaènin toh utt8che tipukod? askuhwheteaénin toh utt8che tipukod?
E.21.11 The burden of Dumah. He calleth to me out of Seir, Watchman, what of the night? Watchman, what of the night?

α.21.12 Askuhwheteaénin n8wau, mohtompan peyaum8, kah wonk nuhkon: kod nat8tomwehteáog, nat8tomwehteagk: qushkek, peyunk.
E.21.12 The watchman said, The morning cometh, and also the night: if ye will enquire, enquire ye: return, come.

α.21.13 OOweanun Arabia. Ut Arabiae touohkomukqut ne pish kukkouéneau, woi Dedanimáe chippan8e pomushaog.
E.21.13 The burden upon Arabia. In the forest in Arabia shall ye lodge, O ye travelling companies of Dedanim.

α.21.14 Wadohkitcheg Tema paudtauáog nippe noh kuhkutt8nutche, koshkomme assamáog petukqunneg neh wusseemunutcheh.
E.21.14 The inhabitants of the land of Tema brought water to him that was thirsty, they prevented with their bread him that fled.

α.21.15 Newutche nag wussemóog wutch tohkodteganehtu, wutch kodtunnum8e togkodteg[a]nit, wutch wonkinnónat ohtomp, wutch unkqunneungane mattompagwut.
E.21.15 For they fled from the swords, from the drawn sword, and from the bent bow, and from the grievousness of war.

α.21.16 Newutche yeu nuttugqunat Jehovah, ash nánukqut kodtumun8gkup, neaunag ne ukkodtum8m noh ann8nit, neit wame wussohsumóonk K[e]dar pish penusheau.
E.21.16 For thus hath the LORD said unto me, Within a year, according to the years of an hireling, and all the glory of Kedar shall fail:

α.21.17 Kah neg ashqushoncheg ne adtass8hettit pepummuwaenuog, ummissugkeneumoh wunnaumonuh Kedar, pish ogqusheáog, newutche Jehovah um-Manitt8moh Israel wussin.
E.21.17 And the residue of the number of archers, the mighty men of the children of Kedar, shall be diminished: for the LORD God of Israel hath spoken it.

α.22.1 OOWeanun monoma[u]sue 8nouhkoi, tohkutushpunam mamusse kuhquhqueog woskeche kommukquehtu.
E.22.1 The burden of the valley of vision. What aileth thee now, that thou art wholly gone up to the housetops?

α.22.2 K[é]n nomwabetunkquean wogkouongash, menumuhquáeu keitotan, wekontamwae otan, nushae k8wosketompomog, matta nushóog nashpe togkodteg, asuh matta nupp8[o]g ut ayeuwuttinneat.
E.22.2 Thou that art full of stirs, a tumultuous city, joyous city: thy slain men are not slain with the sword, nor dead in battle.

α.22.3 Wame nanawunnuácheg moáeu wussem8og, k[è]nepunukquog pepummuwaénúh, wame neg námteauunumukeg nehnesippissuog, neg nôadtit wadt8k[au]utcheg.
E.22.3 All thy rulers are fled together, they are bound by the archers: all that are found in thee are bound together, which have fled from far.

α.22.4 Newaj n8wi, p8nampameh, pish n8weesogkohpûs, ahchue taphehkon, wutche matcheheaongan8 wuttaun8oh nummissinninnúmog.
E.22.4 Therefore said I, Look away from me; I will weep bitterly, labour not to comfort me, because of the spoiling of the daughter of my people.

α.22.5 Newutche ne wuttamehpunáe kesukod, kah tahtashkuhkôadtin, kah unkque wuttaméhpunon nashpe Lord Jehovah ayeuteaunit, ut monomo[n]sue 8nouhkóiyeuut, n8kuhkonat wonkôn8sinash, kah mauongash nogque wadchuuhk[ó]ntu.
E.22.5 For it is a day of trouble, and of treading down, and of perplexity by the Lord GOD of hosts in the valley of vision, breaking down the walls, and of crying to the mountains.

α.22.6 Kah Elam kenunnum petan, nashpe wosketompae chariotsash, kah horsesoh nayeumukqutcheg, kah Kir poshkinumun ogqunneg.
E.22.6 And Elam bare the quiver with chariots of men and horsemen, and Kir uncovered the shield.

α.22.7 Kah pish n$nih, k8ne 8nouuhkóiyeumash pish nanumwohteau ch[e]riotsash, kah horsesoh nayeumukqutcheg, pish sepunnego[n]éhteaog en nogque squontam[é]htu.
E.22.7 And it shall come to pass, that thy choicest valleys shall be full of chariots, and the horsemen shall set themselves in array at the gate.

α.22.8 Kah miskom upputtaguhwheg Judah, kah ne kesukok, kummónunneamup ukkenauwameonk touohkomukque komukqut.
E.22.8 And he discovered the covering of Judah, and thou didst look in that day to the armour of the house of the forest.

α.22.9 Kah wonk kenaumumw8 pohquiyeue ukkeitotan David, nish monatash, kah kummohmóunumumw8 w8muhkôáge nippesse nippeash.
E.22.9 Ye have seen also the breaches of the city of David, that they are many: and ye gathered together the waters of the lower pool.

α.22.10 Kah kutogketamumw8 Jerusalem wetuomash, kah ken8kahteamw8 wetuomash menehketeauunat ummánsk.
E.22.10 And ye have numbered the houses of Jerusalem, and the houses have ye broken down to fortify the wall.

α.22.11 Kah wonk kutayimumw8 pasahtheg ut nashaue neese ummanskut, wutche nukkone nuppisse nuppe: qut matta kummonunnéan[ô]mw8 noh ne kezteunk, kah matta k8t8anumw8 noh kahkenauwehteunkup noadt.
E.22.11 Ye made also a ditch between the two walls for the water of the old pool: but ye have not looked unto the maker thereof, neither had respect unto him that fashioned it long ago.

α.22.12 Kah ne kesukok Lord Jehovah ayeuhteaunit k8wehkomukqun en mauunat, kah neuantamunat, kah mupukkontupónat, kah puttukquobpissineat man8tionak.
E.22.12 And in that day did the Lord GOD of hosts call to weeping, and to mourning, and to baldness, and to girding with sackcloth:

α.22.13 Kah kusseh weekontamóonk, kah muskouantamoonk, nushaonk oxenóg, kah shepsog, meechuonk weyaus, kah wuttattamoonk wine meetsitteuh kah wuttattamutt[u]h, newutche saup pish kenupmun.
E.22.13 And behold joy and gladness, slaying oxen, and killing sheep, eating flesh, and drinking wine: let us eat and drink; for to morrow we shall die.

α.22.14 Kah wahteauwahuwonáh ut nehtauogkut, nashpe Jehovah ayeute[a]anit, wunnamuhkut yeu matcheseonk matta pish pahketeauun ut kuhhogkaóut, nô pajeh kenuppunnaôont, n8wau Lord Jehovah ayeuhteaunit.
E.22.14 And it was revealed in mine ears by the LORD of hosts, Surely this iniquity shall not be purged from you till ye die, saith the Lord GOD of hosts.

α.22.15 Yeu wussin Lord Jehovah ayuhteaunit, monchish, aush noh nompak8 wadchanuk, noh Shebna, noh piohquttuk wetu, n8wash.
E.22.15 Thus saith the Lord GOD of hosts, Go, get thee unto this treasurer, even unto Shebna, which is over the house, and say,

α.22.16 Teagus kutahto yeu$ut? kah teaguas kutahto na$ut? waj 8neeteáan weenohke yeu$ut: noh weenohkéhkauont wuhhogkuh qunuhqu: kah waneúhquttamauont wuhhogkuh wetu ut qussukquanit?
E.22.16 What hast thou here? and whom hast thou here, that thou hast hewed thee out a sepulchre here, as he that heweth him out a sepulchre on high, and that graveth an habitation for himself in a rock?

α.22.17 Kusseh Jehovah pish kummishe missinóhkônittue monchanuk, kah pish wunnamuhkut kupputtaguhhuk.
E.22.17 Behold, the LORD will carry thee away with a mighty captivity, and will surely cover thee.

α.22.18 Noh pish wunnamuhkut chekee k8wahwaapuhkunk onatuh pompasukonganit, en mishékishku wutohtimóneat, na pish kuttit nuppuneau: kah na pish kuttit sohsumoe chariotsash akodjteauunat kussontimom wek.
E.22.18 He will surely violently turn and toss thee like a ball into a large country: there shalt thou die, and there the chariots of thy glory shall be the shame of thy lord's house.

α.22.19 Kah push kutáma8koush wutch kutayeuonganit, kah wutch k8niyeuonganit pish ken8kinuk.
E.22.19 And I will drive thee from thy station, and from thy state shall he pull thee down.

α.22.20 Kah pish n$nih ne kesukok, pish n8wehkom nuttinneum Eliakim wunnaumonuh Hilkiah.
E.22.20 And it shall come to pass in that day, that I will call my servant Eliakim the son of Hilkiah:

α.22.21 Kah pish nuthogqueh kuppetashqusháonk, kah nummenuhkeh wutch kupputtukquobissu, kah nupponam kena[n]ánuwaonk ut wunnutcheganit, kah noh pish 8sh8oh wadohkitcheg Jerusalem, & en wekit Judah.
E.22.21 And I will clothe him with thy robe, and strengthen him with thy girdle, and I will commit thy government into his hand: and he shall be a father to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and to the house of Judah.

α.22.22 Kah David weke pohquoshadtikunk, nukquenohtauun wuttugkit: ne pish wuttin wôshinnumun, kah matta pish howan kupham8un, kah noh pish ukkuphamun, kah matta pish howan uppohqu[à]num8un.
E.22.22 And the key of the house of David will I lay upon his shoulder; so he shall open, and none shall shut; and he shall shut, and none shall open.

α.22.23 Kah nukkishpun onatuh kenontukqueg ut wunnamuhkutée ayeuonganit, kah noh pish sohsumóe appuonk 8shoh wekit.
E.22.23 And I will fasten him as a nail in a sure place; and he shall be for a glorious throne to his father's house.

α.22.24 Kah nag pish 8waôhshanóuh wame 8shoh week8e sohsumóonk, wutontseon, kah wutontsétuonk, wame papeasike wishquash wutch wuttattamóe wishquadt, pajeh wame kehchéshquadt.
E.22.24 And they shall hang upon him all the glory of his father's house, the offspring and the issue, all vessels of small quantity, from the vessels of cups, even to all the vessels of flagons.

α.22.25 Ne kesukok, n8wau Jehovah ayeuhteaunit, kenontukquontunk ne manuhkehteamuk ut wunnamuhkutée ayeuonganit, pish ontahtauun, kah pish tummes[s]umun, kah penusheau; kah weanun ne na quenohtagkup ish tummussumun, newutche Jehovah ukkutt8kontámun.
E.22.25 In that day, saith the LORD of hosts, shall the nail that is fastened in the sure place be removed, and be cut down, and fall; and the burden that was upon it shall be cut off: for the LORD hath spoken it.

α.23.1 OOWeanun Tyre. OOn8k kenaau Tarshishe kuht8nogquog, newutche mahchim8, newaj matta wetuwomun8g, wanne petutteau[n]: wutch Chittimme ohkeit nag wahteauwahuoneau.
E.23.1 The burden of Tyre. Howl, ye ships of Tarshish; for it is laid waste, so that there is no house, no entering in: from the land of Chittim it is revealed to them.

α.23.2 Chequnappek wadohkeógish munóhhanéhtu, ken, Zidone anaqushaenuog neg quoshkodteacheg keitoh, ken[a]mwamechumuhkonukquog.
E.23.2 Be still, ye inhabitants of the isle; thou whom the merchants of Zidon, that pass over the sea, have replenished.

α.23.3 Kah nashpe mishe nippeash, wusk[a]nnem Sihor, sepue kepenumóonk ne wutteashegen8m, kah noh wutohtim[o]inne ahhut kodtauwompa[simu]k.
E.23.3 And by great waters the seed of Sihor, the harvest of the river, is her revenue; and she is a mart of nations.

α.23.4 Akodchish, woi Zidon, newutche keitoh ket8hkau, ummenuhkesuonk keitoh, n8wau, matta nukkodta[u]wekhe[ó]h, asuh nunneechóh, asuh matta n8nadchan8 wuskenuog, asuh matta n8wadchan8 nunksquaog.
E.23.4 Be thou ashamed, O Zidon: for the sea hath spoken, even the strength of the sea, saying, I travail not, nor bring forth children, neither do I nourish up young men, nor bring up virgins.

α.23.5 Onatuh neantunkquok papaume Egypt, ne pish wuttin unkque onkquomominneau n8tamwahettit papaume Tyre.
E.23.5 As at the report concerning Egypt, so shall they be sorely pained at the report of Tyre.

α.23.6 Qushkodteagk Tarshish 8n8k kenaau wadohkeógish munohhanit.
E.23.6 Pass ye over to Tarshish; howl, ye inhabitants of the isle.

α.23.7 Sun yeu k8wekontamwe otaneau, na wunnukkoneayeu8onk wutch n8adt? nehenwonche wussetash pish noadtit uss8unuk pen8wohteauneat.
E.23.7 Is this your joyous city, whose antiquity is of ancient days? her own feet shall carry her afar off to sojourn.

α.23.8 Howan yeu nemunuk kogahquttaonk ayeuuhkonittue Tyre, chetuhquabinnuwae keitotan, wutanaqushaenúmoh sontimaúooh, ukkodtauwompasuéneumoh neg quttiánumukqussuog ut ohkeit?
E.23.8 Who hath taken this counsel against Tyre, the crowning city, whose merchants are princes, whose traffickers are the honourable of the earth?

α.23.9 Jehovah ayeuteaunit uppogkodtantamun nishketeauunat wame pehtuánumwe sohsumóonk, kah jishónumwaheonaóont wame quohtianumukqussitcheg ohkeit.
E.23.9 The LORD of hosts hath purposed it, to stain the pride of all glory, and to bring into contempt all the honourable of the earth.

α.23.10 Papannupohkash kutohke onatuh sepuut, woi wuttaunoh Tarshish: matta na wonk menuhkesuonganunn8.
E.23.10 Pass through thy land as a river, O daughter of Tarshish: there is no more strength.

α.23.11 Summ[a]gunum wunnutcheg woskeche kehtahhanit, nunnukshadto ass8tam8ongash, Jehovah ann8team8 ayeuuhkonittue anaqusháe otan, paguatauunat ummenehtekomukquash.
E.23.11 He stretched out his hand over the sea, he shook the kingdoms: the LORD hath given a commandment against the merchant city, to destroy the strong holds thereof.

α.23.12 Kah n8wau, neketeashe wekontamun, woi ken mukk8kinae penomp, wuttaunoh Zidon, omkish qushkodteash en Chittim, na$ut wonk matt apish wonk k8tanwôsinn8onganéin.
E.23.12 And he said, Thou shalt no more rejoice, O thou oppressed virgin, daughter of Zidon: arise, pass over to Chittim; there also shalt thou have no rest.

α.23.13 Kusseh, wutohkeeu Caldeansog yeug missinninnuog matta appupaneg noh pajeh Assyriansog quenohtae ponamwog wutche nag wadohkitcheg touohkomuk: nag wunohtóog ukqunuhque kommuk88ash, nag tahshinnumwog ummishe kommuk88ash, kah uppaguatauun.
E.23.13 Behold the land of the Chaldeans; this people was not, till the Assyrian founded it for them that dwell in the wilderness: they set up the towers thereof, they raised up the palaces thereof; and he brought it to ruin.

α.23.14 OOn8k kenaau Tarshishe kuht8[n]ogquog, newutche kummenuhkesuognan8 mohtupa[sh]in.
E.23.14 Howl, ye ships of Tarshish: for your strength is laid waste.

α.23.15 Kah pish n$nih ne kesukok, Tyre pish wanantamun nesausuk tahshinchage kodtumwae, neaunak ukkesukodtumash pasuk ketass8t, mahtshunk nesausuk tahshinchage kodtum8, Tyre pish ogk8humau kogkeeusqua[u]t.
E.23.15 And it shall come to pass in that day, that Tyre shall be forgotten seventy years, according to the days of one king: after the end of seventy years shall Tyre sing as an harlot.

α.23.16 Nemunush harp papaumwushash otanat, ken kogkeeusquau wananumunumuk, wunont8ash, m8cheke, unn8humush onk woh kummehquanumit.
E.23.16 Take an harp, go about the city, thou harlot that hast been forgotten; make sweet melody, sing many songs, that thou mayest be remembered.

α.23.17 Kah pish n$nih, mahtshunk nesausuk tahshinchage kodtumm8, Jehovah pish nátauwahto Tyre, kah noh pish quinnuppu ponampóadtinneat, kah pish nanwun8dsquáôsu en wame ass8tam8onganehtu muttaohket, ut woskeche ohkeit.
E.23.17 And it shall come to pass after the end of seventy years, that the LORD will visit Tyre, and she shall turn to her hire, and shall commit fornication with all the kingdoms of the world upon the face of the earth.

α.23.18 Kah nish kodtauwompasitcheh, kah ne ponampauut pish wunnetupanatamweyeu8 Jehovahut: ne matta pish nompak8unehtaun asuh wadchanum8un, newutche ukkodtauwompasuonk pish wutche nag apitcheg anaquabit Jehovah, tapupwunneat, kah sephogk8unon.
E.23.18 And her merchandise and her hire shall be holiness to the LORD: it shall not be treasured nor laid up; for her merchandise shall be for them that dwell before the LORD, to eat sufficiently, and for durable clothing.

α.24.1 KUsseh, Jehovah wussequnnumun ohke kah ummohtupáshitteauun, kah 8nim[usk]inumun, kah seahwau neh ne wadohkinitcheh.
E.24.1 Behold, the LORD maketh the earth empty, and maketh it waste, and turneth it upside down, and scattereth abroad the inhabitants thereof.

α.24.2 Kah pish n$nih, ne anihettit missinninnuog, ne wuttinninneau sephausuaenuog, nea[in]it wuttinneumin, ne wuttinniin wussontimomun, neaniit nunksquoh, ne wuttinniin wussonksquomoh, neaniit adtôadt ne wuttinniin noh maguk, neaniit nagohkouaenin ne wuttinniin noh nogo[h]kouónit, ne aniit noh neemunuk onts[a]uohteaonk ne wuttinniin noh maguk ontsouohteaonk.
E.24.2 And it shall be, as with the people, so with the priest; as with the servant, so with his master; as with the maid, so with her mistress; as with the buyer, so with the seller; as with the lender, so with the borrower; as with the taker of usury, so with the giver of usury to him.

α.24.3 Ohke pish papuhquanne sequnnumun kah papuhquanne matcheteauun, newutche Jehovah wussin yeu kutt8onk. 
E.24.3 The land shall be utterly emptied, and utterly spoiled: for the LORD hath spoken this word.

α.24.4 Ohke maum8, kah mohtsheau, muttaok mahchum8, kah mahchum8, pahtuánumwee[n]unkqussitcheg ohkeit mahchum8og.
E.24.4 The earth mourneth and fadeth away, the world languisheth and fadeth away, the haughty people of the earth do languish.

α.24.5 Kah wonk ohke nishketeauun ut agwe neg wadohkitcheg, newutche panneussehtauáog naumatuonguh, ôs8wunnumwog kuhk8waonk, pohquenumwog m[à]chemohtag wunn8waonk.
E.24.5 The earth also is defiled under the inhabitants thereof; because they have transgressed the laws, changed the ordinance, broken the everlasting covenant.

α.24.6 Newaj matánittuonk paguodtunk ohke, kah neg na apitcheg touwiyeuog, newaj wadohkitcheg ohkeit chikohsuog, kah ogguhsuog sequhkussuog.
E.24.6 Therefore hath the curse devoured the earth, and they that dwell therein are desolate: therefore the inhabitants of the earth are burned, and few men left.

α.24.7 Wuske wine mau, weenomwussippog mahchum8, wame pôanittamwutteahoncheg mishanom8og.
E.24.7 The new wine mourneth, the vine languisheth, all the merryhearted do sigh.

α.24.8 Tabretse wunont8waonk ahquohteau, 8wadtauatonkqussuongan8 neg wekontogig wohkukquoshin, harpe wekontamóonk ahquohteau.
E.24.8 The mirth of tabrets ceaseth, the noise of them that rejoice endeth, the joy of the harp ceaseth.

α.24.9 Nag matta pish unn8hamae wuttattamwog wine, onkuppe pish 8wesogkonhúkquneau neg wadtattogig.
E.24.9 They shall not drink wine with a song; strong drink shall be bitter to them that drink it.

α.24.10 Nanwohteae otan pokshadtauun, nish noh wetu kuppuhhôsu, onk woh mo howae wosketomp petutteóou.
E.24.10 The city of confusion is broken down: every house is shut up, that no man may come in.

α.24.11 Wuttohposuog wine ut maikontu, wame wekontamóonk pohkenashin, 8wekontamóonk ohke mohtsheau.
E.24.11 There is a crying for wine in the streets; all joy is darkened, the mirth of the land is gone.

α.24.12 Ut otanat touushin nukkodtumun, kah ussquont togkodtamun paguanuonk.
E.24.12 In the city is left desolation, and the gate is smitten with destruction.

α.24.13 Yeu n$nagk ut noeu ohkeit, ut kenugke missinninnútu, na pish neaneyeu8 nenemonteamuk oliveuhtug, kah mukkuposquae weenominneash mohtouwunneamuk.
E.24.13 When thus it shall be in the midst of the land among the people, there shall be as the shaking of an olive tree, and as the gleaning grapes when the vintage is done.

α.24.14 Nag pish mishont8waog, pish unn8homa[o]g newutche ukquttianumukqussuonk Jehovah, nag pish mishont8waog wutch kehtahhannit.
E.24.14 They shall lift up their voice, they shall sing for the majesty of the LORD, they shall cry aloud from the sea.

α.24.15 Newutche sohsum8wón8k Jehovah ut n8taut, 8wesuonk Jehovah um-Manitt8moh Israel ut ketahhanne munnahanash.
E.24.15 Wherefore glorify ye the LORD in the fires, even the name of the LORD God of Israel in the isles of the sea.

α.24.16 Wutch aongkauohkomuk n8tamumun ket8homàongash, sohsum8ón8k sampweusseaen, qut nussip, nutônauwussuonk, nutônauwussuonk, missi nutonkapunnaonk: wunass8muwaenuog wunass8muwaog, nux wunass8muwaenuog ahche wunass8muwaog.
E.24.16 From the uttermost part of the earth have we heard songs, even glory to the righteous. But I said, My leanness, my leanness, woe unto me! the treacherous dealers have dealt treacherously; yea, the treacherous dealers have dealt very treacherously.

α.24.17 Wabesuonk, kah pahsahtheg, kah ahpeh kenuhkuhkongquog, woi w[a]dohkeógish ohkeit.
E.24.17 Fear, and the pit, and the snare, are upon thee, O inhabitant of the earth.

α.24.18 Kah pish n$nih, noh waseemwuhteog wadtauatonkqussue wabesuonk, pish petshau psahtheganit, kah noh sohhog wutch noeu psahtheganit, pish puttahwhôu: newutche kenogkanégash wutch waabe wôhshwohtaash, kah ohkee quenohtagish nunnukshaash.
E.24.18 And it shall come to pass, that he who fleeth from the noise of the fear shall fall into the pit; and he that cometh up out of the midst of the pit shall be taken in the snare: for the windows from on high are open, and the foundations of the earth do shake.

α.24.19 Ohke papuhquanne poksheau, ohke papaquanne naswáshin, ohke m8cheke ontohteau.
E.24.19 The earth is utterly broken down, the earth is clean dissolved, the earth is moved exceedingly.

α.24.20 Ohke pish kekepsheau onatuh kogkeissippamwén, kah pish ogque ontaht[à]uun wetuómut, kah uppanneusseonk pish wuttuhkékhúkqun, kah pish penusheau, kah matta wonk omohkemun8[-]
E.24.20 The earth shall reel to and fro like a drunkard, and shall be removed like a cottage; and the transgression thereof shall be heavy upon it; and it shall fall, and not rise again.

α.24.21 Kah pish n$nih ne kesukok, Jehovah pish sasamatahwhau wutayeuwehtóm8uh quanunkqussitcheg, neg quanukquapicheg, kah ohkee ketass8tamwog, wosketohke.
E.24.21 And it shall come to pass in that day, that the LORD shall punish the host of the high ones that are on high, and the kings of the earth upon the earth.

α.24.22 Kah nag pish miyaéog onatuh kopshagkinatcheg moéhettit ut psahtheganit, kah pish kuppuhwhóog ut kuppishshagkinnittuonganit, kah mahtshik monatash kesukquash pish natauwaheóop.
E.24.22 And they shall be gathered together, as prisoners are gathered in the pit, and shall be shut up in the prison, and after many days shall they be visited.

α.24.23 Neit nahnepauhshadt pish mishakodcheheau, kah nepâuz akodchu, Jehovah ayeuteaunit tahs8tam8it ut Zion kah ut Jerusalem, kah ut anaquabenit ukkehchiyeumoh, sohsumóe.
E.24.23 Then the moon shall be confounded, and the sun ashamed, when the LORD of hosts shall reign in mount Zion, and in Jerusalem, and before his ancients gloriously.

α.25.1 WOi Jehovah, ken num-Manitt8m, kummishhesh, n8woweenodtum k8wesuonk, newutche kummonchanatamwe ussem, kenukkone kogohk8waongash pabuhtanumukqussuonk, kah wunnamuhkutéyeuuk.
E.25.1 O Lord, thou art my God; I will exalt thee, I will praise thy name; for thou hast done wonderful things; thy counsels of old are faithfulness and truth.

α.25.2 Newutche kenumwonkwâhteoh keitotan, k8weepótóhteam pummeneutaúsue otan: wanne kutotanáhtu ut papeáhetti penuwohteaog, matta pish wonk ayim8un.
E.25.2 For thou hast made of a city an heap; of a defenced city a ruin: a palace of strangers to be no city; it shall never be built.

α.25.3 Newaj pish menuhkesue missinninnuog sohsum8ónukquean, unkqueneunkque wutohtimonne keitotan pish k8wabesuonuk.
E.25.3 Therefore shall the strong people glorify thee, the city of the terrible nations shall fear thee.

α.25.4 Newutche ken ummenuhkesuonk machéku, ummenuhkesuonk quenauhikquit, ut ukquehquenauánumwinneat, ushpuhh8waonk wuch mishe tahshinit, onkauohteau wutche kussitteau, upp8tómuwaonk uhqunneunkqussitcheg moshtashuhkontamwéhhettiche pummeneutunk.
E.25.4 For thou hast been a strength to the poor, a strength to the needy in his distress, a refuge from the storm, a shadow from the heat, when the blast of the terrible ones is as a storm against the wall.

α.25.5 Pish kuppeéhteoh 8wadtauatonkqussuongan8 penuwohteaog, onatuh kussittea[u] ut nunnobohteaoúut, kussitteau nashpe mahtohqse onkauohteau: 8tukqunn8 uhqunneunkqussitcheg pish n8kinnumun.
E.25.5 Thou shalt bring down the noise of strangers, as the heat in a dry place; even the heat with the shadow of a cloud: the branch of the terrible ones shall be brought low.

α.25.6 Kah yeuut wadchuut Jehovah ayeuteaunit pish weesée mishadtupweheau wame missinninnúh, sekqskausháe wine mishadtup8onk, wâónogqutcheg numwohteau ween sekqskaushae wine, wunnehteausu.
E.25.6 And in this mountain shall the LORD of hosts make unto all people a feast of fat things, a feast of wines on the lees, of fat things full of marrow, of wines on the lees well refined.

α.25.7 Kah yeuut wadchuut, pish paguanau woskechee onkwheg, onkwhut wame missinninnúog, kah puttogwheg sepáginaúsik wame wutohtim[ô]neat.
E.25.7 And he will destroy in this mountain the face of the covering cast over all people, and the vail that is spread over all nations.

α.25.8 Pish sohkôsue misheáskóu nupp8onk, kah Lord Jehovah pish jishkham wussippwegwash wutch wame muskesukqut, kah auskomaonk ummissinninnúmoh pish wutamaunumun wutch ohkeit: newutche Jehovah ukkutt8kontamun.
E.25.8 He will swallow up death in victory; and the Lord GOD will wipe away tears from off all faces; and the rebuke of his people shall he take away from off all the earth: for the LORD hath spoken it.

α.25.9 Kah pish unn8won ne kesukok, kusseh, yeuoh kum-Manitt8mun, nuppáhtsuwóunóun, kah noh pish k8wadchanukqun, yeuoh Jehovah, nuppáhtsuwóunnóun, n8wekontamumun, kah nummuskouantamumun ut 8wadchnuonganit.
E.25.9 And it shall be said in that day, Lo, this is our God; we have waited for him, and he will save us: this is the LORD; we have waited for him, we will be glad and rejoice in his salvation.

α.25.10 Newutche yeu$ut wadchuut wunnutcheg, Jehovah pish anwohshin, kah Moab pish tahtashkuhkauaû ut wutagwiyeumut, onatuh sekuppogheg tahtashkuhkomuk wutche anadtuppúhkout.
E.25.10 For in this mountain shall the hand of the LORD rest, and Moab shall be trodden down under him, even as straw is trodden down for the dunghill.

α.25.11 Kah pish sepagunum wunnutchegash ut wunnashom8wóut, onatuh noh pâmôs8wit sepagunuk wunnutcheash en pamôs8wénat, kah tiahquonkheau pehtuánum8m8uh moeu, nashwunnutchegane sequttahham8ongash.
E.25.11 And he shall spread forth his hands in the midst of them, as he that swimmeth spreadeth forth his hands to swim: and he shall bring down their pride together with the spoils of their hands.

α.25.12 Kah negonohtog kuppummeneutausue umma[n]shk pish wunn8kinnumun, tiuhquonkshin, ohkeit uppaudtauun, puppissiyeuut.
E.25.12 And the fortress of the high fort of thy walls shall he bring down, lay low, and bring to the ground, even to the dust.

α.26.1 NE kesukok, yeu unn8homaonk pish unn8hamon ut ohkeit Judah, nutohtomu menuhki keitotan, God pish kuhquttum wadchanittuonk wutche pummeneutungash kah ummaushkàsh.
E.26.1 In that day shall this song be sung in the land of Judah; We have a strong city; salvation will God appoint for walls and bulwarks.

α.26.2 W[ô]hshinum8k ushquontamash, onk woh sampweusseae wutohtimóin, noh nanawehteunk wanamuhkutéye[u]uk uppetukon.
E.26.2 Open ye the gates, that the righteous nation which keepeth the truth may enter in.

α.26.3 Ken pish kenanaweh ut pannuppee wunohteaonganit, noh ompatussum8wónukquean wuttah, newutche kuppabahtanumuk
E.26.3 Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on thee: because he trusteth in thee.

α.26.4 Pabahtanumok Jehovah micheme, newutche ut Lord Jehovahut noh michemohtáe menuhkesuonk
E.26.4 Trust ye in the LORD for ever: for in the LORD JEHOVAH is everlasting strength:

α.26.5 Newutche n8kinau neh quanunkquiinitcheh, quanunkquok otan, wutti[ú]hquonkqutteauun, wuttiuhquonkqutteauun pajeh ohkeit, uppuppissiyeúhkon.
E.26.5 For he bringeth down them that dwell on high; the lofty city, he layeth it low; he layeth it low, even to the ground; he bringeth it even to the dust.

α.26.6 Musset pish wuttashkuhkomun, matcheku wusseet, wutôntañehtuongash quenahukquit.
E.26.6 The foot shall tread it down, even the feet of the poor, and the steps of the needy.

α.26.7 Ummay sampweusseaen ne samp8hássuonk: ken anue samp8hassean, kukqutompagh8toh ummay sampweusseaen.
E.26.7 The way of the just is uprightness: thou, most upright, dost weigh the path of the just.

α.26.8 Nux ut k8sittum8e mayut, woi Jehovah, kuppahtsuwóunumun: ukkodtantam8onk nukketeahogkôunun ut k8wesuonganit, kah kummequanumitteanat.
E.26.8 Yea, in the way of thy judgments, O LORD, have we waited for thee; the desire of our soul is to thy name, and to the remembrance of thee.

α.26.9 Nashpe nukketeahogkou kukkodtanumush nuhkonáeu, nux nashpe nunnashaonk nuttinnómiyeumut, nompoáe kenatinneáwhush, newutche k8sittum8ongash ohtag ohkeit, wadohkitcheg muttaohkit pish net[u]htauog sampweusseonk.
E.26.9 With my soul have I desired thee in the night; yea, with my spirit within me will I seek thee early: for when thy judgments are in the earth, the inhabitants of the world will learn righteousness.

α.26.10 Nahtinit kitteamonteanittuonk matchetóog, matta pish netuhtóou sampweusseonk, ut sampweusseae ohkeit pish panne unnehuau, kah matta pish naum8 ukquehtianumáonk Jehovah.
E.26.10 Let favour be shewed to the wicked, yet will he not learn righteousness: in the land of uprightness will he deal unjustly, and will not behold the majesty of the LORD.

α.26.11 Jehovah kenutcheg tahshinnuman, nag matta pish naum8og: qut pish wunnaumuneau: kah pish akodchuog wutche wutishkau[é]naongan8 kummissinninnumoh, nux wunn8tom8 kummatwomog pish nah ummahchukkiswôh.
E.26.11 LORD, when thy hand is lifted up, they will not see: but they shall see, and be ashamed for their envy at the people; yea, the fire of thine enemies shall devour them.

α.26.12 Jehovah, pish kukkuhquttumaiimun wunohteaonk, newutche ken wonk kuttinanakausuwánshimun wame nutanakausuwonganonash.
E.26.12 LORD, thou wilt ordain peace for us: for thou also hast wrought all our works in us.

α.26.13 Woi Jehovah num-Manitt8mun, onkatogig sontimòog chabissitcheg onk ken nanawunukqunnónuppanneg, qut nashpe ken webe nummishamumun k8wesuonk.
E.26.13 O LORD our God, other lords beside thee have had dominion over us: but by thee only will we make mention of thy name.

α.26.14 Nag nupp8k, matta pish pomantam8og: nag wohkukquossinwog, matta pish omohkeog, newaj natauwáhheadt, kah kuppaguanóog, kah k8wa[n]teauwahto wame mehquanumaongan8.
E.26.14 They are dead, they shall not live; they are deceased, they shall not rise: therefore hast thou visited and destroyed them, and made all their memory to perish.

α.26.15 Nano kummishteóh wutohtimoin, woi Jehovah, nano kumishteóh wutohtimóin, kussohsumwahit: noadtit kuttinontahtauun, en wame ongkouohkomukqut.
E.26.15 Thou hast increased the nation, O LORD, thou hast increased the nation: thou art glorified: thou hadst removed it far unto all the ends of the earth.

α.26.16 Jehovah, wadtamehpunáhettit, kenatauwahikquog, sokanumwog peantamóonk, kussasamatahh8waonk nohkugkonkqhettit.
E.26.16 LORD, in trouble have they visited thee, they poured out a prayer when thy chastening was upon them.

α.26.17 Onatuh póseu mittamwossis pas8sukog adt woh neechadt, onkquommamwit, kah môe onkquommamwit, ne nuttinniinnean ut anaquabean, woi Jehovah.
E.26.17 Like as a woman with child, that draweth near the time of her delivery, is in pain, and crieth out in her pangs; so have we been in thy sight, O LORD.

α.26.18 Nuppôosimun, nutonkquomomumun, nunneechámun onatuh wuttin, matta nutussûmun pohquawhunnittuonk ut ohkeit, asuh matta wadohkitcheg muttaohkit penusha8og.
E.26.18 We have been with child, we have been in pain, we have as it were brought forth wind; we have not wrought any deliverance in the earth; neither have the inhabitants of the world fallen.

α.26.19 Kenupp8mog pish pomantamwog, nashpe nunnupp8e muhhog nag pish omohkeog: t8kek kah ket8hamunk kenaau wadohkeógish p[ù]ppissiyeuut: newutche keneechippogkum tatuppeyeu8 herbse neechippogkut, kah ohke pish sohwóhteau nupp8oh.
E.26.19 Thy dead men shall live, together with my dead body shall they arise. Awake and sing, ye that dwell in dust: for thy dew is as the dew of herbs, and the earth shall cast out the dead.

α.26.20 Peyunk nummissinninnúmog, petutteash ut kutchambersumut, kah y[â]nitteanumush quinnuppu, puttogquish onatuh ogguhse, noh pajeh paumushaum8uk musquanittuonk
E.26.20 Come, my people, enter thou into thy chambers, and shut thy doors about thee: hide thyself as it were for a little moment, until the indignation be overpast.

α.26.21 Newutche kusseh, Jehovah wutch sohham wutáyeuonganit sasamatahwhonat wadohkitcheg ohkeit wutch ummatcheseongan8, ohke wonk pish wóhshwem8 8sqheonk, kah matta pish wonk onkwhóou nohtauwutcheh.
E.26.21 For, behold, the LORD cometh out of his place to punish the inhabitants of the earth for their iniquity: the earth also shall disclose her blood, and shall no more cover her slain.

α.27.1 NE kesukok Jehovah nashpe kehkechiyeue & missi & menuhki wutogkodteg pish sasamatahwhau Leviathanoh pannupshae ask8k, nux Leviathan noh pepemsque ask8k kah pish nushau dragonoh ut kehtahhanit.
E.27.1 In that day the LORD with his sore and great and strong sword shall punish leviathan the piercing serpent, even leviathan that crooked serpent; and he shall slay the dragon that is in the sea.

α.27.2 Ne kesukok ket8hamok, musqui wine weenominneohteuk.
E.27.2 In that day sing ye unto her, A vineyard of red wine.

α.27.3 Nen Jehovah nanawehteauun, nutogqutchippadtauun nishnoh utt8che: ishkont howan ummatchteauun, nunnanawehteauun nukkonaeu, kah kesukodaeu.
E.27.3 I the LORD do keep it; I will water it every moment: lest any hurt it, I will keep it night and day.

α.27.4 Mishe musquantam8onk matta nutapehtunk8un: howan woh ayeuuhkonittue ponumunkque kôussoh kah hasinnekôussoh? neg woh nuppannupwushonunk, woh nummoáeu chikoswoog.
E.27.4 Fury is not in me: who would set the briers and thorns against me in battle? I would go through them, I would burn them together.

α.27.5 Asuh menuhkinitch nummenuhkesuonk, onk woh n8nohkonuk, kah noh pish n8nohkonuk.
E.27.5 Or let him take hold of my strength, that he may make peace with me; and he shall make peace with me.

α.27.6 Neg ontsécheg wutch Jakobut pish 8wadchabukeheuh: Israel pish péshauau, kah wunéht8nuhquamú8, kah pish numwohtou woskeche muttaohkit nashpe meechummuonk.
E.27.6 He shall cause them that come of Jacob to take root: Israel shall blossom and bud, and fill the face of the world with fruit.

α.27.7 Sun noh togkomau, neane togkomont neg togkomoncheg? sun nushau, neaunag nushaongan8 neh náshoncheh?
E.27.7 Hath he smitten him, as he smote those that smote him? or is he slain according to the slaughter of them that are slain by him?

α.27.8 Quttuhwhosue sontipohshunk, neit kukkeket8hkonau, kuppahwau ummishetashineum ne kesukok wadchepwashik
E.27.8 In measure, when it shooteth forth, thou wilt debate with it: he stayeth his rough wind in the day of the east wind.

α.27.9 Newutche yeu nashpe, ummatcheseonk Jakob pish pahketeaun8, kah yeu wame ne meechummuonk amaunumunat ummatcheseonk: wame altare qussukquanash agqueteunk chalke qussukquanash, nish soquttahhamukish, kogkompagish kah nunneukontunkanog matta pish nepadta[n]8ash.
E.27.9 By this therefore shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged; and this is all the fruit to take away his sin; when he maketh all the stones of the altar as chalkstones that are beaten in sunder, the groves and images shall not stand up.

α.27.10 Qut onch pummeneutausue keitotan pish touwashin, kah ayeuonk nukkodtumun, kah nukkodtumun netatuppe touohkomukqut, na pish wuttut natupwun calf, na pish wussepsinin, kah matcheteau nish wuttuhqunash.
E.27.10 Yet the defenced city shall be desolate, and the habitation forsaken, and left like a wilderness: there shall the calf feed, and there shall he lie down, and consume the branches thereof.

α.27.11 Wuttuhqunash muss8pohtag pish pokshaash: mittamwossissog peyaog, kah chikohsoog, newutche nag matta wohtam8e missinninnuog, newaje ne kezheump matta pish ummonanumoh, kah noh nah kakenauwaheomp matta pish ukkitteamonteanumoh
E.27.11 When the boughs thereof are withered, they shall be broken off: the women come, and set them on fire: for it is a people of no understanding: therefore he that made them will not have mercy on them, and he that formed them will shew them no favour.

α.27.12 Kah pish n$nih ne kesukok Jehovah pish kummoncheahukon wutch sepue posséhteanit pajeh Egipte kussitchuwanit, kah pish kenu[h]aseu mukkinnitteamw8, woi kenaau wunnaumonuh Israel.
E.27.12 And it shall come to pass in that day, that the LORD shall beat off from the channel of the river unto the stream of Egypt, and ye shall be gathered one by one, O ye children of Israel.

α.27.13 Kah pish n$nih ne kesukok, mishe monopu[h]peg pish puhpequohtauun, kah nag pish peyaog, pakodche onkuppunacheg, ut ohkeit Assyria, kah pagkenitcheg ut ohkeit Egipt, kah pish wowussumaog Jehovah, ut wunneetupanatamwe wadchuut, ut Jerusalem.
E.27.13 And it shall come to pass in that day, that the great trumpet shall be blown, and they shall come which were ready to perish in the land of Assyria, and the outcasts in the land of Egypt, and shall worship the LORD in the holy mount at Jerusalem.

α.28.1 MIssi wutonkapunaonk chetuhquabee pechuanumoonk, ukkogkeisippamwaeneumoh Ephraim, noh wussohsumoe wunnetuonk, ne pauuhshauae uppeshau, nish ohtagish 8nogk8e 8nauuhkoiyeue uppuhkuhqut neg sohkunkqutcheg wine.
E.28.1 Woe to the crown of pride, to the drunkards of Ephraim, whose glorious beauty is a fading flower, which are on the head of the fat valleys of them that are overcome with wine!

α.28.2 Kusseh Jehovah ohto how[a] menuhkes[u] kah missugken noh, neaneyeu8g nashqutne mussegan, & pagwohte[á]e nashquttin, onatuh mishe nippeash tômogkok, pish uppenuhkon en ohkeit, nashpe wunnutcheg.
E.28.2 Behold, the Lord hath a mighty and strong one, which as a tempest of hail and a destroying storm, as a flood of mighty waters overflowing, shall cast down to the earth with the hand.

α.28.3 Petuanumwe chetuhqu[á]b, ukkogkeissippam8moh Ephraim pish tahtashkuhkauoog ut agwe musseetut.
E.28.3 The crown of pride, the drunkards of Ephraim, shall be trodden under feet:

α.28.4 Sohsumoe 8netuonk ne ohtag wunnogque 8nouhkoi uppuhkukqut, ne pish pôuhshauwae uppeshau, kah onatuh kenuppegane meechumuonk, ash achuwan8gkup, ne noh kahkinneog, nag*, ash pampohtag wunnutcheganit, mahchipwun
E.28.4 And the glorious beauty, which is on the head of the fat valley, shall be a fading flower, and as the hasty fruit before the summer; which when he that looketh upon it seeth, while it is yet in his hand he eateth it up.

α.28.5 Ne kesukok Jehovah ayeuteaunit, noh wussohsumoe chetuhquabeyeu, kah 8neetue kenadtukquabpeyeu ashqushonitcheh ummissinninneumoh.
E.28.5 In that day shall the LORD of hosts be for a crown of glory, and for a diadem of beauty, unto the residue of his people,

α.28.6 Kah nasháuanittoe 8sittum8onk noh apit wussittum8onganit, kah ummenuhkesuongan8 nag quoshkinukeg ayeuwuttuonk ut ushquontamut.
E.28.6 And for a spirit of judgment to him that sitteth in judgment, and for strength to them that turn the battle to the gate.

α.28.7 Qut nag wonk panneusseog nashpe wine kah nashpe onkuppe, matta appeog mâyut sephausuen kah quoshodtumwaen panneusseog nashpe unkuppe, nag misseashk8wonukquog wine: nag matta appeog mayut nashpe onkuppe, panneseae monomansuog, togkussittahsunwog wâsittumohettit.
E.28.7 But they also have erred through wine, and through strong drink are out of the way; the priest and the prophet have erred through strong drink, they are swallowed up of wine, they are out of the way through strong drink; they err in vision, they stumble in judgment.

α.28.8 Newutche wame tablesash numwohteau munnadtumoonk kah nishkeneunkquok, newaj wanne ayeuonk pahkan8.
E.28.8 For all tables are full of vomit and filthiness, so that there is no place clean.

α.28.9 Howane woh kohk8tomauont wahteauonk, howane woh kohk8tomauont wahteauonk, howane woh wahtamwaheont kuh[k]8tomwehteaonk? neg 8chininnahitcheg wutch sogkodtunkanit, kah pashkunaog wutch mohpanôganit[.]
E.28.9 Whom shall he teach knowledge? and whom shall he make to understand doctrine? them that are weaned from the milk, and drawn from the breasts.

α.28.10 Newutche kuhk8tomwehteaonk pish ahôsuhkaueyeu8 kuhk8tomwehteaonk, kuhk8tomwehteaonk ahôsuhkaueyeu8 kuhk8tomweheteaonk, kuhkuhheg ahósuhkaueyeu8 kuhkuhheg, kuhkuhheg ahos[ú]hkaueyeu8 kuhkuhheg, yeuut ogguhse, kah naut wonk ogguhse.
E.28.10 For precept must be upon precept, precept upon precept; line upon line, line upon line; here a little, and there a little:

α.28.11 Newutche nashpe nahnogkiae mississitt8nash, kah pen8wont8waonk pish wuttinnont8wanumauon yeuh missinninnuh
E.28.11 For with stammering lips and another tongue will he speak to this people.

α.28.12 Neh anoncheh, yeu anwohsinn8onk ne [á]dt anwosumoh neg sauunukeg, kah yeu ne taphettuonk, qut onch mat n8tam8og.
E.28.12 To whom he said, This is the rest wherewith ye may cause the weary to rest; and this is the refreshing: yet they would not hear.

α.28.13 Qut wuttinnowaonk Jehovah appehtunkquog kuhk8tomwehteaonk ahôsuhkaueyeu8 kuhk8tomwehteaonk, kuhk8tomwehteaonk [a]hosuhkaueyeu8 kuhk8tomwehteaonk; kuhkuhheg ahôsuhkaueyeuo kuhkuhheg, kuhkuhheg ahôsuhkaueyeu8 kuhkuhheg, yeu ogguhse naut wonk ogguhse, onk woh moncheog kah woh ant8[h]shaog, kah pohksunwog, kah puttahwhoog, kah tohqunóog.
E.28.13 But the word of the LORD was unto them precept upon precept, precept upon precept; line upon line, line upon line; here a little, and there a little; that they might go, and fall backward, and be broken, and snared, and taken.

α.28.14 Newutche n8tam8k wuttinnowaonk Jehovah, pahtuanumweogish nanauwunogish missinninnuog neg apitcheg Jerusalem.
E.28.14 Wherefore hear the word of the LORD, ye scornful men, that rule this people which is in Jerusalem.

α.28.15 Newutche kussimw8, n8n8womun nupp8onk, kah n8n8womun chepiohkomuk, aneupae sasamatahwhuttuonk paumushaum8uk, matta pish nuppeyógk8unan: néwutche nutushpohhouwaonganéhteamun pann8waongash, kah agwe as8kekodteam8onganit nupputogquemun.
E.28.15 Because ye have said, We have made a covenant with death, and with hell are we at agreement; when the overflowing scourge shall pass through, it shall not come unto us: for we have made lies our refuge, and under falsehood have we hid ourselves:

α.28.16 Newajeh yeu n8wadt Lord Jehovah, kusseh, nupponamun ut Sion wutche quenohtag, qussuk, qutchehteoe qussuk, mishoadtue nahshine qussuk, papane quenohtag, noh wanamptog matta kenupshau8.
E.28.16 Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD, Behold, I lay in Zion for a foundation a stone, a tried stone, a precious corner stone, a sure foundation: he that believeth shall not make haste.

α.28.17 Kah wonk wussittum8onk nupponamun kuhkuheganit, kah sampweusseonk qutompagh8teganit: kah mussegon pish chekham pann8wae ushpuhh8waongash, kah nippeash pish nehtippadt8 adtahtoe ayeuonk,
E.28.17 Judgment also will I lay to the line, and righteousness to the plummet: and the hail shall sweep away the refuge of lies, and the waters shall overflow the hiding place.

α.28.18 Kah k8n8waongan8 nupp8onk pish mo teagwunnehte[á]uun, kah n8n8waongan8 chepiohkomuk matta pish neepadtano: aneupae sasamatahwhuttuonk pannupwushaum8uk, neit pish kenashpe tashkuhkonteaneau.
E.28.18 And your covenant with death shall be disannulled, and your agreement with hell shall not stand; when the overflowing scourge shall pass through, then ye shall be trodden down by it.

α.28.19 Wutch aquompeyeue sohham8m8uk, pish kuttohqunukquneau; newutche mohmohtompanae pish paumusháum8, kesukodaeu kah nukonaeu, kah pish m8sqhettuwonganu8, webe wohtamunat unnehtunkquot.
E.28.19 From the time that it goeth forth it shall take you: for morning by morning shall it pass over, by day and by night: and it shall be a vexation only to understand the report.

α.28.20 Newutche appin tiohqui wosketomp matta woh wuttit sesekein, kah hogk8onk penompagod, matta woh uppapadtukqussun8un.
E.28.20 For the bed is shorter than that a man can stretch himself on it: and the covering narrower than that he can wrap himself in it.

α.28.21 Newutche Jehovah pish omohku, ne asip ut wadchuut Perazim, pish musquantam ne asip ut Gibeone 8no[ú]hkoiye[ú]ut, onk woh wutussenat wutanakausuonk, penowe wutanakausuonk, onk woh kezteau wutusseonk, penowe wutusseonk.
E.28.21 For the LORD shall rise up as in mount Perazim, he shall be wroth as in the valley of Gibeon, that he may do his work, his strange work; and bring to pass his act, his strange act.

α.28.22 Newutche ahque momonehtásuenuek ishkont kukkinnepsuongan8oash menehketeausuash; newutch nunn8tam wutch Lord Jehovah ayeuteaunit, mohchekonnaeonk kehtimau ut woskeche mamusse ohkeit.
E.28.22 Now therefore be ye not mockers, lest your bands be made strong: for I have heard from the Lord GOD of hosts a consumption, even determined upon the whole earth.

α.28.23 Kuhkeitiek, kah n8tam8k n8wadtauatonkqussuonk, kuhkihtam8k, kah n8tam8k nukkutt8wonk.
E.28.23 Give ye ear, and hear my voice; hearken, and hear my speech.

α.28.24 Sun anaskhomwen anaskham nehteage ohteuhkonat? sun wohshinum kah pohquenum puhquohkomukquash ut wutohteakonit?
E.28.24 Doth the plowman plow all day to sow? doth he open and break the clods of his ground?

α.28.25 M8sitte[u]nk woskeche, sunnummatta seahham8 fitches[à]sh, kah seahhamm8 cummin kah ohkehteau wanegukish wheatash kah kuhquttumwe barly, kah rye ut wutayeaongan8out.
E.28.25 When he hath made plain the face thereof, doth he not cast abroad the fitches, and scatter the cummin, and cast in the principal wheat and the appointed barley and the rie in their place?

α.28.26 Newutche um-Manitt8moh ukkuhk8tomau nehtôe usseonk, kah ukkuhk8tomauuh.
E.28.26 For his God doth instruct him to discretion, and doth teach him.

α.28.27 Newutche fitchesash matta poggohhomwauhtugque poggohhamunash, asuh matta carte-wheel quinnuppenum8un woskeche cummin, qut fitchesash poggohhamunash nashpe anwohhou, kah cummin nashpe souobpunk.
E.28.27 For the fitches are not threshed with a threshing instrument, neither is a cart wheel turned about upon the cummin; but the fitches are beaten out with a staff, and the cummin with a rod.

α.28.28 Petukqunnegane weatchiminneash s8quttahhamunash, newutche matta kod nagwutteae uppogham8un, asuh matta pohquetahhamun nashpe uk-carte-wheelum, asuh matta sohquttahham8 nashpe nayeumukqutcheg horsesoh.
E.28.28 Bread corn is bruised; because he will not ever be threshing it, nor break it with the wheel of his cart, nor bruise it with his horsemen.

α.28.29 Yeu wonk 8m88 wutch Lord ayéuteaunit, noh monchanatamwe koguhtimut, kah waussinit.
E.28.29 This also cometh forth from the LORD of hosts, which is wonderful in counsel, and excellent in working.

α.29.1 MIssi wutonkapunaonk Ariel, A[a]iel, keitotan ne David ayeup k8tnehteau8k kodtum8, nehtauhettich sephausuongash.
E.29.1 Woe to Ariel, to Ariel, the city where David dwelt! add ye year to year; let them kill sacrifices.

α.29.2 Qut onch nukquehquenauánumweh Ariel, kah na pish nupp8anum8onk kah neuantam8onk, kah pish nuttatupontamun Ariel.
E.29.2 Yet I will distress Ariel, and there shall be heaviness and sorrow: and it shall be unto me as Ariel.

α.29.3 Kah pish ayeuuhkonittue k8wéenu tupuksinn8wonsh, kah k8weenussumwehtoush nashpe wadchu, kutayeuuhkonittue waápenumoush ummanshkash.
E.29.3 And I will camp against thee round about, and will lay siege against thee with a mount, and I will raise forts against thee.

α.29.4 Pish ken8kinit, kah pish kukket8hkon wutch ohkeit, kah kukkutt8wongash tiuhquonkod wutch puppissiyeuut: kah k8wadtauatonkqussuonk pish tatuppeyeu8 noh apehtunkqut matche nashauonk wutch ohkeit: kah kukkutt8onk keemompeum8 wutch puppissiyeuut.
E.29.4 And thou shalt be brought down, and shalt speak out of the ground, and thy speech shall be low out of the dust, and thy voice shall be, as of one that hath a familiar spirit, out of the ground, and thy speech shall whisper out of the dust.

α.29.5 Nano, mataanukeg kuppen8wohteomogish pish ogqueneunkqussuog sohque puppissiyeuut, & kutunkqueneunkqusseume monacheg, pish tatupeyeu8og wussadteanumit, ne pamshunk, nux pish kenuppeyeu8, teanuk.
E.29.5 Moreover the multitude of thy strangers shall be like small dust, and the multitude of the terrible ones shall be as chaff that passeth away: yea, it shall be at an instant suddenly.

α.29.6 Jehovah ayeuteaunit pish kenatauwahik nashpé padtohquohhan, kah nashpe quequanash, kah mishont8waongash, nashpe nashquttin kah mishetahshin, kah n8n8nae mahchukkissuwae n8teau.
E.29.6 Thou shalt be visited of the LORD of hosts with thunder, and with earthquake, and great noise, with storm and tempest, and the flame of devouring fire.

α.29.7 Kah mataanukish wutohtimoneash ayeuuhkontam8m8ukish Ariel, wame neg ayeuuhkononcheg, kah wutauwohteaongash, kah quehquenauanumwutcheg, pish tatuppeyeu8og nukkonae monománsue nukquom8onk
E.29.7 And the multitude of all the nations that fight against Ariel, even all that fight against her and her munition, and that distress her, shall be as a dream of a night vision.

α.29.8 Pish tatuppeyeu8, kodtupwen ánukquonk, kah kusseh meetsu, qut t8hku, kah ukketeahogkôunoh mahtussuoh, asuh onatuh kûhkuht8n8wenin ánukquonk kah kusseh wuttattam, qut t8hku, kah kusse, sauunum, kah ukketeahogkôunoh kodtantamoh: ne pish wutti[nnii]neau mataáneukish wutohtimóneash ayeuuhkontogig Zion.
E.29.8 It shall even be as when an hungry man dreameth, and, behold, he eateth; but he awaketh, and his soul is empty: or as when a thirsty man dreameth, and, behold, he drinketh; but he awaketh, and, behold, he is faint, and his soul hath appetite: so shall the multitude of all the nations be, that fight against mount Zion.

α.29.9 Chequnappek kah monchanatam8k, mishont8wak kah mau8k, nag kogkeussippam8og qut matta nashpe wine, kekepshaog, qut matta nashpe onkuppe.
E.29.9 Stay yourselves, and wonder; cry ye out, and cry: they are drunken, but not with wine; they stagger, but not with strong drink.

α.29.10 Newutch Jehovah kussokanumunk8 kussukkouéyeue nashaonguh, yáununum kuskesuk8óash: quoshodtumwaenuog, kah kenanawunnaeneum8og, nauwacheg upputtogúhwhoh.
E.29.10 For the LORD hath poured out upon you the spirit of deep sleep, and hath closed your eyes: the prophets and your rulers, the seers hath he covered.

α.29.11 Kah ummonomansuongan8 wame kuttatuppeyunkquneau sukkúhkehteoeu b8ke kutt8wongash; ne wosketompaog wuttinnumauóneau, neh nohtontauunutcheh, n8waog, yeu ogketash k8wehquetumoush, kah n8wau, n8nanum newutch sukkuhkehteausu.
E.29.11 And the vision of all is become unto you as the words of a book that is sealed, which men deliver to one that is learned, saying, Read this, I pray thee: and he saith, I cannot; for it is sealed:

α.29.12 Kah b8k aninnumauon noh matta nohtantau8k, n8wau, yeu ogketash k8wehquetumoush, kah n8wau, matta nunnetuhtauouun.
E.29.12 And the book is delivered to him that is not learned, saying, Read this, I pray thee: and he saith, I am not learned.

α.29.13 Newaj Jehovah n8wadt, newutche yeug missinninnuog nuppas8sukkongquog nashpe wutt8n8, kah nashpe wussissitt8n8[a]sh nukquehtianumukquog, qut noadtit in nutontuhtongquog wuttahh8woash, kah nukqushhúk8ongan8 kuhk8tomoadtin, nashpe wosketompae kogohk8waongash.
E.29.13 Wherefore the Lord said, Forasmuch as this people draw near me with their mouth, and with their lips do honour me, but have removed their heart far from me, and their fear toward me is taught by the precept of men:

α.29.14 Newutche kusseh nukkutchittôusha[m] ussenat monchanatamwe usseonk ut kenugke yeug missinninnuog, monchanatamwe anakausuonk, kah monchanatam8onk: newutche 8waantam8ongan8 waantamwog pish wutahquohtauun, kah 8wohwohtam8ongan8 wunnupwom8oh pish adtahtauóneau.
E.29.14 Therefore, behold, I will proceed to do a marvellous work among this people, even a marvellous work and a wonder: for the wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and the understanding of their prudent men shall be hid.

α.29.15 Missi wutonkapunnaongan8 neg m8nôi natinneáhogig adtahtauunat ukkogáhqutteam8onk Jehovah, kah wutanakausuongan8oash pohkenaiash, kah n8waog, howan kenogkumun? kah howan k8wahikumun?
E.29.15 Woe unto them that seek deep to hide their counsel from the LORD, and their works are in the dark, and they say, Who seeth us? and who knoweth us?

α.29.16 Wunnamuhkut kukqushkohteáshitteaongan8, pish tatupontamun ahk8hqutteae[nin] umman8nskumut: newutche sun woh anakausuonk n8wom8 noh kezteungkup, matta nukkezhik8? asuh ne teag ne weekitteamuk, sun woh unnau neh weekitteanepoh, matta wohwohtam8?
E.29.16 Surely your turning of things upside down shall be esteemed as the potter's clay: for shall the work say of him that made it, He made me not? or shall the thing framed say of him that framed it, He had no understanding?

α.29.17 Sunnummatta majish ogguhsese, kah Lebanon pish quinnuppenumun en mishummeechumue ohteakonit, kah misummeechume ohteuk pish ogquontamun touohkomuk?
E.29.17 Is it not yet a very little while, and Lebanon shall be turned into a fruitful field, and the fruitful field shall be esteemed as a forest?

α.29.18 Kah ne kesukok kogkopsau pish n8tam b8ke kutt8wongash: kah pogkinnumwe muskesukquash pish naum8m8ash wutch pogkenum8onganit kah pohkenaiyeuut,
E.29.18 And in that day shall the deaf hear the words of the book, and the eyes of the blind shall see out of obscurity, and out of darkness.

α.29.19 Manunnissuog wonk pish pishkonteauog 8wekontam8ongan8 ut Jehovahut, kah matchekuog ut kenugke missinninnuog, pish weekontam8oneau 8neetupanatam8moh Israel.
E.29.19 The meek also shall increase their joy in the LORD, and the poor among men shall rejoice in the Holy One of Israel.

α.29.20 Newutche unkqunneunkqussit mattohhentuppéheau, kah mamanauwontamwenin mohtupáeu, kah wame neg askuhwhontogeg matcheseonk tummehtahwhoog.
E.29.20 For the terrible one is brought to nought, and the scorner is consumed, and all that watch for iniquity are cut off:

α.29.21 Neg ayeuoncheg wosketomp matcheseaenuunneat wutche kutt8onk, kah upponamauónaoont noh áuskôadt ut usquontamut, kah wutamaunónaoont sampweusseaenuh wutche monteag.
E.29.21 That make a man an offender for a word, and lay a snare for him that reproveth in the gate, and turn aside the just for a thing of nought.

α.29.22 Newaj yeu n8wadt Jehovah noh pohquohwhunomp Abrahamoh, papaume week Jakob, J[o]kob pish yeuyeu matta akodchu, asuh matta yeuyeu wuskesuk womukushànó.
E.29.22 Therefore thus saith the LORD, who redeemed Abraham, concerning the house of Jacob, Jacob shall not now be ashamed, neither shall his face now wax pale.

α.29.23 Qut nauont wunneechanoh nunnutchegáne anakausuonk ut wunnashomut, nag pish wunneetupanatamwahtoog n8wesuonk, kah pish wunnetupanatamwaheaog 8neetupanatam8moh Jakob, kah pish wabesuonaog um-Manitt8moh Israel.
E.29.23 But when he seeth his children, the work of mine hands, in the midst of him, they shall sanctify my name, and sanctify the Holy One of Jacob, and shall fear the God of Israel.

α.29.24 Nag wonk pannesitcheg ut nashauonganit pish wohwohtamwog, kah nag m8m8sk8wacheg, pish nehtuhtóog kogohk8wáonk.
E.29.24 They also that erred in spirit shall come to understanding, and they that murmured shall learn doctrine.

α.30.1 MIssi wutonkapunnaongan8 cheketamwe mukkiesog, n8wau Jehovah, neemunnumwog kogohquttuonk, qut matta nashpe nen, kah neg ágqutcheg onkwhonk, qut matta nashpe nunnashauanitt8moh: onk woh k8tnehteauog matcheséonk en matcheseonganit.
E.30.1 Woe to the rebellious children, saith the LORD, that take counsel, but not of me; and that cover with a covering, but not of my spirit, that they may add sin to sin:

α.30.2 Neg pomushacheg womsinneat en Egypt (kah matta kogáhqutteog ut nutt8nut) ummenuhkehheonaóont wuhhogkauh nashpe ummenuhkesuonk Pharoh, kah pabuhtantamunat wutonkouohtom Egypt.
E.30.2 That walk to go down into Egypt, and have not asked at my mouth; to strengthen themselves in the strength of Pharaoh, and to trust in the shadow of Egypt!

α.30.3 Newutche ummenuhkesuonk Pharoh ne pish k8takodchuwonkaninneau, kah pabahtanumonat onkouòhtom Egypt ne pish kenaswaiyeuongan8.
E.30.3 Therefore shall the strength of Pharaoh be your shame, and the trust in the shadow of Egypt your confusion.

α.30.4 Newutche wussontimósimoh apinitcheh Zoan, kah wutann8naéneumoh peyaog Hanes.
E.30.4 For his princes were at Zoan, and his ambassadors came to Hanes.

α.30.5 Nag wame akodchuheóog missinninnuog neg matta aninnumauunkig, asuh waneheunkig, kah wadchiyeumu[k]eg qut akodchu[h]éoog kah ukkekontuwaheouh.
E.30.5 They were all ashamed of a people that could not profit them, nor be an help nor profit, but a shame, and also a reproach.

α.30.6 OOweanunn8 sowanie puppinashimwog en wuttamehpunáe kah unkquanumóe, ohkeit uttoh wagk wuske kah nukkone qunnonou, viper, kah n8tae pummunáe ask8k: nag pish kenunnumwog 8weenauwetuongan8, ut uhpegwann8óo[u]t wuske assesog, kah wunnompako[ú]unn8oash 8nuhquiyeum8out camelsog, en missinninnúut ne woh mo wanenehikquéhhettegeh.
E.30.6 The burden of the beasts of the south: into the land of trouble and anguish, from whence come the young and old lion, the viper and fiery flying serpent, they will carry their riches upon the shoulders of young asses, and their treasures upon the bunches of camels, to a people that shall not profit them.

α.30.7 Newutche Egyptiansog pish tahn8che aninnôsuog, kah en wanne wanegik, newaj yeu papaume mishont8wi, nag ummenuhkesuongan8 ne chequnappuonk.
E.30.7 For the Egyptians shall help in vain, and to no purpose: therefore have I cried concerning this, Their strength is to sit still.

α.30.8 Yeuyeu monchish wussukwhush ut tableut, ut anaquabhettit, kah wussukwhush ut b8kut, onk woh ne chékeyeu88 micheme kah micheme.
E.30.8 Now go, write it before them in a table, and note it in a book, that it may be for the time to come for ever and ever:

α.30.9 Yeug cheketam8e missinninnúog, pann8wae mukkiesog, mukkiesog neg matta k[o]hkeihtam8gig wuttinnaumatuonk Jehovah.
E.30.9 That this is a rebellious people, lying children, children that will not hear the law of the LORD:

α.30.10 Neg anoncheg namunutche ahque naum8k, quoshódtumwaénúh, ahque sampwe quosh[ó]dtamwiinneau: ussinnan mam8sagish, as8kekodteam8e quoshodtumaiiñean.
E.30.10 Which say to the seers, See not; and to the prophets, Prophesy not unto us right things, speak unto us smooth things, prophesy deceits:

α.30.11 Amayek wutch mayut, pohchagk wutch mayut: 8neetupanatam8moh Israel wohkukquosun ut anaquabeog.
E.30.11 Get you out of the way, turn aside out of the path, cause the Holy One of Israel to cease from before us.

α.30.12 Newaj yeu n8wadt 8neetupanatam8moh Israel; newutche yeu kutjishantamuneau kutt8onk, kah kuppabahtantamumw8 mukk8kinnuwaonk, kah wounkkag, kah ne kutompadtussinuneau.
E.30.12 Wherefore thus saith the Holy One of Israel, Because ye despise this word, and trust in oppression and perverseness, and stay thereon:

α.30.13 Newaj pish yeu matcheseonk tatuppeyeu88k n8kompskishunk, p8tôem8uk qunuhque qussukquaneutunk, noh uppokshaonk koshkomme teanuk peyaum8.
E.30.13 Therefore this iniquity shall be to you as a breach ready to fall, swelling out in a high wall, whose breaking cometh suddenly at an instant.

α.30.14 Kah noh pish wuttinne sokqshadtauun sokqshadtomuk ahkuhqutteaenin 8wisq, ne sohquetahhamuk, matta pish ukkishpadtam8un; newaje pish mat namehteauomuk, ne adt sohqueta[hh]amuk, kodchuhkisq, nemequomunat n8teau wutch n8teau ahhohtag, asuh quomphamunat nippe wutch passohtheganit.
E.30.14 And he shall break it as the breaking of the potters' vessel that is broken in pieces; he shall not spare: so that there shall not be found in the bursting of it a sherd to take fire from the hearth, or to take water withal out of the pit.

α.30.15 Newutche yeu n8wau Lord Jehovah, 8neetupanatam8moh Israel, qushkémuk kah anwôsinimuk pish k8wadchanitteamw8, manunnissimuk kah wutt8anatamuk, ne pish kummenuhkesuongan8, kah kussekenamumw8.
E.30.15 For thus saith the Lord GOD, the Holy One of Israel; In returning and rest shall ye be saved; in quietness and in confidence shall be your strength: and ye would not.

α.30.16 Qut kussimw8, matta, newutch pish n8semun nashpe horsesog, ne$waj pish wussemwe[y]óg: kah naiyeumutteamun kakenupshoncheg, newaj neg n8swuttahukqueógig pish kogkenupwusháog.
E.30.16 But ye said, No; for we will flee upon horses; therefore shall ye flee: and, We will ride upon the swift; therefore shall they that pursue you be swift.

α.30.17 Muttanonganogkussuog pish wussem8og, pasuk wabuwonont, kah napannatahsuog wabuwunáhettit, pish k8semw8 nô pajeh keánewunneaóont beakon koduhkôagk, kah onatuh muttaagk ut wadchuut.
E.30.17 One thousand shall flee at the rebuke of one; at the rebuke of five shall ye flee: till ye be left as a beacon upon the top of a mountain, and as an ensign on an hill.

α.30.18 Newaj Jehovah pahtussit, onk woh kukkitteamonteanumukou, kah newaj mishehit, onk woh kummonánumukou: newutche Jehovah noh wussittumóe Manit. Wunanumunach neg wame pahtussuonóncheg.
E.30.18 And therefore will the LORD wait, that he may be gracious unto you, and therefore will he be exalted, that he may have mercy upon you: for the LORD is a God of judgment: blessed are all they that wait for him.

α.30.19 Newutche missinninnuog pish ayeuog ut Zion, ut Jerusalem: pish matta wonkkummâou, noh pish ahche kukkitteamonteanumuk, ut k8wadtauatonkqussue mauonganit, n8tog neit kenamp8hamunk.
E.30.19 For the people shall dwell in Zion at Jerusalem: thou shalt weep no more: he will be very gracious unto thee at the voice of thy cry; when he shall hear it, he will answer thee.

α.30.20 Kah tohkônogque Lord kittiñumunkquneau onkquommom8e petukqunneg, kah wuttammepunnae nippe, qut onch kukkuhk8tomwehteaeneumog matta pish wonk ontasháog en p8chekeheganit, qut kuskesukquash pish nâau kukkuhk8tomwehteaeneumoh.
E.30.20 And though the Lord give you the bread of adversity, and the water of affliction, yet shall not thy teachers be removed into a corner any more, but thine eyes shall see thy teachers:

α.30.21 Kah kehtauogash pish ken8tam8m8 kutt8onk en kuppusquanit, n8wau, yeu may, ne pomushagk, quinnuppéog en kuttinohk[ô]unit, kah quinnuppeóg en menadcheani.
E.30.21 And thine ears shall hear a word behind thee, saying, This is the way, walk ye in it, when ye turn to the right hand, and when ye turn to the left.

α.30.22 Kah pish wonk kenishketeomw8 wuthogk8ongan8 silvere kittinneukontunkán8, kah wuthogk8unash kussabossume golde unneukontunkanog: nag pish kutogque pogkenóog qushinausue kodchuhkonákinit, pish kuttittamun amaish.
E.30.22 Ye shall defile also the covering of thy graven images of silver, and the ornament of thy molten images of gold: thou shalt cast them away as a menstruous cloth; thou shalt say unto it, Get thee hence.

α.30.23 Neit pish kittinnumunk sokanon ut k8skannemuneat, ne woh ahketeáan, kah petukqununk nashpe ne teashegik wutch ohkeit, kah ne pish wunogk8m8 kah monat: ne kesukok kenetasumog pish nadtupp8og en mummiske tanadtupp8onganit.
E.30.23 Then shall he give the rain of thy seed, that thou shalt sow the ground withal; and bread of the increase of the earth, and it shall be fat and plenteous: in that day shall thy cattle feed in large pastures.

α.30.24 Kah wonk oxinog, kah wuske assesog ne anaskohhogeg ohke, pish mukk8tanéhteamwog weatchimineash, ne seahamoe pahketeamukup nashpe shovel kah paanonteg.
E.30.24 The oxen likewise and the young asses that ear the ground shall eat clean provender, which hath been winnowed with the shovel and with the fan.

α.30.25 Kah nishnoh ut kussohkôi, kah qunuhqui wadchuut na pish sepu8 kah kussehtan nippeyeu8, ut pagwanittue kesukodtut, qunuhkquikommukquash panshunk.
E.30.25 And there shall be upon every high mountain, and upon every high hill, rivers and streams of waters in the day of the great slaughter, when the towers fall.

α.30.26 Nano, 8wôhsumóonk nanepaushadt pish tatuppeyeu8 nepâuzsae pumôsum8onganit, kah 8wôsumóonk nepâuz pish nesausuk tahshit tahshin; onatuh nesausuk tahshit kesukquae wôhsum8onk, ne kesukog Jehovah waashpunont uppokshaonganóoash ummissinninneumoh, kah neetskehteunk n8chumwehtahwaeu annehtahwaonganooash.
E.30.26 Moreover the light of the moon shall be as the light of the sun, and the light of the sun shall be sevenfold, as the light of seven days, in the day that the LORD bindeth up the breach of his people, and healeth the stroke of their wound.

α.30.27 Kusseh, 8wesuonk Jehovah n8adtit 8m88, nashquneau nashpe ummusquanittam8onk, kah ne weanun tuhkequan, wussissitt8nit numwohteau nukque musquanittam8onk, kah wenan tatuppeyeu8 mahchekuss8wae n8taut.
E.30.27 Behold, the name of the LORD cometh from far, burning with his anger, and the burden thereof is heavy: his lips are full of indignation, and his tongue as a devouring fire:

α.30.28 Kah wunnashauonk ánuwutchuwane kussehtanup, pish ohqussinin nôeu mussittipukonit, nohnohkinnumunat wutohtimoneash, nashpe tahn8chee nanahkineg: kah na pish bridle ut wutompekon8wout missinninnuog, panneseáheont.
E.30.28 And his breath, as an overflowing stream, shall reach to the midst of the neck, to sift the nations with the sieve of vanity: and there shall be a bridle in the jaws of the people, causing them to err.

α.30.29 Pish kutahtomw8 unn8homaonk nukkonáeu, wunneetupanatamwe moéonk nanawehteomuk, kah wekontamwáeteaháonk, onatuh noh p[a]ont nashpe puhpekq ut 8wadchumut Jehovah ummissugken8moh Israel.
E.30.29 Ye shall have a song, as in the night when a holy solemnity is kept; and gladness of heart, as when one goeth with a pipe to come into the mountain of the LORD, to the mighty One of Israel.

α.30.30 Kah Jehovah wunn8tamwáheuh wussohsumóe wadtauatonqussuonk, kah pish nahtitteau, 8pittene kutshaumun nashpe wutuhquanittamwe musquanittam8onk, kah nashpe n8n8nae mahchekussuáe n8teau, nashpe seaham8e mishehtash, kah missegan.
E.30.30 And the LORD shall cause his glorious voice to be heard, and shall shew the lighting down of his arm, with the indignation of his anger, and with the flame of a devouring fire, with scattering, and tempest, and hailstones.

α.30.31 Newutche nashpe 8wadtauagonkqussuonk Jehovah wut-Assyrian quttaúwetáhwóu, togkomit nashpe pogkomunk.
E.30.31 For through the voice of the LORD shall the Assyrian be beaten down, which smote with a rod.

α.30.32 Kah nishnoh ut ayeuonganit uttôh adt menuhki anwohhou pish pamshunk, ne Jehovah pish ponamauont, ne pish nashpe tabretsash kah harpsash, kah nunnuksháe ayeuwuttuonganehtu, pish ne nashpe ayeukontamun.
E.30.32 And in every place where the grounded staff shall pass, which the LORD shall lay upon him, it shall be with tabrets and harps: and in battles of shaking will he fight with it.

α.30.33 Newutch Tophet kukkuhquttumunah nôadt, nux quagquoshwehtamauun ketass8t, umm8unonteauun, kah kishki: ne noh ohtag n8tau kah monatash wuttuhqunash wunnashauonk Jehovah wunnashqunánumun, ogqueneunkqut brimstone kussitchuwanut.
E.30.33 For Tophet is ordained of old; yea, for the king it is prepared; he hath made it deep and large: the pile thereof is fire and much wood; the breath of the LORD, like a stream of brimstone, doth kindle it.

α.31.1 MIssi wutonkapunnaongan8 neg wômussitcheg en Egypt wuch aninnumoadtuonk, kah ompatissinwog horsesoh, kah pabuhtantamwog chariotsash, newutche monaash, kah nayeumukqunutcheh horsesoh, newutche ahche menuhkesuoh: qut matta mouninneauou8og 8neetupanatam8moh Israel, asuh matta natinnewhau[ó]og Jehovah.
E.31.1 Woe to them that go down to Egypt for help; and stay on horses, and trust in chariots, because they are many; and in horsemen, because they are very strong; but they look not unto the Holy One of Israel, neither seek the LORD!

α.31.2 Qut onch waantam, kah pish paudto machuk, kah matta pish ontattó8 ukkutt8ongash, qut pish waabéhtauau matcheseaenúe weetu, kah ayeuuhkonittue wutannosuongan8 neg asécheg matcheseonk.
E.31.2 Yet he also is wise, and will bring evil, and will not call back his words: but will arise against the house of the evildoers, and against the help of them that work iniquity.

α.31.3 Qut Egyptiansog wosketomp8og, & matta Mani[t]tt88og, & wut-horsesum8oh weyausu8oh, kah matta nashauanitt88og: Jehovah summagunuk wunnutch, naneese noh aninnausit pish penushau, kah noh aninnumauut pish penushau, kah nag wamu pish moeu penusháog.
E.31.3 Now the Egyptians are men, and not God; and their horses flesh, and not spirit. When the LORD shall stretch out his hand, both he that helpeth shall fall, and he that is holpen shall fall down, and they all shall fail together.

α.31.4 Newutch[è] yeu nuttugqun Jehovah: onatuh qunnonou, kah qunnonuwem, mishont8wae tohq[u]nont ne tohqunoncheh, monanutcheh nanaushipsaen[ù]h ayeuuhkonittue wehquetuog nah wutch, matta wabesu wutch 8wadtauatonkqussuongan8, asuh matta mishanehheaout wuhogkuh wutche nag monacheg: netatuppe Lord ayeuhteaunit pish n8keu wutáyeuwehteaunsh[ô]nat wadchu Zion, kah wutche 8wadcheum.
E.31.4 For thus hath the LORD spoken unto me, Like as the lion and the young lion roaring on his prey, when a multitude of shepherds is called forth against him, he will not be afraid of their voice, nor abase himself for the noise of them: so shall the LORD of hosts come down to fight for mount Zion, and for the hill thereof.

α.31.5 Onatuh psuksesuk pâmunáhettit, netatuppe Jehovah ayeuhteaunit pish wadchanau Jerusalem, kah wadchanuwae pish uppohquohwhuttauun, kah quoshkodteadt pish 8wadchanumun.
E.31.5 As birds flying, so will the LORD of hosts defend Jerusalem; defending also he will deliver it; and passing over he will preserve it.

α.31.6 Qushkek noh en, neh wunneechanoh Israel menuhke amaehtauoncheh.
E.31.6 Turn ye unto him from whom the children of Israel have deeply revolted.

α.31.7 Newutche ne kesukok nishnoh pasuk mittamwossis pish pogkenau silvere wuttinneukontunkoh, kah wosketomp golde wuttinneukontunkoh; neh nehenwonche kenutchegash kezheumpuh wutche matcheseonk.
E.31.7 For in that day every man shall cast away his idols of silver, and his idols of gold, which your own hands have made unto you for a sin.

α.31.8 Neit wut$Assyrian pish penushau nashpe wuttogkodteg, matta menuhkesu[é]nin: kah wuttogkodteg matta kuttamunge wosketomp, pish ummahtupanukqun: qut noh pish wussemo wutch togkodteganit, kah 8skeneumoh pish papuhquojhéonineuh.
E.31.8 Then shall the Assyrian fall with the sword, not of a mighty man; and the sword, not of a mean man, shall devour him: but he shall flee from the sword, and his young men shall be discomfited.

α.31.9 Kah wabesue pish qushkodteau en 8manskut, kah wussontimósimoh pish qusháog mataag k[ó]unumunutcheh, wussin Jehovah, noh wunn8tom ohtag ut Sion, kah ahhut sabasósit ut Jerusalem.
E.31.9 And he shall pass over to his strong hold for fear, and his princes shall be afraid of the ensign, saith the LORD, whose fire is in Zion, and his furnace in Jerusalem.

α.32.1 KUsseh, ketass8t pish sampweusseáe nanauwunnuau, kah sontimosog pish wussittumoe nanauwunnuáog.
E.32.1 Behold, a king shall reign in righteousness, and princes shall rule in judgment.

α.32.2 Kah wosketomp pish tatuppeyeu8 asompamukque ayeuonganit wutche wabanit kah unkwhonk wutch mishehtash, onatuh sepue nippeash ut [n]abohteaiyeuut, onatuh mishikqussukquane onkauohteau, ut sauunnumoe ohkeit.
E.32.2 And a man shall be as an hiding place from the wind, and a covert from the tempest; as rivers of water in a dry place, as the shadow of a great rock in a weary land.

α.32.3 Kah wuskesuk88ash neg nagig matta pish pogkenum8mun8ash, kah wuhtauogk8oash neg n8togig, pish kuhkeihtamwog.
E.32.3 And the eyes of them that see shall not be dim, and the ears of them that hear shall hearken.

α.32.4 Wuttah wonk kákinne musquantog posh wohtam8m8 wahteóonk, nohnogkiáe meenan, pakodche pish wunának8waog.
E.32.4 The heart also of the rash shall understand knowledge, and the tongue of the stammerers shall be ready to speak plainly.

α.32.5 Nishkeneunkqussuenin matta pish wonk hennau chippinin, kah kasenussit matta pish hennou mag8énin.
E.32.5 The vile person shall be no more called liberal, nor the churl said to be bountiful.

α.32.6 Newutche nishkeneunkqussuaénin unn8wau nishkeneunkquokish, kah wuttah ussémo matcheseonk eiantukiyeue ussenat, kah ayeuuhkônitt8e unnónát Jehovah, mohchiéhheonat ukketeahogkounoh noh kódtupwit, kah wohkuhquohsumwaheau kohkutt8nutcheh 8tattam8onk.
E.32.6 For the vile person will speak villany, and his heart will work iniquity, to practise hypocrisy, and to utter error against the LORD, to make empty the soul of the hungry, and he will cause the drink of the thirsty to fail.

α.32.7 Wutauwohteaongash wonk noh kasenussit matchi[t]ash: natwontam matche natwontam8ongash, paguanonat matchekuwog nashpe pann8wae kutt8wongash, quenahikqutcheg sampweyéhettit[.]
E.32.7 The instruments also of the churl are evil: he deviseth wicked devices to destroy the poor with lying words, even when the needy speaketh right.

α.32.8 Qut wunnenéhuwaénin natwontam wunnenehuae teaguassinish kah nashpe wunnenehuwae teaguassinish pish neep[o]u.
E.32.8 But the liberal deviseth liberal things; and by liberal things shall he stand.

α.32.9 Nepo8k kenaau mittamwossisog sasegeneamogish: n8tam8k n8wadtauatonkqussuonk mattohhentupontamwe wuttauninneunk, kuhkeihtam8k nukkutt8wonk.
E.32.9 Rise up, ye women that are at ease; hear my voice, ye careless daughters; give ear unto my speech.

α.32.10 M8chetikquinne, & kodtum8ash pish k8tamehpunomw8, kenaau mat toh$hen tupantam8e mittamwossissog: newutche wenominneash pish mat nekininn8ash, matta pish mauunneaun.
E.32.10 Many days and years shall ye be troubled, ye careless women: for the vintage shall fail, the gathering shall not come.

α.32.11 Nunnukshunk kenau sasegenamwe mittamwossissog, wuttamanátam8k kenaau mattohhentupanatam8ogish, mukk8keg, kah poskishegk, puttukquobpissuontam8k man8tionak ut kussegon8out.
E.32.11 Tremble, ye women that are at ease; be troubled, ye careless ones: strip you, and make you bare, and gird sackcloth upon your loins.

α.32.12 Nag pish mauog wutch sogkodtunkash, wutch wunne ohteuhkonash, wutch mishummeechume weenomwussippog.
E.32.12 They shall lament for the teats, for the pleasant fields, for the fruitful vine.

α.32.13 Ut wutohk8out nummissinninnumog pish 8tch sonkinneau asinnekoussog, kah koussog, nux nish$noh ut wekontamwe wetuomut, ut wekontamwe otanat.
E.32.13 Upon the land of my people shall come up thorns and briers; yea, upon all the houses of joy in the joyous city:

α.32.14 Newutche mishikkomukquash pish ahquontamunash, keitotanae monacheg pish nukkonnoog, ummanshkash kah qunuhk8komukquash, nish pish asampamukquotash micheme, 8wekontam8ongan8 touohkomukque assessog, flokse tanadtupp8onk.
E.32.14 Because the palaces shall be forsaken; the multitude of the city shall be left; the forts and towers shall be for dens for ever, a joy of wild asses, a pasture of flocks;

α.32.15 Nô pajeh nashauanit sokenumonteaog wutch wohqut, kah touohkomuk mishummeechumme ohteukonu8k, kah mishummeechume ohteuk ogquontamuk touohkomuk.
E.32.15 Until the spirit be poured upon us from on high, and the wilderness be a fruitful field, and the fruitful field be counted for a forest.

α.32.16 Neit wussittumoonk pish ayeum8 touohkomuk, kah sampweusseonk ohtaut mishummeechumue ohteuhkonit.
E.32.16 Then judgment shall dwell in the wilderness, and righteousness remain in the fruitful field.

α.32.17 Kah sampweusseae anakausuonk ne pish wunohteaonk: kah sampweusseae usseonk ne manunnissuonk kah pahkontam8onk micheme.
E.32.17 And the work of righteousness shall be peace; and the effect of righteousness quietness and assurance for ever.

α.32.18 Kah nummissinninnumog pish ayeuog wunohteae ayeuonganit, kah menuhki ayeuonganehtu, kah wunohteae anwohsinwe ayeuonganehtu.
E.32.18 And my people shall dwell in a peaceable habitation, and in sure dwellings, and in quiet resting places;

α.32.19 Missegog, n8kit ut touohkomuk, kah keitotan pish tiohqunkquodt, tiuhquonkque ayeuonganit.
E.32.19 When it shall hail, coming down on the forest; and the city shall be low in a low place.

α.32.20 Wunnanumittegk ohketeaogish kiṣhke wame nippeit, na en sohh8kouogish wussét8ash oxinog kah assesog.
E.32.20 Blessed are ye that sow beside all waters, that send forth thither the feet of the ox and the ass.

α.33.1 MIssi kutonkapunaonk woskhuwaan, kah matta k8woskhitteop, kah as8kekodteam8e ussean kah nag matta kutas8kekomuk8panneg: chequnapean wutch k8woskhuwaonganit pish ken k8woskhit, chequnapean wunassumuwae usseonganit nag pish k8nassum8e unnehikquog.
E.33.1 Woe to thee that spoilest, and thou wast not spoiled; and dealest treacherously, and they dealt not treacherously with thee! when thou shalt cease to spoil, thou shalt be spoiled; and when thou shalt make an end to deal treacherously, they shall deal treacherously with thee.

α.33.2 Woi Jehovah, kitteamonteanuminnean, kuppahtsuonumunonup: ken nag uhpittenhettich nish$noh mohtompan, kah wonk n8wadchanitteaonganun wuttamehpunamuk.
E.33.2 O LORD, be gracious unto us; we have waited for thee: be thou their arm every morning, our salvation also in the time of trouble.

α.33.3 Wogkouee wadtauatongqussimuk missinninnuog wussem8og: tahshinadt kuhhog, wutohtimoneash seahhamunapash.
E.33.3 At the noise of the tumult the people fled; at the lifting up of thyself the nations were scattered.

α.33.4 Kah kussequttahhamoonk pish mohmounumun onatuh mohmounuk m8p: onatuh quaqueshontae popomshaonk, ne pish wuttinne quogqueeu tahtashkuhkauon.
E.33.4 And your spoil shall be gathered like the gathering of the caterpiller: as the running to and fro of locusts shall he run upon them.

α.33.5 Jehovah misheheau, newutche qunuhqui ayeu, numwohtau Zion wussittumoonk kah sampweusseonk,
E.33.5 The LORD is exalted; for he dwelleth on high: he hath filled Zion with judgment and righteousness.

α.33.6 Kah waantamoonk kah wahteoon pish ne ummenuhkesuonk kutahquompiyeum, kah wadchanuae menuhkesuonk, qushaonk Jehovah ne wunnompakou.
E.33.6 And wisdom and knowledge shall be the stability of thy times, and strength of salvation: the fear of the LORD is his treasure.

α.33.7 Kusseh, ummenuhkeseum8uh nag pish poquadchit ut móoh: wunohteae ann8nitcheg pish weesogohposuog.
E.33.7 Behold, their valiant ones shall cry without: the ambassadors of peace shall weep bitterly.

α.33.8 Taumaogquash yaunegenash: pomushaenin ahqshau: noh pohqunum wunn8waonk, noh jishontam keitotanash: mattohhentupanumau8 howae wosketompoh.
E.33.8 The highways lie waste, the wayfaring man ceaseth: he hath broken the covenant, he hath despised the cities, he regardeth no man.

α.33.9 Ohke maueem8, kah ahp8teau, Lebanon akodchu, kah tummetahwhau: Sharon ogqueneunkqussu touohkomukqut, kah Baashan; kah Carmel ne[n]emonteáog ummeechummuóngan8.
E.33.9 The earth mourneth and languisheth: Lebanon is ashamed and hewn down: Sharon is like a wilderness; and Bashan and Carmel shake off their fruits.

α.33.10 Yeuyeu nutomohkem n8wau Jehovah, yeuyeu nummishhit, yeuyeu nuttahshin nuhhog.
E.33.10 Now will I rise, saith the LORD; now will I be exalted; now will I lift up myself.

α.33.11 Pish k8wompequomw8 wussadteamunash, pish keneechamw8 séque kepenunk: kenashaongan8 onatuh n8tau, pish kummahtsikquneau.
E.33.11 Ye shall conceive chaff, ye shall bring forth stubble: your breath, as fire, shall devour you.

α.33.12 Kah missinninnuog pish ogqueneunkqussuog chokkoswut lime, onatuh tummehtahwhaeu asinnekôussog pish chikoswóog ut n8taut.
E.33.12 And the people shall be as the burnings of lime: as thorns cut up shall they be burned in the fire.

α.33.13 N8tam8k kenaau nôappéogish uttoh asée, kah kenaau paswoppéogish, wahteau8k nummenuhkesuonk.
E.33.13 Hear, ye that are far off, what I have done; and, ye that are near, acknowledge my might.

α.33.14 Zione matcheseanuog wabesuog, wabesuonk nuhkuhkongquog eiantogkeiog, howan ut kenugke nuhhogkanonut pish ayit mahchukkissuwaeu n8taut? howan ut kenugke nuhhogkanonut pish ayit micheme chikohsuonganit?
E.33.14 The sinners in Zion are afraid; fearfulness hath surprised the hypocrites. Who among us shall dwell with the devouring fire? who among us shall dwell with everlasting burnings?

α.33.15 Noh sampweusseae pomushadt, k[à]h sampwe án8wadt, noh sekeneog woskehuwae anuhamoadtúongash: seahog wunnutchegash wutch kogkôunumunat kemunkquodtunk, noh kobhog wuhtauogash wutch n8tamunat musqueheonk, kah yanunuk wuskesukquash wutch naumunat machuk.
E.33.15 He that walketh righteously, and speaketh uprightly; he that despiseth the gain of oppressions, that shaketh his hands from holding of bribes, that stoppeth his ears from hearing of blood, and shutteth his eyes from seeing evil;

α.33.16 Noh pish qunuhqui ayeu, wutushphouaongane ayeuonk, ne ukqussukquanonkônous, petukqununk pish aninnumauau, wunnippe pish papaneyéu8.
E.33.16 He shall dwell on high: his place of defence shall be the munitions of rocks: bread shall be given him; his waters shall be sure.

α.33.17 Kuskesukquash pish naau ketass8toh ut wunnetuonganit: nag pish kuhkinneamwog ohke ne n[ó]ohtag.
E.33.17 Thine eyes shall see the king in his beauty: they shall behold the land that is very far off.

α.33.18 Kuttah pish natwontam unkqueneunkquok, uttiyeuoh Scribe? uttiyeuoh attumunumwenin? uttiyeuoh agketog qununkqui kommukquash.
E.33.18 Thine heart shall meditate terror. Where is the scribe? where is the receiver? where is he that counted the towers?

α.33.19 Matta pish kenauoh nashquetue missinninnuog, siohkont8wae missinninnuog neg woh mo wohtauoacheg: nahnagkiae menan ne woh mo wohtam8an.
E.33.19 Thou shalt not see a fierce people, a people of a deeper speech than thou canst perceive; of a stammering tongue, that thou canst not understand.

α.33.20 Kukinneam8k Zion moeongane nukkeitotat: kuskesukquash pish naum8m8ash Jerusalem manunne ayeuonk, Tabernakle ne matta pish n8kinum8muk, matta pasuk nepattuhquonk pish ontahto8un micheme, kah matta pasuk uppemunneat pish pokshan8.
E.33.20 Look upon Zion, the city of our solemnities: thine eyes shall see Jerusalem a quiet habitation, a tabernacle that shall not be taken down; not one of the stakes thereof shall ever be removed, neither shall any of the cords thereof be broken.

α.33.21 Qut na$ut sohsumoe Jehovah noh pish kuttatupanumoun mishekishkae kah kussitchuwane sepue ayeuonk: ne matta pish aomun8g wuttuhhongane kuht8nog, kah matta pish wunnegane kuht8nog paumushomun8.
E.33.21 But there the glorious LORD will be unto us a place of broad rivers and streams; wherein shall go no galley with oars, neither shall gallant ship pass thereby.

α.33.22 Newutche Lord noh k8sittumwaeneumun, Jehovah noh naumatuonk ayimunkqueog, Jehovah nukkehtass8tamomun, noh pish k8wadchanukqun.
E.33.22 For the LORD is our judge, the LORD is our lawgiver, the LORD is our king; he will save us.

α.33.23 Kukkishpinegash ompinimunash, matta wunne menehkheauog wussepogkonganuhtugk8oh, n8nanumoog sépagkinnumun sepagheg: neit mishe tohqunumwe sequttahhamoonk chachaubenumun n8chumwesitcheg nemunnumwog tohqunnumoonk.
E.33.23 Thy tacklings are loosed; they could not well strengthen their mast, they could not spread the sail: then is the prey of a great spoil divided; the lame take the prey.

α.33.24 Kah noh wadôhkit matta pish n8woou nummahchinam: missinninnuog neg na wadohkitcheg, pish ahquontamauóog ummatcheseonganooash.
E.33.24 And the inhabitant shall not say, I am sick: the people that dwell therein shall be forgiven their iniquity.

α.34.1 PAhs8tshagk, kenaau wutohtimóneash n8tamunat, kah kuhkeitam8k kenaau missinninnuog, ohke n8taj, kah wame ne naohtag, muttaok, kah wame ne waj sohham8m8uk.
E.34.1 Come near, ye nations, to hear; and hearken, ye people: let the earth hear, and all that is therein; the world, and all things that come forth of it.

α.34.2 Newutche ummishe musquanitteaonk Jehovah ohteau ut wame wutohtimóneat, kah wutôskoméhheaonk ut wame ukkenauwameongan8oont: noh uppápaquane pagwanoh, nah upponuh paguanaonganit,
E.34.2 For the indignation of the LORD is upon all nations, and his fury upon all their armies: he hath utterly destroyed them, he hath delivered them to the slaughter.

α.34.3 Kah wonk pagwatauutcheh pish sohwhôokonuh, kah wuttann8wongan8 pish wutch sohham8m8 wunnupwe hogkaóont, kah wadchuash pish mohtupohtaash nashpe 8sqheongan8.
E.34.3 Their slain also shall be cast out, and their stink shall come up out of their carcases, and the mountains shall be melted with their blood.

α.34.4 Kah wame kesukque kenauwameonk pish ompéog, kah kesukquash pish ogque tuttuppaginausuash ahtunk wussukwhosimuk, kah wame ukkenawameonk pish ogque penushaog weenómwussippog pá[n]shunk, kah onatuh panshunk wutch figsuhtugqut.
E.34.4 And all the host of heaven shall be dissolved, and the heavens shall be rolled together as a scroll: and all their host shall fall down, as the leaf falleth off from the vine, and as a falling fig from the fig tree.

α.34.5 Newutche nuttogkodteg kutchissittauun ut kesukqut, kusseh, pish 8núhkuhkongquneau Idumea, kah ut nummatánumáe missinninnuut, en wussittum8onganit.
E.34.5 For my sword shall be bathed in heaven: behold, it shall come down upon Idumea, and upon the people of my curse, to judgment.

α.34.6 Wuttogkodteg Jehovah numwohteau musqueheonk; ne wu[u]nogquehteauun nashpe wanogqinnu8k, kah nashpe lambse kah goatse 8squeheonk, nas[k]pe ramse wutt8unnusse wees: newutche Jehovah ayim sephausuonk: ut Bozrah kah miṣhe paguanittuonk ut Idumea ohkeit.
E.34.6 The sword of the LORD is filled with blood, it is made fat with fatness, and with the blood of lambs and goats, with the fat of the kidneys of rams: for the LORD hath a sacrifice in Bozrah, and a great slaughter in the land of Idumea.

α.34.7 Kah nequttu[un] pish 8weeche w8mseumoh, & oxinog weeche bulsog, & wutohkeu pish wuttadtippáh naṣhpe musqueheonk: kah uppuppissiyeum8 pish weesteauun naṣhpe wees.
E.34.7 And the unicorns shall come down with them, and the bullocks with the bulls; and their land shall be soaked with blood, and their dust made fat with fatness.

α.34.8 Newutche ne Jehovah wutann8tauwae kesukodtum: kah onkquatongane kodtum8ash wutche Zione penuanittuonk.
E.34.8 For it is the day of the LORD's vengeance, and the year of recompences for the controversy of Zion.

α.34.9 Kah nish kussehtannuppeash pish quinnuppenumunash en pittu$ut, kah uppuppissiyeum en brimstonut kah ne ohke pish chikohtae pitteu8.
E.34.9 And the streams thereof shall be turned into pitch, and the dust thereof into brimstone, and the land thereof shall become burning pitch.

α.34.10 Matta pish ontham8un nukonae kah kesukodae, ne pukuttau pish micheme ushpem8: wutch pometuonganit onk yean pometu[o]nganit pish mohtuppashin, matta pish howan uppamuhkom8un micheme.
E.34.10 It shall not be quenched night nor day; the smoke thereof shall go up for ever: from generation to generation it shall lie waste; none shall pass through it for ever and ever.

α.34.11 Qut kuttis kah bittern pish wutohta[n]unneau, kah wonk k8k8khos, kah konkont pish 8tohkin, kah pish naswaiyeue pemunneohtane ukkuhkhamun kah mahchiyeue qussukquanash. 
E.34.11 But the cormorant and the bittern shall possess it; the owl also and the raven shall dwell in it: and he shall stretch out upon it the line of confusion, and the stones of emptiness.

α.34.12 Pish wekomaog wussontimosum8oh en ass8tam8onganit, qut matta howane pish na wutappeinneau, kah wame wussontimos[u]m8oh pish monteag wunnuoh.
E.34.12 They shall call the nobles thereof to the kingdom, but none shall be there, and all her princes shall be nothing.

α.34.13 Kah asinnekoussoh pish sontuoh ut ummishekommukquehtu; netlesash kah koussog ut 8wonkôn8sinn8wout, & ne pish wutayeuongan8 Dragonsog, kah ummoeayeuongan8 k8k8khausog.
E.34.13 And thorns shall come up in her palaces, nettles and brambles in the fortresses thereof: and it shall be an habitation of dragons, and a court for owls.

α.34.14 Touohkomukque wonk puppinashimwog pish nogkishkouaog munnahhanne puppinashimwog; kah satyr pish wehkomau weecheheioh: kah weewes na pish wuttit anwósinin, kah pish namehteou anwosinoe ayeuonk.
E.34.14 The wild beasts of the desert shall also meet with the wild beasts of the island, and the satyr shall cry to his fellow; the screech owl also shall rest there, and find for herself a place of rest.

α.34.15 Mishe k8k8khaus ná pish wuttit wadchishahkon, kah pish ahtinahsin, kah pwohkuhhoeyau, kah miayeu ut agwu wutonkouohtomut: na wonk pish ut vultursog miaeog nish$noh pasuk weeche wutishquoshomoh.
E.34.15 There shall the great owl make her nest, and lay, and hatch, and gather under her shadow: there shall the vultures also be gathered, every one with her mate.

α.34.16 Natinneakontam8k ut upb8kum Lord, kah ogketam8k: wanne pasuk yeush pish mat teagwuninno, wanne pasuk pish quenauhik8 wutishquoshomoh: newutche nut8n wutann8hteamun, & wunnashauanitt8moh ummukinoh.
E.34.16 Seek ye out of the book of the LORD, and read: no one of these shall fail, none shall want her mate: for my mouth it hath commanded, and his spirit it hath gathered them.

α.34.17 Kah wuttit tanohtóadtuwanshuh, kah wunnutcheg pemuneat wunnashpe chachabinuh: nag pish ummichemohtauuneau, wutch pometuonganit onk yaan pometuonganit na pish wuttaiinneau.
E.34.17 And he hath cast the lot for them, and his hand hath divided it unto them by line: they shall possess it for ever, from generation to generation shall they dwell therein.

α.35.1 TOuohkomuk kah touwushinne ayeuonk pish nah 8wekontam8onuh, kah touohkomuk pish muskouantam, kah peṣhauau onatuh rose.
E.35.1 The wilderness and the solitary place shall be glad for them; and the desert shall rejoice, and blossom as the rose.

α.35.2 Pish m8cheke peṣhauau, kah pish wekontamwe kah ket8hamáe muskouantam: wussohsumoonk Lebanon pish unninnuma[u]on, 8neetuonk Carmel kah Sharon: nag pish naumwog wussohsumóonk Jehovah, kah 8neetuonk kum[-]Manitt8mun.
E.35.2 It shall blossom abundantly, and rejoice even with joy and singing: the glory of Lebanon shall be given unto it, the excellency of Carmel and Sharon, they shall see the glory of the LORD, and the excellency of our God.

α.35.3 Menehketeo8k n8chumwe menutchegash, kah menuhkesuweheuk n8chumwe mukkuttukquog.
E.35.3 Strengthen ye the weak hands, and confirm the feeble knees.

α.35.4 Unnók nag wabesuwutte[à]honcheg, menuhkesek, ahque wabesek, kusseh, kum-Manitt8mw8 pish ann8tauwae peyau Manit nashpe onkquatunk, noh pish peyau k8wadchanukqunnaout.
E.35.4 Say to them that are of a fearful heart, Be strong, fear not: behold, your God will come with vengeance, even God with a recompence; he will come and save you.

α.35.5 Neit wuskesuk88ash pogkenukeg pish wohshwem8[à]sh, kah kohkobsahtauogash pish pohquaémoash.
E.35.5 Then the eyes of the blind shall be opened, and the ears of the deaf shall be unstopped.

α.35.6 Neit pish n8chumwesuenin ogque quequeshau áyompaut, kah mo kakutt8e meenan pish ketohomom8: newutche nippe pish sonkhetchuan wutch touohkomuk, kah kussitchúanash ut touohkomuk.
E.35.6 Then shall the lame man leap as an hart, and the tongue of the dumb sing: for in the wilderness shall waters break out, and streams in the desert.

α.35.7 Kah kôhkohteadtáe ohke pish nuppissú8, & kúhkuht8n8e ohke ne pish nippeae tohkekomu8, ut dragone ayeuonganit, uttoh nish$noh pasuk sepsuk, na pish mosketú8 wekinashquash, kah rushes[á]sh.
E.35.7 And the parched ground shall become a pool, and the thirsty land springs of water: in the habitation of dragons, where each lay, shall be grass with reeds and rushes.

α.35.8 Kah toumaog na pish ohteau, kah may, kah ne pish hettamun wunneetupanatamwe may, nishkeneunkqussit matta pish uppaumukkomm8un, qut ne pish yeug wutche, papaumusháenuog, tohkônogque ass8khettit, matta pish pehchumma8og.
E.35.8 And an highway shall be there, and a way, and it shall be called The way of holiness; the unclean shall not pass over it; but it shall be for those: the wayfaring men, though fools, shall not err therein.

α.35.9 Na matta pish qunnón8wunn8, kah wanne m8wheyausae puppinashim na pish ukkuhkuhquein, matta pish na$ut nameheaun: qut manouhwhutcheg na pish uppomushoneau.
E.35.9 No lion shall be there, nor any ravenous beast shall go up thereon, it shall not be found there; but the redeemed shall walk there:

α.35.10 Kah manouwhoncheh Jehovah pish qushkeog, kah pish peyaog Sion nashpe ket8hom[á]ongash, kah machemohtag wekontamoonk ut uppuhkuk8óut, nag pish attumunumwog mskauantamoonk kah wekontamoonk, kah unkquanumoonk kah mishânom8onk pish pt8sheau.
E.35.10 And the ransomed of the LORD shall return, and come to Zion with songs and everlasting joy upon their heads: they shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away.

α.36.1 KAh n$nih nabo weyáue kodtom8m Hezekiah ketass8t, Sennacherib Assyriae ketass8t ayeuuhkonittue kuhkuhquehtauau wame pummeneutaúsue keitotanash Judah, kah nish wussohkomunash.
E.36.1 Now it came to pass in the fourteenth year of king Hezekiah, that Sennacherib king of Assyria came up against all the defenced cities of Judah, and took them.

α.36.2 Kah Assyriae ketass8t ann8nau Rabshekah wutch Lachish en Jerusalem, en Hezekiah ketass8t[im]wut, weeche miṣhe kenauwameoh: kah ne[é]pau kishke kohkuhquóhtag ohtopaṣhitteunk, ut mayut wutohteuhkonit pôanek8énin.
E.36.2 And the king of Assyria sent Rabshakeh from Lachish to Jerusalem unto king Hezekiah with a great army. And he stood by the conduit of the upper pool in the highway of the fuller's field.

α.36.3 Eliakim wunnaumonuh Hilkiah noh en sohham, noh piahquttuk weetu, kah Shebna noh Scribe, kah Joash wunnaumonuh Asaph mehquontamwahuwaénin.
E.36.3 Then came forth unto him Eliakim, Hilkiah's son, which was over the house, and Shebna the scribe, and Joah, Asaph's son, the recorder.

α.36.4 Kah Rabshakeh nah wuttinuh, yeuyeu unnók Hezekiah, yeu wussin miṣhe ketass8t, Assyriae ketass8t, chaugua yeu teagwe yeu wutt8anatam8onk ne pabahtantaman?
E.36.4 And Rabshakeh said unto them, Say ye now to Hezekiah, Thus saith the great king, the king of Assyria, What confidence is this wherein thou trustest?

α.36.5 Nussim (kussim, qut webe tahn8che kutt8wongash) nutóhto kog[à]hquttuonk, kah menuhkesuonk en ayeuuhkonat: qut h[o]wan kuppabahtanum, waj chek[é]htauwéan?
E.36.5 I say, sayest thou, (but they are but vain words) I have counsel and strength for war: now on whom dost thou trust, that thou rebellest against me?

α.36.6 Kusseh, kuppabahtantam pohquiyeue k8wékinasque anwohhou, ut Egypt, ne howan ompatussum8óntog, woh ummiskouwutchinun: ne wuttátupéyeuwunneau Pharaoh Egypte ketass8t, wame neh pabahtanumukqutcheh.
E.36.6 Lo, thou trustest in the staff of this broken reed, on Egypt; whereon if a man lean, it will go into his hand, and pierce it: so is Pharaoh king of Egypt to all that trust in him.

α.36.7 Qut ussean, nuppabahtanumómun Jehovah num-Manitt8mun[?] sun noh matta, ukqunúhqui ayeuongash, kah wut-altarumash Hezekiah wunneemunumunapash, kah unnóp Judahoh kah Jerusalemoh, pish k8wowussummuwómw8 ut anaquohtag yeu Altar?
E.36.7 But if thou say to me, We trust in the LORD our God: is it not he, whose high places and whose altars Hezekiah hath taken away, and said to Judah and to Jerusalem, Ye shall worship before this altar?

α.36.8 Newutche yeuyeu mag8k kenohtohsuongash, k8wehquetumoush, en nussontimômut Assyriae ketass8t, kah kuttinninnumoush neese muttañonganogkussuog horsesog, tapenuman wutch k8weech8humukqunnaóut neh ná8mahetticheh.
E.36.8 Now therefore give pledges, I pray thee, to my master the king of Assyria, and I will give thee two thousand horses, if thou be able on thy part to set riders upon them.

α.36.9 Tohwutch neit quinuppequaéhtauadt pasuk peississit mugquomp nussontimom wuttinneumoh, kah pabahtánumadt Egypt wutch chariotsash kah nay8mukqutcheg horsesoh?
E.36.9 How then wilt thou turn away the face of one captain of the least of my master's servants, and put thy trust on Egypt for chariots and for horsemen?

α.36.10 Kah yeuyeu nen ayeuuhkonittue nukkuhkuhquéhtamun yeu ohke matta wusseinat Jehovah, pagwatauunat? Jehovah nuttinuk, ayeuuhkonittue kuhkuhquéhtash yeu ohke, kah pagwataush.
E.36.10 And am I now come up without the LORD against this land to destroy it? the LORD said unto me, Go up against this land, and destroy it.

α.36.11 Neit Eliaim kah Shebna, kah Joah unnaog Rábshakehoh, unnont8wanumau k8wehquetumoush kittinneumog Syraie unnont8waonk, newutche n8wohtamunan: kah ahque unnont8wanumaiinnean Jewse unnont8waonk, ut wehtauogk8wout missinninnuog neg apitcheg pummeneutonganit,
E.36.11 Then said Eliakim and Shebna and Joah unto Rabshakeh, Speak, I pray thee, unto thy servants in the Syrian language; for we understand it: and speak not to us in the Jews' language, in the ears of the people that are on the wall.

α.36.12 Qut Rabshakeh n8wau, sun nussontimom nutann8nukqus en kussontimomut, kah en kuhhogkat, unneat yeush kutt8wongash? sunnummatta nuttin ánn8nuk8h wosketompahtu neg apitcheg pummeneutonganit, onk woh meechuog nehenwonche umm8yu, kah wuttattamwog wunnuneyeu, weeche kenauu?
E.36.12 But Rabshakeh said, Hath my master sent me to thy master and to thee to speak these words? hath he not sent me to the men that sit upon the wall, that they may eat their own dung, and drink their own piss with you?

α.36.13 Neit Rabshakeh neepáu, kah mishont8wau, nashpe Jewse unnont8waonk, kah n8wau, n8tám8k ukkutt8wongash mishe ketass8t, Assyriae ketass8t.
E.36.13 Then Rabshakeh stood, and cried with a loud voice in the Jews' language, and said, Hear ye the words of the great king, the king of Assyria.

α.36.14 Yeu wussin ketass8t, ahque Hezechiah as8kekomuk8k, newutche matta pish tapenum8 kuppohquohwhunukqunnaoout.
E.36.14 Thus saith the king, Let not Hezekiah deceive you: for he shall not be able to deliver you.

α.36.15 Asuh ahque Hezechiah pabahtantamwahik8k Jehovah$ut, n8wonat, Jehovah pish wunamuhkut kuppohquohwhunukqun, yeu keitotan matta pish mag8un, en wunnutcheganit Assyriae ketass8t.
E.36.15 Neither let Hezekiah make you trust in the LORD, saying, The LORD will surely deliver us: this city shall not be delivered into the hand of the king of Assyria.

α.36.16 Kuhkehtauuhteok Hezechiah, newutche yeu wussin Assyriae ketass8t, wunn8waonk ayimaiek nashpe mag8onk, kah sohham8k en nuhhogkat: kah meech8k nish$noh pasuk nehenwonche, 8wenomwussippog, kah nehenwonche, figsehtug, kah wuttattam8k nish$noh pasuk ohtopashitteae nippeash.
E.36.16 Hearken not to Hezekiah: for thus saith the king of Assyria, Make an agreement with me by a present, and come out to me: and eat ye every one of his vine, and every one of his fig tree, and drink ye every one the waters of his own cistern;

α.36.17 Noh pajeh nuppéyonat, kah keneemunumunnaoout en ohket tatuppeyeu8uk nehenwonche kutohkeyeuout: weatchiminee ohke, kah wine ohke petukqunneganee kah weenominneohtekonee ohke.
E.36.17 Until I come and take you away to a land like your own land, a land of corn and wine, a land of bread and vineyards.

α.36.18 Nupweshanukquehteok Hezechiah unn8wadt, Jehovah pish kuppohquohwhunukqun: sun howae wutohtimounneae Manittuog pohquohwúttoog wutohtu wutch wunnutcheganit Assyriae ketass8t?
E.36.18 Beware lest Hezekiah persuade you, saying, the LORD will deliver us. Hath any of the gods of the nations delivered his land out of the hand of the king of Assyria?

α.36.19 Uttiyeug Hamathe kah Arpade Manitt8og? uttiyeug Sepharvaim8e M[à]nitt8og? kah sun nag pohquohwhunoog Samaria wutch nunnutcheganit?
E.36.19 Where are the gods of Hamath and Arphad? where are the gods of Sepharvaim? and have they delivered Samaria out of my hand?

α.36.20 Howanig neg ut kénugke wame yeug wutohtimoinne Manitt8og, neg pohquohwhuttunkeg wutohtu wutch nunnutcheganit, waj woh Jehovah pohquohwuttunk Jerusalem wutch nunnutcheganit?
E.36.20 Who are they among all the gods of these lands, that have delivered their land out of my hand, that the LORD should deliver Jerusalem out of my hand?

α.36.21 Qut nag chequnappuog, kah matta wunnamp8hamauouh pasuk kutt8onk, newutche ketáss8t wutann8teám8onk, ne an8womuk namp8hamauuhteok,
E.36.21 But they held their peace, and answered him not a word: for the king's commandment was, saying, Answer him not.

α.36.22 Neit Eliakim wunnaumonuh Hilkiah, noh piahquttuk wetu, kah Shebna noh Scribe kah Joah wunnaumonuh Asaph mehquontamwayeuaenin, peyaunáog Hezechiahoh, sokqshadtauwehettit wuthogk8un8oash, kah nah wuttinnonaoash ukkutt8wongash Rabshakeh.
E.36.22 Then came Eliakim, the son of Hilkiah, that was over the household, and Shebna the scribe, and Joah, the son of Asaph, the recorder, to Hezekiah with their clothes rent, and told him the words of Rabshakeh.

α.37.1 KAh n$nihyeup Hezechiah ketass8t yeu n8tog nehnekshadto wuthogk8unash kah man8tionak hogk8, kah petutteau wekit Jéhovah.
E.37.1 And it came to pass, when king Hezekiah heard it, that he rent his clothes, and covered himself with sackcloth, and went into the house of the LORD.

α.37.2 Kah ann8nau Eliakim noh nanauwunuk weetu, Shebna noh Scribe & Sepausuenue Eldersog, agqhettit man8tionak, en Esayah quoshodtumwaenuut wunnaumonuh Amoz.
E.37.2 And he sent Eliakim, who was over the household, and Shebna the scribe, and the elders of the priests covered with sackcloth, unto Isaiah the prophet the son of Amoz.

α.37.3 Kag nág wuttinouh, yeu wussin Hezechiah, yeu kesukok wuttamehpunae kesukod, kah auskomae, kah Blasphemae, newutche mukkiog kodtauweetuog, kah matta menuhkesuonganun8h neechonat.
E.37.3 And they said unto him, Thus saith Hezekiah, This day is a day of trouble, and of rebuke, and of blasphemy: for the children are come to the birth, and there is not strength to bring forth.

α.37.4 Pagwodcheh woh Jehovah n8tam ukkutt8wongash Rabshakeh, neh Assyriae ketàss8t, wussontimomoh an8nukqut kehkomonat pomantamwae God, kah pish auskontam kutt8wongash nish Lord kum$Manitt8m n8togish: newutche tahshinush kuppeantam8onk, wutche sequttahwhutcheg ne apitcheg.
E.37.4 It may be the LORD thy God will hear the words of Rabshakeh, whom the king of Assyria his master hath sent to reproach the living God, and will reprove the words which the LORD thy God hath heard: wherefore lift up thy prayer for the remnant that is left.

α.37.5 Neit wuttinneumoh ketass8t Hezechiah peyaonaog Isaiahoh.
E.37.5 So the servants of king Hezekiah came to Isaiah.

α.37.6 Kah Isaiah nah wuttinuh, yeu woh kittinnoneau kussontimom8h, yeu wussin Jehovah, wabesuontam8hkon kutt8ongash nish n8tamanish, nish nashpe wuttinneumoh Assyriae ketass8t nupblasphemónukquog.
E.37.6 And Isaiah said unto them, Thus shall ye say unto your master, Thus saith the LORD, Be not afraid of the words that thou hast heard, wherewith the servants of the king of Assyria have blasphemed me.

α.37.7 Kusseh, nupponamau nashauongoh, kah noh pish n8tam unnussittunkquôt, kah pish qushkeu en nehenwonche wutohkit, kah nuppunushah nashpe togkodteg ut nehenwonche wutohkit.
E.37.7 Behold, I will send a blast upon him, and he shall hear a rumour, and return to his own land; and I will cause him to fall by the sword in his own land.

α.37.8 Neit Rabshakeh qushkeu, kah namehheau Assyriae ketass8toh, ayeuuhkontamunat Libnah: newutche n8tamup, moncheai wutch Lachish.
E.37.8 So Rabshakeh returned, and found the king of Assyria warring against Libnah: for he had heard that he was departed from Lachish.

α.37.9 Kah n8tamup papaume Tirhakah Ethiopiae ketass8t, noh sohham kutayeuuhkonukqunat: kah n8tog, ann8nau ann8náenuh en Hezechiahut n8wonat.
E.37.9 And he heard say concerning Tirhakah king of Ethiopia, He is come forth to make war with thee. And when he heard it, he sent messengers to Hezekiah, saying,

α.37.10 Yeu woh kuttinnoneau Hezechiah Judae ketass8t, n8wagk, kum-Manitt8m noh pabahtanumadt as8kukkomuk8hkon, n8wonat Jerusalem matta pish mag8un en wunnutchegani Assyriae ketass8t.
E.37.10 Thus shall ye speak to Hezekiah king of Judah, saying, Let not thy God, in whom thou trustest, deceive thee, saying, Jerusalem shall not be given into the hand of the king of Assyria.

α.37.11 Kusseh, ken8tamup Assyriae ketass8tamwog, ne anteauhettit wame wutohtimoineash, papuhquanne pagwanonaoont, kah ken sun woh kuppohquohwhunit?
E.37.11 Behold, thou hast heard what the kings of Assyria have done to all lands by destroying them utterly; and shalt thou be delivered?

α.37.12 Wutohtimoune Manitt8og, sun nah uppohquohwhunouh, neh n8shog mahche pagwanahetticheh, ut Gozanut, kah Haranut, kah Rezephut, kah wunneechanoh Eden neg apitcheg Telassar?
E.37.12 Have the gods of the nations delivered them which my fathers have destroyed, as Gozan, and Haran, and Rezeph, and the children of Eden which were in Telassar?

α.37.13 Uttiyeuoh Hamathe ketass8t, Arphade ketass8t, kah Sepharvaimme otanae ketass8t, Henah kah Ivah?
E.37.13 Where is the king of Hamath, and the king of Arphad, and the king of the city of Sepharvaim, Hena, and Ivah?

α.37.14 Kah Hezechiah attumunum wussukwhonk, wutch wunnutcheganit ann8naenin kah wutogketamun: kah Hezechiah kuhkuhqueu en wekit Jehovah, kah wussepaginumun ut anaquabit Jehovah.
E.37.14 And Hezekiah received the letter from the hand of the messengers, and read it: and Hezekiah went up unto the house of the LORD, and spread it before the LORD.

α.37.15 Kah Hezechiah peantamauau Jehovahoh, n8wau,
E.37.15 And Hezekiah prayed unto the LORD, saying,

α.37.16 Woi Jehvoah ayeuteaunit, um-Manitt8moh Israel, ken ayean nashauwe Cherubimsut, ken um-Manitt8m8uh, ken webe, wame ass8tam8ongash ut ohkeit, ken kukkesteoh kesuk kah ohke.
E.37.16 O LORD of hosts, God of Israel, that dwellest between the cherubims, thou art the God, even thou alone, of all the kingdoms of the earth: thou hast made heaven and earth.

α.37.17 Ahch8sitash, woi Jehovah, kah n8tash wôhshinush kuskesukquash woi Jehovah, kah naish, kah n8tash wame ukkutt8wongash Senacherib, nish an8teamwutcheh kehkomonat pomantamwae God.
E.37.17 Incline thine ear, O LORD, and hear; open thine eyes, O LORD, and see: and hear all the words of Sennacherib, which hath sent to reproach the living God.

α.37.18 Wunnamuhkut woi Jehovah, Assyriae ketass8tamwog, pagwodteoog wame wutohtimoneash, kah wutohtuoash.
E.37.18 Of a truth, LORD, the kings of Assyria have laid waste all the nations, and their countries,

α.37.19 Kah unnohteaog um[$]Manitt8m8uh en n8taut: newutche nag matta Manitt88og, qut wosketompae wunnutchegane anakausuongash, mehtug káh qussuk: newaj nah pagwanont.
E.37.19 And have cast their gods into the fire: for they were no gods, but the work of men's hands, wood and stone: therefore they have destroyed them.

α.37.20 Newutche yeuyeu, woi Jehovah num-Manitt8mun, wadchaninneau wutch wunnutcheganit onk woh wame ass8tam8ongash muttaohket, wahteauog, ken Jehovah, ken webe.
E.37.20 Now therefore, O LORD our God, save us from his hand, that all the kingdoms of the earth may know that thou art the LORD, even thou only.

α.37.21 Neit Isaiah wunnaumonuh Amoz ann8team8, en Hezechiahut, n8wau yeu wussin Jehvovah um-Manitt8m8oh Israel, paantamauwean ayeuuhkonittue Senacherib, Assyriae ketass8t.
E.37.21 Then Isaiah the son of Amoz sent unto Hezekiah, saying, Thus saith the LORD God of Israel, Whereas thou hast prayed to me against Sennacherib king of Assyria:

α.37.22 Yeu ukkutt8onk Jehovah ne an8wop papaume nagum: peénomp, wuttaunoh Zion kutjishanumuk, kah momontauae kutahan8wehtunk, wuttaunoh Jerusalem, kenónokuhquaehtunk.
E.37.22 This is the word which the LORD hath spoken concerning him; The virgin, the daughter of Zion, hath despised thee, and laughed thee to scorn; the daughter of Jerusalem hath shaken her head at thee.

α.37.23 Howan kuhkékom, kupblasphemon? kah howan ayeuuhkonittue kummishont8wánumau, kah kukqun[ú]hque táhshinum kuskesukquash, ayeuuhkonittue 8neetupanatam8moh Israel.
E.37.23 Whom hast thou reproached and blasphemed? and against whom hast thou exalted thy voice, and lifted up thine eyes on high? even against the Holy One of Israel.

α.37.24 Nashpe kittinneumog kukkehkom Jehovah, kah kussip, nashp[é] mataánukish nutchariotsumash, nukkuhkuhquem en kudohkôag wadchuuhkontu, sussippoeu Lebanon, kah nuttumehtah quanunkqussitcheg chikuppog, kah pepenamwe k8wâog, kah pish nuppetutteam kodukóag wussissipôiyeumut, kah uk-Carmelle touohkomuk.
E.37.24 By thy servants hast thou reproached the Lord, and hast said, By the multitude of my chariots am I come up to the height of the mountains, to the sides of Lebanon; and I will cut down the tall cedars thereof, and the choice fir trees thereof: and I will enter into the height of his border, and the forest of his Carmel.

α.37.25 N8wonuhkontamup kah n8tatumup nippe, kah nashpe nusseet nukôhkonéhteap wame wusseppum8ash neg wéenuhkauógkutcheg.
E.37.25 I have digged, and drunk water; and with the sole of my feet have I dried up all the rivers of the besieged places.

α.37.26 Sunnummatta n8adt ken8tam8mus uttoh ánteau, kah n8adt nukkuhkenauéhtinneap? yeuyeu nukkezteauun, onk woh ken kummahchumwehteauuneat pummeneutausue keitotanash wep8to8ut.
E.37.26 Hast thou not heard long ago, how I have done it; and of ancient times, that I have formed it? now have I brought it to pass, that thou shouldest be to lay waste defenced cities into ruinous heaps.

α.37.27 Newaj neg na wadohkitcheg n8chumwesuog, kah chepshanaog kah naswaiyeuog, tatuppeyeu8og ohteuhkone moskehtuut, kah ohchippogqut, kah, woskeche weetuome moskehtuut, kah pissagquodtinnit weachiminneash.
E.37.27 Therefore their inhabitants were of small power, they were dismayed and confounded: they were as the grass of the field, and as the green herb, as the grass on the housetops, and as corn blasted before it be grown up.

α.37.28 Qut n8wahteoh kutayeuonk, kah kussohham8onk kah kuppetukonat, kah kummusquanummuonk.
E.37.28 But I know thy abode, and thy going out, and thy coming in, and thy rage against me.

α.37.29 Newutche kummusquanummuonk, kah k8wogkoue[ó]nk kuhkuhquem8 en nuhtauogkut: newaj ponum n8hquon kutchónit, kah nup-bridlum ut kussisset8nit, kah kukkushquenush en mayut ne wâman.
E.37.29 Because thy rage against me, and thy tumult, is come up into mine ears, therefore will I put my hook in thy nose, and my bridle in thy lips, and I will turn thee back by the way by which thou camest.

α.37.30 Kah yeu pish kukkehkinneasuonk yeu kodtum8k pish kummeechumw8, ne nehenwonchekik: kah nahohtóeu kodtumuk, ne nan noh wadchegit: kah nishwe kodtum8k ohkehteagk, kah kepenum8k, kah weenominneohketeagk, kah meech8k ne meechu[m]muonk.
E.37.30 And this shall be a sign unto thee, Ye shall eat this year such as groweth of itself; and the second year that which springeth of the same: and in the third year sow ye, and reap, and plant vineyards, and eat the fruit thereof.

α.37.31 Kah sekqshoncheg ut wekit Judah neg pohquohhogig, nág pish ohkeayeu unuhchabukaog, kah wohkummiyeu unummeechummuog.
E.37.31 And the remnant that is escaped of the house of Judah shall again take root downward, and bear fruit upward:

α.37.32 Newutche ashqushoncheg pish sohhamwog wutch Jerusalem, kah neg wutch pohquohhogig wadchuut Zion: wuszealum Jehovah ayeuteaunit yeu pish wutussen.
E.37.32 For out of Jerusalem shall go forth a remnant, and they that escape out of mount Zion: the zeal of the LORD of hosts shall do this.

α.37.33 Newaj yeu n8wadt Jehovah papaume wutássyriae ketass8t, matta pish petutteaou pummeyeu keihtotanat kah matta pish nawuttit in kouhquodt kah matta pish naṣhpe peyoou ogqunegash, & matta pish wutayeuuhkonittue kutaham8un.
E.37.33 Therefore thus saith the LORD concerning the king of Assyria, He shall not come into this city, nor shoot an arrow there, nor come before it with shields, nor cast a bank against it.

α.37.34 Ne may wagkup, ne pish wonk wuttin qushken kah matta pish yeu petuttutteaun keihtotan n8wau Jehovah[-]
E.37.34 By the way that he came, by the same shall he return, and shall not come into this city, saith the LORD.

α.37.35 Newutche yeu n8wadchumun keihtotan, wadchanumunat wutche nen nehenwonche, kah wutche nuttinneum David.
E.37.35 For I will defend this city to save it for mine own sake, and for my servant David's sake.

α.37.36 Neit wut-Angelumoh Jehovah sohhamwoh, kah nushau ut wuttuppukkussinn8wongan8wout Assyriansog, nequt pasuk8e, kah shwosuk tahshinchage, kah napanna tahshe muttanonganogkussuog: kah nompoaeu omohkehettit kusseh nag wame nupwog.
E.37.36 Then the angel of the LORD went forth, and smote in the camp of the Assyrians a hundred and fourscore and five thousand: and when they arose early in the morning, behold, they were all dead corpses.

α.37.37 Neit Senacherib wut-Assyriae ketass8t amaeu kah monchu kah qushku, kah ayeu Ninive.
E.37.37 So Sennacherib king of Assyria departed, and went and returned, and dwelt at Nineveh.

α.37.38 Kah nniyeup wó[u]ssumont weekit Nishroch ummanitt8m, Hidramelech kah Sharezer wunnaumonuh, wuttogkomukquoh ohkeit, kah Esarhaddon wunnaumonuh wunnompe nanawunnuwómukquoh.
E.37.38 And it came to pass, as he was worshipping in the house of Nisroch his god, that Adrammelech and Sharezer his sons smote him with the sword; and they escaped into the land of Armenia: and Esarhaddon his son reigned in his stead.

α.38.1 YEush ut kesukodtash Hezekiah mahchinau en nuppunat, kah Isaiah quoshodtumwaen wunnaumonuh Amoz peyaonukquoh, kah wuttugquoh, yeu wussin Jehovah, wunohtoush kek, newutche pish kenup, kah matta kuppomantamóh.
E.38.1 In those days was Hezekiah sick unto death. And Isaiah the prophet the son of Amoz came unto him, and said unto him, Thus saith the LORD, Set thine house in order: for thou shalt die, and not live.

α.38.2 Neit Hezechiah quinnippinnum wuskesuk en sussipponkomuk, kah péantamauau Jehovah.
E.38.2 Then Hezekiah turned his face toward the wall, and prayed unto the LORD,

α.38.3 Kah n8wau, mehquontash yeuyeu woi Jehovah k8wehquetumoush, uttoh an pomusháomp ut anaquabean wunnamuhkutée, káh pañuppeteaháeu kah nummahche ussem né wanekik ut anaquabean, kah Hezechiah muttauhpâsu.
E.38.3 And said, Remember now, O LORD, I beseech thee, how I have walked before thee in truth and with a perfect heart, and have done that which is good in thy sight. And Hezekiah wept sore.

α.38.4 Neit wuttinn8waonk Jehovah peyaonuk Isayah n8wau,
E.38.4 Then came the word of the LORD to Isaiah, saying,

α.38.5 Monchish us Hezechiah, yeu wussin Jehovah, um-Manitt8moh David k8sh: nunn8tam kuppeantamoonk, nunnaum kussippegwash: kusseh, nukk8tn[e]hteoh kukkesukodtumash nabo napanna tahshe kodtumwae.
E.38.5 Go, and say to Hezekiah, Thus saith the LORD, the God of David thy father, I have heard thy prayer, I have seen thy tears: behold, I will add unto thy days fifteen years.

α.38.6 Kah pish kuppohquohwhunush kah yeu keitotan, wutch wunnutcheganit Ass[y]iae ketass8t: kah n8wadchanum yeu otán.
E.38.6 And I will deliver thee and this city out of the hand of the king of Assyria: and I will defend this city.

α.38.7 Kah yeu pish kuhkinneasuonk wutch Jehovahut, woh wutussen Jehovah ne an8wadt.
E.38.7 And this shall be a sign unto thee from the LORD, that the LORD will do this thing that he hath spoken;

α.38.8 Kusseh, nutomponcheáhtoh dialle onkauohteau ne womussúm8uk ut Ahaze wussun-dialumut, ompo[h]ch[é]eu piogquonéhtuonk neit nepauz piogquonehtuongane qushkeu, nish mahche pamuhkogkish.
E.38.8 Behold, I will bring again the shadow of the degrees, which is gone down in the sun dial of Ahaz, ten degrees backward. So the sun returned ten degrees, by which degrees it was gone down.

α.38.9 OOsukuhwhesuonk Hezechiah Judae ketass8t, mahchinadt, kah keteóp wutch ummahchinónat.
E.38.9 The writing of Hezekiah king of Judah, when he had been sick, and was recovered of his sickness:

α.38.10 Nussip tâmussumuk nukkesukodtumash, pish nuttom weenohkée squontamut: sequnnumukish nukkodtum8mash nutamaunumonteanash.
E.38.10 I said in the cutting off of my days, I shall go to the gates of the grave: I am deprived of the residue of my years.

α.38.11 Nussip matta pish nunnau Jehovah, Jehovah ut pomantamoe ohkeit: matta pish wonk nunnauoh wosketomp, weeche wadohkitcheg muttaohkit.
E.38.11 I said, I shall not see the LORD, even the LORD, in the land of the living: I shall behold man no more with the inhabitants of the world.

α.38.12 Nukkechisuonk nutontoht[ò]nteau onatuh nanaushepsaen wekit: nuttummussum nukketeaonk onatuh monakinehteáenin: pish nuttummussuk nashpé mohchim8e mahchinnaonguh: w[u]tch kesukodtut pajeh wunnonk8ut, pish kummahcheh.
E.38.12 Mine age is departed, and is removed from me as a shepherd's tent: I have cut off like a weaver my life: he will cut me off with pining sickness: from day even to night wilt thou make an end of me.

α.38.13 Nutogketomup pajeh mohtompanúut, onatuh qunnonouut pish pokshadto wame nuskonash, wutch kesukodtut pajeh wunnonk8ut k8wohkukquohsumeh.
E.38.13 I reckoned till morning, that, as a lion, so will he break all my bones: from day even to night wilt thou make an end of me.

α.38.14 Onatuh sassadt asuh mameesashquis, ne nuttinn8won, nutogque mauop wuskuhwhunanâut: nuskesukquash sauunum88ash spadtauwompinneat: woi Jehovah, nussinukkuhhuk, nontumah.
E.38.14 Like a crane or a swallow, so did I chatter: I did mourn as a dove: mine eyes fail with looking upward: O LORD, I am oppressed; undertake for me.

α.38.15 Toh pish nussim? naneeswe nuttukqunáh, kah nagum wutussen: pish nukkemwusham ut wame nukkodtum8mut, n8wésogke keteahogkôunit.
E.38.15 What shall I say? he hath both spoken unto me, and himself hath done it: I shall go softly all my years in the bitterness of my soul.

α.38.16 Woi Lord nashpe yeush pomantamwog wosk[e]tompaog: kah ut wame yeush nunnashauongane pomantamoonk ohteau, neit kukketeáheh kah kuppomantamwaheh
E.38.16 O LORD, by these things men live, and in all these things is the life of my spirit: so wilt thou recover me, and make me to live.

α.38.17 Kusseh, wutche wunohteaonk nutáhtop mishe weesogkunóonk, qut k8womonomp nukketeahogkou, kah kuppohquohwhun wutch aninn8e pissohtheganit; newutch kuttinnôhteap wame nummatcheseongash kuppusquanit.
E.38.17 Behold, for peace I had great bitterness: but thou hast in love to my soul delivered it from the pit of corruption: for thou hast cast all my sins behind thy back.

α.38.18 Newutche weenohk[é] mattá woh k8wóweenomuk8h, nupp8onk matta kummishanumuko[u], neg womussitcheg en passahtheganit, matta woh annoontamóog k8namuhkutéayeum.
E.38.18 For the grave cannot praise thee, death can not celebrate thee: they that go down into the pit cannot hope for thy truth.

α.38.19 Pâmontog, pâmontog noh pish k8woweenomuk, ne ásee yeu kesukok, wut8shimau pish wahteauwahuah k8namuhkutéyeum en mukkiesut.
E.38.19 The living, the living, he shall praise thee, as I do this day: the father to the children shall make known thy truth.

α.38.20 Jehovah nukkenuppe wadchanuk, newaj pish unn8homóog nukket8homaongash nashpe pemunneohtone puhpegk, tosohke pomontamog ut wekit Jehovah.
E.38.20 The LORD was ready to save me: therefore we will sing my songs to the stringed instruments all the days of our life in the house of the LORD.

α.38.21 Newutche Isaiah n8wop, neemunumohettich figse puttukqutchéi, kah ponaskéhtuáhettich mogquenit, kah pish keteau.
E.38.21 For Isaiah had said, Let them take a lump of figs, and lay it for a plaister upon the boil, and he shall recover.

α.38.22 Hezekiah wonk n8wop, teagwe kuhkinneasuonk onk woh nukkuhkuhquem en weekit Jehovah.
E.38.22 Hezekiah also had said, What is the sign that I shall go up to the house of the LORD?

α.39.1 NA ahquompak Merod[a]ch-Baladan wunnaumonuh Baladan Babylone ketass8t, negonshúau wussukwhongash noh en, kah mag8onk en Hezechiahut, newutche n8tam mahchinap, kah keteau.
E.39.1 At that time Merodachbaladan, the son of Baladan, king of Babylon, sent letters and a present to Hezekiah: for he had heard that he had been sick, and was recovered.

α.39.2 Kah Hezechiah nah 8weekontam8ónuh, kah wunnohtinuh wunnompak8unikkomuk, silver, kah gold, kah spicesash, kah mishôadtue sussequeáeu pummeeash, kah wame ukkenauwamée week, káh wame ne ohtag ut weekit, kah ut wame wutass8tom8onganit, ne Hezechiah matta nohtinnunk.
E.39.2 And Hezekiah was glad of them, and shewed them the house of his precious things, the silver, and the gold, and the spices, and the precious ointment, and all the house of his armour, and all that was found in his treasures: there was nothing in his house, nor in all his dominion, that Hezekiah shewed them not.

α.39.3 Neit Isaiah quoshodtumwáen peyaonau Hezechiah ketass8toh, kah wuttinuh, toh n8waog yeug wosketompaog? kah tohnoh 8mwog en kuhhogkat, kah Hezechiah n8wop, neg nuppeyaonukquog wutch nôadtit wutohtimoneat, wutch Babylon.
E.39.3 Then came Isaiah the prophet unto king Hezekiah, and said unto him, What said these men? and from whence came they unto thee? And Hezekiah said, They are come from a far country unto me, even from Babylon.

α.39.4 Neit n8wop, teagwa naumwog ut kékit? k[á]h Hezekiah namp8ham, naumwog wame ne neekit ohtag, matta ne teag ut nunnompag8unnekomukqut, ne matta nóhtinóog.
E.39.4 Then said he, What have they seen in thine house? And Hezekiah answered, All that is in mine house have they seen: there is nothing among my treasures that I have not shewed them.

α.39.5 Neit Isaiah unnau, Hezechiahoh, n8tash ukkutt8onk Jehovah ayeuteaunit.
E.39.5 Then said Isaiah to Hezekiah, Hear the word of the LORD of hosts:

α.39.6 Kusseh, kesukodtash peyom8ash, ne wame kekit ohtag, kah nish k8shog wadchanummóhetteupash pajeh yeu kesukok, pish uss8wuttauunash Babylon, matta pish teag ushqunnum8un wussin Jehovah.
E.39.6 Behold, the days come, that all that is in thine house, and that which thy fathers have laid up in store until this day, shall be carried to Babylon: nothing shall be left, saith the LORD.

α.39.7 Kah neg pish monchanaog kenaumonuh, neg sohhogig wutch kohhogkat, neg pish wânamoniéaneg, kah nag pish wuttinneumunneunk wekit Babylone ketass8t.
E.39.7 And of thy sons that shall issue from thee, which thou shalt beget, shall they take away; and they shall be eunuchs in the palace of the king of Babylon.

α.39.8 Neit Hezechiah unnau Isaiahoh, wunnegen ukkutt8onk Jehovah ne an8wáan: kah wonk n8wop, newutche wunohteaonk kah wanumuhkuteyeuuk ohteau ut nukkesukodtumut.
E.39.8 Then said Hezekiah to Isaiah, Good is the word of the LORD which thou hast spoken. He said moreover, For there shall be peace and truth in my days.

α.40.1 TAphéninongqutch, taphéninongqutch nummissinninneumog, n8wau kum-Manitt8m.
E.40.1 Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, saith your God.

α.40.2 Tapheáe ken8nók Jerusalem, kah mishont8wánumók, ummattompagum wohkukquashin, ummatcheseonk ahquontamun: newutche attumunum wutch Jehovah wunnutcheganit, pápskeu wutch wame ummatcheseongash.
E.40.2 Speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem, and cry unto her, that her warfare is accomplished, that her iniquity is pardoned: for she hath received of the LORD's hand double for all her sins.

α.40.3 OOwadtauatonkqussuonk noh mashont8adt ut touohkomuk; quagquoshwehtam8k ummay Jehovah, sampwehteó8k ut touohkomuk ummay num-Manitt8mun.
E.40.3 The voice of him that crieth in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the LORD, make straight in the desert a highway for our God.

α.40.4 Nishnoh 8nóuhkôi pish qunóhqutteauun, kah nishnoh wadchu, kah wadchuemes pish tiuhquohquttauunash, kah woonkagk pish sampweteauunash, kah machipsquehtuash pish m8siyeuash.
E.40.4 Every valley shall be exalted, and every mountain and hill shall be made low: and the crooked shall be made straight, and the rough places plain:

α.40.5 Kah wussohsumoonk Jehovah pish náhtúhkon, kah wame weyaus pish wunnaumuneau moayeu: newutche wutt8n Jehovah wussinnin.
E.40.5 And the glory of the LORD shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see it together: for the mouth of the LORD hath spoken it.

α.40.6 Wadtauatonkqussuonk n8wop, Mishont8wash, Kah n8wau, Teagwe woh mishont8wai, wame weyaus moskehtu8, kah wame na$ut wanegik tatuppeyeu8 ohteuhkone uppeshaónut.
E.40.6 The voice said, Cry. And he said, What shall I cry? All flesh is grass, and all the goodliness thereof is as the flower of the field:

α.40.7 Maskeht ahp8hteau, uppeshau penusheau, newutche wunnashontamun Jehovah, wunnamuhkut missinninnúog moskehtu8og.
E.40.7 The grass withereth, the flower fadeth: because the spirit of the LORD bloweth upon it: surely the people is grass.

α.40.8 Moskeht ahp8hteau, uppeshau penusheau: qut wuttinn8waonk num-Manitt8mun pish michemohteau.
E.40.8 The grass withereth, the flower fadeth: but the word of our God shall stand for ever.

α.40.9 Woi Zion, noh wanonchimudt, kuhkuhquish en kussôhkôiyeue wadchuut: woi Jerusalem ken wanonchimwean, menuhke mishont8wash, mishont8wash, wabesehkon: utash Judáe keitotanash, moninneok kum-Manitt8mw8.
E.40.9 O Zion, that bringest good tidings, get thee up into the high mountain; O Jerusalem, that bringest good tidings, lift up thy voice with strength; lift it up, be not afraid; say unto the cities of Judah, Behold your God!

α.40.10 Kusseh, Lord Manit menuhku peyau, kah wuhpit nanawunnumwanshau: kusseh, wutonkquatunk weechayeumuk, kah wutanakausuonk ohteau anaquabit.
E.40.10 Behold, the Lord GOD will come with strong hand, and his arm shall rule for him: behold, his reward is with him, and his work before him.

α.40.11 Pish sohkom8uneau uf-flockum onatuh nanaushepsaenin: noh pish mouneau lambsoh ut wuhpittenit, kah pish ukkeninuh ut upp8chenauónut, kah pish manunne sagkompanau wompeqúaunitcheh.
E.40.11 He shall feed his flock like a shepherd: he shall gather the lambs with his arm, and carry them in his bosom, and shall gently lead those that are with young.

α.40.12 Howan quaquadh8k nippeash ut wunnutcheganit? kah quadompskinuk kesukquash nashpe wunnutcheg, kah miahtunk ohkee puppissai, ut quttuhhonganit, kah quadh8k wadchuash ut qutompagh8teganit, kah wadchuemesash quttompagh8teganit.
E.40.12 Who hath measured the waters in the hollow of his hand, and meted out heaven with the span, and comprehended the dust of the earth in a measure, and weighed the mountains in scales, and the hills in a balance?

α.40.13 Howan kogáhtimont wunnashauanitt8moh Jehovah, asuh kogáhqutteamweneumwit ukkuhk8tomauuh.
E.40.13 Who hath directed the Spirit of the LORD, or being his counsellor hath taught him?

α.40.14 Howaneh k8n8náhetteup, howan ukkuhk8tomauoh, kah ukkuhk8tomauoh wussittumóe may? kah ukkuhk8tomauoh wahteauonk kah wunnahtinuh wohwohtamwe may.
E.40.14 With whom took he counsel, and who instructed him, and taught him in the path of judgment, and taught him knowledge, and shewed to him the way of understanding?

α.40.15 Kusseh, wutohtimoneash tatuppeyeu8ash pápenuppáshunk p8thonchuut, ogquanu[m]ukquss8og puppissiyeuwésit ut qutompagh8teganit: kusseh, nemunum ogquidnash onatuh ne teag peyasik.
E.40.15 Behold, the nations are as a drop of a bucket, and are counted as the small dust of the balance: behold, he taketh up the isles as a very little thing.

α.40.16 Kah Lebanon matta wamuttinn8 chikohsumunat, kah puppinashimwog na apitcheg matta womattinn8 wutche chikohtae mag8onk.
E.40.16 And Lebanon is not sufficient to burn, nor the beasts thereof sufficient for a burnt offering.

α.40.17 Wáme wutohtimoneash ut anaquabit, onatuh matteagwuninu8g, kah náh wutogquanumoh anue peyasik onk ne mo teag, kah t[á]hn8che.
E.40.17 All nations before him are as nothing; and they are counted to him less than nothing, and vanity.

α.40.18 Neit Howan ogquanumôg Godut? asuh teagwe ogqueneunkqussuonk kutogqunneauau.
E.40.18 To whom then will ye liken God? or what likeness will ye compare unto him?

α.40.19 Anakausuen sabaswau nunneukontunkoh, kah Golde-Smith sepagenumauoh upputtoguhwaeu gold, kah wunnupasahdtoh silvere chainsash.
E.40.19 The workman melteth a graven image, and the goldsmith spreadeth it over with gold, and casteth silver chains.

α.40.20 Noh machekit noh mat teag woh mag8k, pepenam mehtug, ne woh mo anittinn8g: natinnewhau nehtoou anakausuenuñeu ukquoshauehtauonat nunneukontungoh, ne matta woh ontapegk.
E.40.20 He that is so impoverished that he hath no oblation chooseth a tree that will not rot; he seeketh unto him a cunning workman to prepare a graven image, that shall not be moved.

α.40.21 Sunnummatta k8wahteauomw8? sunnummatta ken8tam8m8? sunnummatta kuttitteaunaous, waj kutchissik? sunnummatta k8wohtamm8unnaous wutch quenohtagish muttaok?
E.40.21 Have ye not known? have ye not heard? hath it not been told you from the beginning? have ye not understood from the foundations of the earth?

α.40.22 Noh quenapit petukqui ohkeit, kah neg na wadohkitcheg tatuppeyeu8og chansompsit, noh agque sepagunuk kesuk onkwheganit, kah wutogque sepagunumunash weetu ne weetimuk.
E.40.22 It is he that sitteth upon the circle of the earth, and the inhabitants thereof are as grasshoppers; that stretcheth out the heavens as a curtain, and spreadeth them out as a tent to dwell in:

α.40.23 Noh mat toh antuppehheunk sontimosoh: tahn8cheáheau ohkee wussittum8eneuh.
E.40.23 That bringeth the princes to nothing; he maketh the judges of the earth as vanity.

α.40.24 Nux nag pish matta ohkéhteaununk, nux matta pish seahwhoog, nux 8weepuhtugk8 matta pish wadchabukkinn8 ut ohkeit, kah noh pish wonk upp8tomuh, kah nag pish upp8suog, kah pemsquoh pish wutogque amaunuh sequkkepaneganit.
E.40.24 Yea, they shall not be planted; yea, they shall not be sown: yea, their stock shall not take root in the earth: and he shall also blow upon them, and they shall wither, and the whirlwind shall take them away as stubble.

α.40.25 Neit hówan tatupanumeóg, asuh neanèyeue n8wau wunneetupantamwéyeuit?
E.40.25 To whom then will ye liken me, or shall I be equal? saith the Holy One.

α.40.26 Tahshinum8k qunuhqueu kuskesuk88ash, kah kuhkinneam8k howan noh yeush kahkénauwéhteunk, noh kuhkénaue sohh8wunont wutayeuwehteomoh: wame 8wesuongane missahwhoh, nashpe mohsag ummenuhkesuonk, newutche noh menuhkesu, matta pasuk quenauwadtinn8.
E.40.26 Lift up your eyes on high, and behold who hath created these things, that bringeth out their host by number: he calleth them all by names by the greatness of his might, for that he is strong in power; not one faileth.

α.40.27 Tohwutch n8waan, woi Jakob, kah missohhaman, woi Israel, nummay adtahtôsu wutch Lordut, kah n8sumitteáonk paumushóm8 wutch num-Manitt8mut?
E.40.27 Why sayest thou, O Jacob, and speakest, O Israel, My way is hid from the LORD, and my judgment is passed over from my God?

α.40.28 Sun matta k8wahteo8h, sun matta ken8tam8mus machemappue Manit Jehovah noh kezteunk weekqshinne ohke, matta kodtinneó8 asuh sauunnum8? matta howan woh wohkuhquónam8 noh 8wohwohtam8onk.
E.40.28 Hast thou not known? hast thou not heard, that the everlasting God, the LORD, the Creator of the ends of the earth, fainteth not, neither is weary? there is no searching of his understanding.

α.40.29 Noh ummenuhkesuáheau kôdtinneánitcheh, kah neh mat mánuhkesénitcheh nano ummenuhkeheuh.
E.40.29 He giveth power to the faint; and to them that have no might he increaseth strength.

α.40.30 Wuskenúog pish kodtinneaog kah sauunumwog, kah nunkompaog pish pápukquanne penushaog.
E.40.30 Even the youths shall faint and be weary, and the young men shall utterly fall:

α.40.31 Qut neg pahtussuóunoncheg Jehovah pish wuskehteauog ummenuhkesuongan8: pish ogque ushpushaog wompussikukquaut nashpe wunnuppuhwhunoh; nag pish quogqueog kah matta sauunum8og, nag pish pomushaog, kah mat kodtinneau8og.
E.40.31 But they that wait upon the LORD shall renew their strength; they shall mount up with wings as eagles; they shall run, and not be weary; and they shall walk, and not faint.

α.41.1 CHequnapek ut anaquabeh, woi munóhhanog, kah missinninnúog wuskehteauwehettich ummenuhkesuongan8: pas8tsháhettich kah ket8káhettich: moae peyontuh ut wussittum8onganit.
E.41.1 Keep silence before me, O islands; and let the people renew their strength: let them come near; then let them speak: let us come near together to judgment.

α.41.2 Howan omohkinont sampweusseaénúh wutch wutchepwóiyeu, weekomont en wusseetut, áninnumauont wutohtimoneash ut anaquabenit, kah nanawunnumwáheont ta[h]s8tamwoh? wutogque áninnumauoh wuttogkodteg puppissiyuut, kah wutohtompeh onatuh t8annóhhanne sequkkepaneg.
E.41.2 Who raised up the righteous man from the east, called him to his foot, gave the nations before him, and made him rule over kings? he gave them as the dust to his sword, and as driven stubble to his bow.

α.41.3 Nah wunn8swuttahwhóh, wunohteae paumwushau en may$ut ne matta wusseetue paumushog.
E.41.3 He pursued them, and passed safely; even by the way that he had not gone with his feet.

α.41.4 Howan ne ásit kah kezteunk, wehquetuk pometeongash wutch waj kutchissik? nen Jehovah, negonne, kah weeche maumachish, nen n$noh.
E.41.4 Who hath wrought and done it, calling the generations from the beginning? I the LORD, the first, and with the last; I am he.

α.41.5 Munnohhanash wunnaumuneau, kah wabesuog, wekqshinne ohkeash wabesum8ash, pas8tsháog, kah peyaog.
E.41.5 The isles saw it, and feared; the ends of the earth were afraid, drew near, and came.

α.41.6 Nishnoh pasuk [à]ninnumauau weetatteamungoh, kah nishnoh pasuk unnau weematoh wunne wutt8antash.
E.41.6 They helped every one his neighbour; and every one said to his brother, Be of good courage.

α.41.7 Neit wunnágittôhôsuénin wutt8anatamheau gold-smithoh, kah noh m8sitteunk nashpe hammer, kah noh togkodtog anvil, n8waog, pakodche kesompskutteau, kah ukkeneepunun nashpe kenontugwhegash, onk woh matta ontohtano.
E.41.7 So the carpenter encouraged the goldsmith, and he that smootheth with the hammer him that smote the anvil, saying, It is ready for the sodering: and he fastened it with nails, that it should not be moved.

α.41.8 Qut ken Israel, ken nuttinninneum, Jakob noh pepenauog, 8skannem Abram netomp.
E.41.8 But thou, Israel, art my servant, Jacob whom I have chosen, the seed of Abraham my friend.

α.41.9 Ken noh pepenauog wutch wehshik ohke, kah k8wehkomush wutch kenugke mogkouwáut, kah kuttinnunup, ken nuttinninneum, kuppepenaush, kah mattà kuppogkénun8h.
E.41.9 Thou whom I have taken from the ends of the earth, and called thee from the chief men thereof, and said unto thee, Thou art my servant; I have chosen thee, and not cast thee away.

α.41.10 Wabesehkon, newutche k8wetomsh, chepshuhkon, newutche nen kum-Manitt8m: kummenuhkehesh: nux kutáninnumoush, n[ù]x nashpe nussampwée nuttinnuhkounne sampweusseonk kukkogkôunush.
E.41.10 Fear thou not; for I am with thee: be not dismayed; for I am thy God: I will strengthen thee; yea, I will help thee; yea, I will uphold thee with the right hand of my righteousness.

α.41.11 Kusseh, wame nag m8m8qhikqueáneg pish akodchuog kah chepshaog, pish monteagk88og, kah neg mekonukqueaneg pish onkapunaog.
E.41.11 Behold, all they that were incensed against thee shall be ashamed and confounded: they shall be as nothing; and they that strive with thee shall perish.

α.41.12 Nag pish kénátinneahwhòog, & matta pish kenamheoog, neg mekônukqueaneg, neg mátompaguhkónukqueaneg, pish monteagk88og, kah mat tohhentuppayeu8og.
E.41.12 Thou shalt seek them, and shalt not find them, even them that contended with thee: they that war against thee shall be as nothing, and as a thing of nought.

α.41.13 Newutche nen Jehovah kum-Manitt8m, nukkinninum kuttinohkôu, kuttinnush, wabesehkon, kutanninnumoush.
E.41.13 For I the LORD thy God will hold thy right hand, saying unto thee, Fear not; I will help thee.

α.41.14 Wabesehkon ken ask8kse J[o]kob, kah kenaau Israelle wosketomp[a]og kuttanninnumoush, n8wau Jehovah, kah kuppohquohwussuaéneum, OOneetupanatam8moh Israel.
E.41.14 Fear not, thou worm Jacob, and ye men of Israel; I will help thee, saith the LORD, and thy redeemer, the Holy One of Israel.

α.41.15 Kusseh kuttayimoush wuske pogguhham8e weepittum8e auwohteaonk: pish k[u]ppogham wadchuash, kah kussukquttahhamunash, kah pish kuttogqueteoh wadchuash wussadteamunit:
E.41.15 Behold, I will make thee a new sharp threshing instrument having teeth: thou shalt thresh the mountains, and beat them small, and shalt make the hills as chaff.

α.41.16 Pish kuppáuanóntamunash, kah waban pish ummonchadtauunash, kah pemsquoh pish wusseáhhamunash: kah ken pish k8woweenoam ut 8neetupanatam8moh Israel.
E.41.16 Thou shalt fan them, and the wind shall carry them away, and the whirlwind shall scatter them: and thou shalt rejoice in the LORD, and shalt glory in the Holy One of Israel.

α.41.17 Mach[ee]k[u] kah qu[é]nahukquit natinnehog nippe, kah na monteagwuninno, kah weenan8 kohkutt8n8e sauunum8m8, nen Lord pish nag nunn8tauoog nen um-Manitt8moh Israel matta nunnukonóog.
E.41.17 When the poor and needy seek water, and there is none, and their tongue faileth for thirst, I the LORD will hear them, I the God of Israel will not forsake them.

α.41.18 N8wôshwunum sepuash ut qunuhqui ayeuonganit, kah tohkekomm[ú]ash ut nôeu 8nóuhkôiyeuut, nupseeu nuppéhteau touohkomuk, kah nu[n]bobohteai nuttohkekomuúhteam.
E.41.18 I will open rivers in high places, and fountains in the midst of the valleys: I will make the wilderness a pool of water, and the dry land springs of water.

α.41.19 Nutohketeam chikkuppog ut touohkomukqut, Shittahuhtug, kah Mirtluhtug, kah pummeeuhtug, kah ut touushinne ohkeit nutohketeam firruhtug, kah pineuhtug, kah boxuhtug moeu.
E.41.19 I will plant in the wilderness the cedar, the shittah tree, and the myrtle, and the oil tree; I will set in the desert the fir tree, and the pine, and the box tree together:

α.41.20 Onk woh nag naumwog, kah wahteauog kah natwontamwog, kah wohtamwog moaeu, wunnutcheg Jehovah yue ussem8, kah 8neetupanatam8moh Israel ukkezteauun.
E.41.20 That they may see, and know, and consider, and understand together, that the hand of the LORD hath done this, and the Holy One of Israel hath created it.

α.41.21 Pas8che paduto8k kuppissaumatuonk n8wau Lord, s8h8wuttau8k kummenuhke unnaumaiyeum8ash, n8wau ukketass8tam8moh Jakob.
E.41.21 Produce your cause, saith the LORD; bring forth your strong reasons, saith the King of Jacob.

α.41.22 Sohh8wuttauwéhettich, kah nahtinnukqutteuh toh pish ônagk: natitteahettich mahche nnagish, uttoh ônagk, onk woh nunnatwontamunánonash, kah woh n8wahteomun adt wohkukquoshik, asuh wahteauwahinnean toh pish ônagk.
E.41.22 Let them bring them forth, and shew us what shall happen: let them shew the former things, what they be, that we may consider them, and know the latter end of them; or declare us things for to come.

α.41.23 Nahtitteagk nish pish ompetak ônagish, onk woh n8wahteomun, kum-Manitt88mw8: nux wunnesek ash matchesek onk woh nutchepshomun, kah woh moéu naumunan.
E.41.23 Shew the things that are to come hereafter, that we may know that ye are gods: yea, do good, or do evil, that we may be dismayed, and behold it together.

α.41.24 Kusseh, matta toh kuttin tuppéayeu8mw8, kah kutanakausuongan8 matteagwunninn8: noh jishánumukqussu noh pepenunkqueóg.
E.41.24 Behold, ye are of nothing, and your work of nought: an abomination is he that chooseth you.

α.41.25 Nutomuhkin pasuk wutch nanumaiyeu, kah noh pish peyau: waj pashpishont pish wehquetum n8wesuonk, kah pish ogque nuhkuhkauau sontimoh, man8nskut, onatuh ahkuhqutteaenin tahtashkuhkauont man8nskoh.
E.41.25 I have raised up one from the north, and he shall come: from the rising of the sun shall he call upon my name: and he shall come upon princes as upon morter, and as the potter treadeth clay.

α.41.26 Howan wahteauwáhu[a]dt waj kutchissik, onk woh n8wahteauunan? kah nish asquam ahquompan8g; onk woh nussimun noh sampweusseaenú8? qut matta howan wunnahtitteauunash, qut matta howan 8wahteauwahuwáunash, nux matta howan n8tam8 kukkutt8wongan88ash.
E.41.26 Who hath declared from the beginning, that we may know? and beforetime, that we may say, He is righteous? yea, there is none that sheweth, yea, there is none that declareth, yea, there is none that heareth your words.

α.41.27 Negonnu pish unnau Zion, kusseh, nag naau, kah nuttinninnumau Jerusalem neh wanaunchumwunutcheh.
E.41.27 The first shall say to Zion, Behold, behold them: and I will give to Jerusalem one that bringeth good tidings.

α.41.28 Newutch nummoninneam, kah na matta wosketompaun8, ut kenugke nagoh, kah na matta kogohqutteamwenuunn8, noh woh namp8hamiit pasuk kutt8onk, nat8tomauog.
E.41.28 For I beheld, and there was no man; even among them, and there was no counsellor, that, when I asked of them, could answer a word.

α.41.29 Kusseh nag wame tahn8cheyeu8og, wutanakausuongan88ash matteagwunun8ash: nag wussabassumwe nunnekontunkan8oh waban[n]u8oh, kah naswaiyeu8oh:
E.41.29 Behold, they are all vanity; their works are nothing: their molten images are wind and confusion.

α.42.1 Nók nuttinneum noh kónunog, noh pepenauog, nukketeahogkou womononcheh, nupponamau nunnashauanitt8moh, noh pish sohh8wuttauau wussittumoonk Gentilsuh.
E.42.1 Behold my servant, whom I uphold; mine elect, in whom my soul delighteth; I have put my spirit upon him: he shall bring forth judgment to the Gentiles.

α.42.2 Matta pish mishont8woou, asuh tháhshinnum8 asuh n8tamwahuwoou 8wadtauatonkqussuonk ut maikontu.
E.42.2 He shall not cry, nor lift up, nor cause his voice to be heard in the street.

α.42.3 Sukqutchoshae wekinasq mâtta uppohquanum8un k[á]h pukuttae hashábpoh matta wutontahwhoh, pish sohh8wuttáu wussittum8onk en wunnamuhkuteyeuut.
E.42.3 A bruised reed shall he not break, and the smoking flax shall he not quench: he shall bring forth judgment unto truth.

α.42.4 Matta pish sauunum8, asuh paunompasu noh pajeh upponamunat wussittumoonk ut ohkeit, kah munnohhanash pish pahtsuwontamog wuttinnaumatuonk.
E.42.4 He shall not fail nor be discouraged, till he have set judgment in the earth: and the isles shall wait for his law.

α.42.5 Yeu wussin Manit Jehovah, noh kahkenauwehteunk kesukquash, & noh sepaginuk, noh mashegskehteunk ohke, kah ne noh waj sohham8m88k, noh nashauwaheont missinninnuh na$ut, kah nashauanitt8heont neh ne paumushanitcheh.
E.42.5 Thus saith God the LORD, he that created the heavens, and stretched them out; he that spread forth the earth, and that which cometh out of it; he that giveth breath unto the people upon it, and spirit to them that walk therein:

α.42.6 Nen Jehovah k8wehkomush ut sampweusseonganit, kah pish nukkenunnum kenutcheg, kah pish kenananunush, kah pish kuttinninnumoush wutche 8n8waongan8 missinninnuog, wutche 8wequaiyeum8 gentilsog.
E.42.6 I the LORD have called thee in righteousness, and will hold thine hand, and will keep thee, and give thee for a covenant of the people, for a light of the Gentiles;

α.42.7 Woshwunnumunat pogkenumwae muskesukquash sohh8wunonat kobshagkinitcheg wutch kubshagkinnittuonganit, kah neg apitcheg pohkenaiyeuut, wutch kuppishagkinnittuae kommukqut.
E.42.7 To open the blind eyes, to bring out the prisoners from the prison, and them that sit in darkness out of the prison house.

α.42.8 Nen Jehovah, ne n8wesuonk, kah nussohsumoonk matta nuttinnumauoun onkatuk, kah matta n8woweenomuwaonk nunneukontunganog.
E.42.8 I am the LORD: that is my name: and my glory will I not give to another, neither my praise to graven images.

α.42.9 Kusseh, negonae ônagish nnihyeuash, kah wuske teagwasinish n8wahteauwáhuwam; asquam sasonkunun8gkup, kuttinunnanaôash.
E.42.9 Behold, the former things are come to pass, and new things do I declare: before they spring forth I tell you of them.

α.42.10 Unn8hamok Jehovah wuske unn8homáonk; kah woweenomaonk wutch wehqshik ohke, kenaau w8mséogish en kehtahhanit, kah wame ne noh ohtag, munnohkanash, kah neg na wadohkitcheg.
E.42.10 Sing unto the LORD a new song, and his praise from the end of the earth, ye that go down to the sea, and all that is therein; the isles, and the inhabitants thereof.

α.42.11 Touohkomuk kah 8tanash naut, mishont8wáhettich, otanamesash nish Kedar wadohkitchish: wadohkitcheg qussukquanit ket8hamahettich, mishont8wahettich wutch kussôhkôiyeue wadchuut.
E.42.11 Let the wilderness and the cities thereof lift up their voice, the villages that Kedar doth inhabit: let the inhabitants of the rock sing, let them shout from the top of the mountains.

α.42.12 Sohsumm8wounáhettich Jehovah, kah wahteauwaheáhettich waweenomaonk munnáhhunoh.
E.42.12 Let them give glory unto the LORD, and declare his praise in the islands.

α.42.13 Jehovah pish ogque sohham menuhkesuenûut, pish wogkowunum m8sitteam8onk, onatuh mattompagwehteaénin: pish mishont8wau, nux onkquont8wau, pish sohkauau ummatwomoh.
E.42.13 The LORD shall go forth as a mighty man, he shall stir up jealousy like a man of war: he shall cry, yea, roar; he shall prevail against his enemies.

α.42.14 Nussepe chequnap, nummanunap, nukquihtin nuhhog: eyeu nutogque mishont8wam neechae mittamwussissut, pish nuppagwohteam nummishashquinneunk pasukqut.
E.42.14 I have long time holden my peace; I have been still, and refrained myself: now will I cry like a travailing woman; I will destroy and devour at once.

α.42.15 Nummáhchumwéhtoh wadchuash kah wadchuemesash, kah nunnunassum wame weherbsum8ash, kah sepuash nummenúhhann8team, kah nunnunassum nuppissepagwash.
E.42.15 I will make waste mountains and hills, and dry up all their herbs; and I will make the rivers islands, and I will dry up the pools.

α.42.16 Kah pogkenumwog nuppas8 mayut ne matta wahteauhetteg, nutuss8unóog maikontu ne matta wahteauhetteg: pohkenai n8wequaiyeuhteam ut nag anaquabhettit, kah woonkagish nussampweteauunash, yeush nuttinheonaoash, kah matta nutohquanumóog.
E.42.16 And I will bring the blind by a way that they knew not; I will lead them in paths that they have not known: I will make darkness light before them, and crooked things straight. These things will I do unto them, and not forsake them.

α.42.17 Nag pish qushkeog, pish mishe akodchuog, pabuhtanumoncheg nunneukontunkoh, neg anoncheg sabassume nunneukontunkoh kenaau num-Manitt8munónog.
E.42.17 They shall be turned back, they shall be greatly ashamed, that trust in graven images, that say to the molten images, Ye are our gods.

α.42.18 N8tam8k kenaau kôkobsóogish, kah natauwompek kenaau pogkenumógish, onk woh kenaumw8.
E.42.18 Hear, ye deaf; and look, ye blind, that ye may see.

α.42.19 Howan pogkenuk webe nuttinninneum? asuh kôkohsont qut nutann8naeneum noh an8nog? howan pogkenuk neane noh pannuppeyeuit, kah pogkenuk neane wuttinneumoh Jehovah?
E.42.19 Who is blind, but my servant? or deaf, as my messenger that I sent?  who is blind as he that is perfect, and blind as the LORD's servant?

α.42.20 Nauman monatash qut matta kukkehkinneasséinash: wôhshinnuman mehtauogash, qut matta n8tam8.
E.42.20 Seeing many things, but thou observest not; opening the ears, but he heareth not.

α.42.21 Lord tapeneam wutche 8nomwausseonk, pish mishehteau naumatuonk, kah ukquhtiánittamutteauun.
E.42.21 The LORD is well pleased for his righteousness' sake; he will magnify the law, and make it honourable.

α.42.22 Qut yeug missinninnuog mukk8kinaog kah matcheheóog, wame puttahwh[ô]og ut wonogquehtu, kah adtashôog ut kuppishaginnitteae kommukqut: nag másompanitcheg, kah matta howan uppohquohwhunoh nag mukk8kinôog, kah wanne howan n8wau ompontin8k.
E.42.22 But this is a people robbed and spoiled; they are all of them snared in holes, and they are hid in prison houses: they are for a prey, and none delivereth; for a spoil, and none saith, Restore.

α.42.23 Howan ut kenugke kenaau, yeu n8tog? howan ahchuwussittog kah n8tog wutche ompetak?
E.42.23 Who among you will give ear to this? who will hearken and hear for the time to come?

α.42.24 Howan anumauont Jakoboh wutche matchehtóonk, kah Israeloh chechequnnuaenúh? sun matta Lord, noh matcheneheogkut? newutche nag cheketamwog pomushonat ummayut, kah matta noswehtamwog wuttinnaumatuonk.
E.42.24 Who gave Jacob for a spoil, and Israel to the robbers? did not the LORD, he against whom we have sinned? for they would not walk in his ways, neither were they obedient unto his law.

α.42.25 Newaj sokenumauont ummishe musquantam8onk, kah menuhkesue ayeuwuttuonk: kah wéenohtauoh n8teau, qut onch matta wahteauun, kah wutchikoswoh, qut matta upponam8un ut wuttahhut.
E.42.25 Therefore he hath poured upon him the fury of his anger, and the strength of battle: and it hath set him on fire round about, yet he knew not; and it burned him, yet he laid it not to heart.

α.43.1 QUt yeuyeu, yeu wussin Jehovah noh kezhikquean, woi Jakob, kah noh kakénauáhikquean, woi Israel, wabesehkon: newutche kummanóuwhush, k8wesuongane missohwhush, ken nuttaihe.
E.43.1 But now thus saith the LORD that created thee, O Jacob, and he that formed thee, O Israel, Fear not: for I have redeemed thee, I have called thee by thy name; thou art mine.

α.43.2 Pannupwusháan nippéash, k8weetomsh, kah qushkodteaan sepuash nish matta pish kenehtipánuk8unash: pannupwushaan n8teau, matta pish kutchikkussu, kah n8n8uneau matta pish kenashqussuk8un.
E.43.2 When thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee; and through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee: when thou walkest through the fire, thou shalt not be burned; neither shall the flame kindle upon thee.

α.43.3 Newutche nen Jehovah kum-Manitt8m, 8neetupanatam8moh Israel kuppohquohwussuaéneum: nummagup Egypt wutch kumman8whun8onk, Ethiopia kah Sheba wutche ken.
E.43.3 For I am the LORD thy God, the Holy One of Israel, thy Saviour: I gave Egypt for thy ransom, Ethiopia and Seba for thee.

α.43.4 Nádteoh máshoadtean ut anaquabeh, kukquhtiánumukqus[si]p, kah k8womonsh, newaj mag8 wosketompaog wutche ken, kah missinninnuog wutche kuppomantam8onk.
E.43.4 Since thou wast precious in my sight, thou hast been honourable, and I have loved thee: therefore will I give men for thee, and people for thy life.

α.43.5 Wabesehkon, newutche k8weetomsh: pish nuppas8 k8skannemunneog wutch wutchepwôou, kah kummohmóunush wutch wutcheksuiyeu.
E.43.5 Fear not: for I am with thee: I will bring thy seed from the east, and gather thee from the west;

α.43.6 Pish nuttin nanumit, magush, kah sowanish assaéhkon, pas8k nunnaumonunk wutch noadtit, kah nuttaunog wutch wehqshik ohke.
E.43.6 I will say to the north, Give up; and to the south, Keep not back: bring my sons from far, and my daughters from the ends of the earth;

α.43.7 Nish$noh pasuk noh as8wesit n8wesuonk: newutche nukkezeh wutche nussohsumóonk, nukkehkenauéhheop, nukkezheop.
E.43.7 Even every one that is called by my name: for I have created him for my glory, I have formed him; yea, I have made him.

α.43.8 Sohh8wunok pôgkenukeg missinninnuog wuskesukqutcheg, kah k[ó]kobsonch$eg wohtauogkutcheg.
E.43.8 Bring forth the blind people that have eyes, and the deaf that have ears.

α.43.9 Wame wutohtimoneash miyaém8utch, kah missinninnuog móappéhettich: howan kenugke nagoh woh yeu wahteauwáhuadt, kah nahtinukqueog negonne anágkupash? sohh8wunáhettich 8wauwáeneum8oh, onk woh sampweógquanumóog, kah n8tamohettich, kah n8wahettich, wunnamuhkuteyeu8.
E.43.9 Let all the nations be gathered together, and let the people be assembled: who among them can declare this, and shew us former things? let them bring forth their witnesses, that they may be justified: or let them hear, and say, It is truth.

α.43.10 Kenaau n8wauwaeneumog wussin Jehovah, kah nuttinninneum noh pepenauog: onk woh k8wahteomw8 kah woh k8namptiimw8, kah woh k8wohtamumw8, noh nen: negonne onk nen matta Manittoun8, kah matta pish wonk asuhkaue onk nen.
E.43.10 Ye are my witnesses, saith the LORD, and my servant whom I have chosen: that ye may know and believe me, and understand that I am he: before me there was no God formed, neither shall there be after me.

α.43.11 Nen, nen Jehovah, kah matta wonk howan wadchanuwaenu8, webe nen.
E.43.11 I, even I, am the LORD; and beside me there is no saviour.

α.43.12 N8wahteauwahuap, kah wadchanuap, kah nunnáhtitteap na matta penowe manitt8un8g ut kenugke kenaau: newutche kenaau n8wauwaeneumog n8wau Jehovah, nen Manitto.
E.43.12 I have declared, and have saved, and I have shewed, when there was no strange god among you: therefore ye are my witnesses, saith the LORD, that I am God.

α.43.13 Nux, asquam kesukodtin8g, nen n$noh, kah matta woh howan pohquohwussuóou wutch nunnutcheganit: pish nutanakaus, kah howan woh 8tamehtauun?
E.43.13 Yea, before the day was I am he; and there is none that can deliver out of my hand: I will work, and who shall let it?

α.43.14 Yeu wussin Jehovah kum$Mano[u]huwaeneum8, 8neetupanatam8moh Israel, wutche kenaau, nutann8hteam en Babilon, kah nuttiuhkongqueh wame wussontimom8uh, kah Caldeansog, neg ummauongan8 ohtag kuht8nugquehtu.
E.43.14 Thus saith the LORD, your redeemer, the Holy One of Israel; For your sake I have sent to Babylon, and have brought down all their nobles, and the Chaldeans, whose cry is in the ships.

α.43.15 Nen Jehovah k8neetupanatam8m8, kezkukqutche Israel, kukketass8tam8m8.
E.43.15 I am the LORD, your Holy One, the creator of Israel, your King.

α.43.16 Yeu wussin Jehovah, noh ayik may ut kehtahhannit, kah may mishe nippekontu.
E.43.16 Thus saith the LORD, which maketh a way in the sea, and a path in the mighty waters;

α.43.17 Sohh8wuttunk charit kah horse, kah menuhkesue kenauwameonk: nag pish mo[á]e sepsinwog, nag matta pish omohkeog: nag ontohwhoog, ogque wuhkohshanoog hashabput.
E.43.17 Which bringeth forth the chariot and horse, the army and the power; they shall lie down together, they shall not rise: they are extinct, they are quenched as tow.

α.43.18 Méhquontam8hteok negonne anagkupush, kah natwontam8hteok noadt anagkupash.
E.43.18 Remember ye not the former things, neither consider the things of old.

α.43.19 Kusseh, n8skeu ussem: eyeu pish sonkun, sun matta pish k8wahte[u]uneau? nummayehteam touóhkomukqut, kah nussepuehteam touushinne ohkeit.
E.43.19 Behold, I will do a new thing; now it shall spring forth; shall ye not know it? I will even make a way in the wilderness, and rivers in the desert.

α.43.20 Ohteuhkônee puppinashimwog pish nukquehtianumukquog, Dragonsog, kah kuhk8khosog, newutche nummag nippe ut touohkomukqut, kah sepuash ut touushinne ohkéit, n8tattamheonat nummissinninnuog pepenauogig.
E.43.20 The beast of the field shall honour me, the dragons and the owls: because I give waters in the wilderness, and rivers in the desert, to give drink to my people, my chosen.

α.43.21 Yeug missinninnuog nukkuhkenauehteauonuh nuhhog, nag pish nahtitteaóg n8woweenomitteaonk.
E.43.21 This people have I formed for myself; they shall shew forth my praise.

α.43.22 Qut matta k8wehquetumiyeuh woi Jakob, qut kussauanumeh woi Israel.
E.43.22 But thou hast not called upon me, O Jacob; but thou hast been weary of me, O Israel.

α.43.23 Chiko[h]tae kummag8e puppinashimwog matta kuppaudtiyeuh, kah matta kenashpe quttiánumyeuh kussephausuongash: matta k8tinninneumuhkônuwahiñ8 nashpe mag8onk, kah matta kussauanunóh nashpe incense.
E.43.23 Thou hast not brought me the small cattle of thy burnt offerings; neither hast thou honoured me with thy sacrifices. I have not caused thee to serve with an offering, nor wearied thee with incense.

α.43.24 Matta kutteagwu kuttaphumwanshu weetemungque wekinask, kah matta k8wamepwuhheuh k8nogk8e sephausuongash, qut k8tinninneumuhkausuwáheh nashpe kummatcheseongash, kussau[u]neh nashpe kummatcheseongash.
E.43.24 Thou hast bought me no sweet cane with money, neither hast thou filled me with the fat of thy sacrifices: but thou hast made me to serve with thy sins, thou hast wearied me with thine iniquities.

α.43.25 Nen, nen noh jishkhog kuppanneseseongash wutche nen nehenwon[c]he, kah matta nummehquontam8h kummatcheseongash.
E.43.25 I, even I, am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for mine own sake, and will not remember thy sins.

α.43.26 Mehquontamwaheh, ken8tamwanshittitteuh: wahteauwahuash, onk woh kussampweogquanumit.
E.43.26 Put me in remembrance: let us plead together: declare thou, that thou mayest be justified.

α.43.27 Negonne k8sh matcheseup: & kukkuhk8tomwehtamog nuppannesehtunkquog.
E.43.27 Thy first father hath sinned, and thy teachers have transgressed against me.

α.43.28 Newaj matchetupanatamwaheog peantamwaekomukque sontimóog, kah nummag Jakob én matánumónat, kah Israel en kekontinneat.
E.43.28 Therefore I have profaned the princes of the sanctuary, and have given Jacob to the curse, and Israel to reproaches.

α.44.1 QUt onch yeuyeu n8tash woi Jakob, nuttinninneum, kah ISrael noh pepenauog.
E.44.1 Yet now hear, O Jacob my servant; and Israel, whom I have chosen:

α.44.2 Yeu wussin Jehoah noh kezhukquean, kah kahkenauwéhikquean wutch ôontomukqut, noh aninnumunkquean: wabesehkon woi Jakob nuttinninneum: kah ken Jesurun noh pepenauogkup.
E.44.2 Thus saith the LORD that made thee, and formed thee from the womb, which will help thee; Fear not, O Jacob, my servant; and thou, Jesurun, whom I have chosen.

α.44.3 Newutch nussokanumau nippe noh kohkutt8g, kah tomogkonash ut nobohteaiyeuut: nussokun nunnashauanitt8m k8skannemunit, kah n8nanitteaonk ut kutontseonganit.
E.44.3 For I will pour water upon him that is thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground: I will pour my spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thine offspring:

α.44.4 Kah nag pish ogque sontuog ut kenugke moskehtekontu, onatuh anumwussukuppeit ut kishke nippekontu.
E.44.4 And they shall spring up as among the grass, as willows by the water courses.

α.44.5 Pasuk pish n8wau n8chi Jehovah, kah onkatuk pish ussowenau wuhhogkuh 8wesuonk Jakob: kah onkatog pish wussukwhosuohtu nashpe wunnutcheg en Jehovahut, kah nahohtoeu 8wesuonganeh[e]au Israeloh.
E.44.5 One shall say, I am the LORD's; and another shall call himself by the name of Jacob; and another shall subscribe with his hand unto the LORD, and surname himself by the name of Israel.

α.44.6 Yeu wussin Jehovah Israelle ketass8t, kah ummanouhuaeneumoh, Jehovah ayeuteaunit, Nen negonáe, k[á]h nen maumachish, kah chonchippe nen wanne Manitt8un8.
E.44.6 Thus saith the LORD the King of Israel, and his redeemer the LORD of hosts; I am the first, and I am the last; and beside me there is no God.

α.44.7 Kah howan neane nen, pish wehqutteamwit, kah pish 8wahteauwahuon, kah pish n8nohtonkqun, náiteuh kahtimog nukkône missinninnuog? kah nish paóm8gish, kah pish peyom8ash? nah nohtin[á]hettich.
E.44.7 And who, as I, shall call, and shall declare it, and set it in order for me, since I appointed the ancient people? and the things that are coming, and shall come, let them shew unto them.

α.44.8 Wabesehteok kah chepshonteog, sunnummatta kuttinn8n[á]s nâ wutch ahquompag, kah n8wahteauwahuwon[á]h? kenaau n8wauwaeneumog, sun wonk Manitto8 chonchippe nen? nux na matta Manitt8un8, matta pasuk n8waheoh.
E.44.8 Fear ye not, neither be afraid: have not I told thee from that time, and have declared it? ye are even my witnesses. Is there a God beside me? yea, there is no God; I know not any.

α.44.9 Neg ayeuoncheg nunneukontungoh, wame neg tahn8cheyeu8og, kah ukkodtantamukóm8ash matta pish 8chienáoash, kah nag nehenwonche 8wauwóm8oh, nag mat naumóog, kah matta wahteáu8og, onk woh akodchuog.
E.44.9 They that make a graven image are all of them vanity; and their delectable things shall not profit; and they are their own witnesses; they see not, nor know; that they may be ashamed.

α.44.10 Howan káhkenauweheont manitto, kah sabaswont nunneukontunkoh, ne matta tohhentupán8g?
E.44.10 Who hath formed a god, or molten a graven image that is profitable for nothing?

α.44.11 Kusseh wame weetomukqutcheh pish akodchuoh: kah anakausuenuog, neg wosketompo8og, wame miyaehettich, kah neepauwehettich: nag pish wabesuog, pish moeu akodchuog.
E.44.11 Behold, all his fellows shall be ashamed: and the workmen, they are of men: let them all be gathered together, let them stand up; yet they shall fear, and they shall be ashamed together.

α.44.12 Smith nashpe wuttongsumash naneeswe, wutayimun nashpe mohkohsaash, kah kehkenauwehtin nashpe hamer, kah nashpe wuhpitte[n]ue menuhkesuonk wutayimun: nux kodtupp8, kah sa[u]unum, matta wuttattam8 nippe kah sauunum.
E.44.12 The smith with the tongs both worketh in the coals, and fashioneth it with hammers, and worketh it with the strength of his arms: yea, he is hungry, and his strength faileth: he drinketh no water, and is faint.

α.44.13 Wunnagkittuhhausuenin sampwompanum ukkehkinneasuonk ukkuhkhamun nashpe pemuneat: 8nteouun nashpe upplainsumash kah ukkuhkhamun nashpe ukompasash, kah wutogquehteauun wosketompaut, neaunak wosketompae wunneetuonk, onk woh ohteau wetuomut.
E.44.13 The carpenter stretcheth out his rule; he marketh it out with a line; he fitteth it with planes, and he marketh it out with the compass, and maketh it after the figure of a man, according to the beauty of a man; that it may remain in the house.

α.44.14 Wannagittahwau chikkupoh, kah nemunnum cypressuhtug, kah n8timis, ne sampwuttahhamont, ut kenugke touohkomukque metugquekontu, ohkehteau monunkqsoh, kah sokanon wunnekheuh.
E.44.14 He heweth him down cedars, and taketh the cypress and the oak, which he strengtheneth for himself among the trees of the forest: he planteth an ash, and the rain doth nourish it.

α.44.15 Neit pish ponamon: newutche na 8tinnumun, kah pish auwossu, nux wunnashqunánumun, kah apwau petukqunneg, nux, ayeuau manitto kah wowussumoh: ayeuau nunneukontunkoh, kah wunnauwaéhtauoh.
E.44.15 Then shall it be for a man to burn: for he will take thereof, and warm himself; yea, he kindleth it, and baketh bread; yea, he maketh a god, and worshippeth it; he maketh it a graven image, and falleth down thereto.

α.44.16 Nawhutche chikohsum n8taut, nashpe nawhutche meechu weyaus: app8sue app8su, kah wamep8h, nux, ouwassu, kah n8wau, kah nutáuwas, nunnaum n8teau.
E.44.16 He burneth part thereof in the fire; with part thereof he eateth flesh; he roasteth roast, and is satisfied: yea, he warmeth himself, and saith, Aha, I am warm, I have seen the fire:

α.44.17 Kah nawhutche um-manitt8hkon, wuttinneuhkontunkoh[;] wunnauwaéhtauoh, kah 8wowussumoh; peantamauoh kah n8wau, pohquohwusseh, newutche ken num-manitt8m.
E.44.17 And the residue thereof he maketh a god, even his graven image: he falleth down unto it, and worshippeth it, and prayeth unto it, and saith, Deliver me; for thou art my god.

α.44.18 Matta wahteau8og asuh wohtamwog: newutch yânunum wuskesukquash, nag matta woh naumoog, kah wuttah8oash, matta woh wohtam8mun8ash.
E.44.18 They have not known nor understood: for he hath shut their eyes, that they cannot see; and their hearts, that they cannot understand.

α.44.19 Kah mtta howan natwontam8 ut wuttahhut, kah matta wohwohtamóonk asuh wahteauonk ohteau n8wonat, nawhutche nutchikohsumun n8taut, nux wonk nuttittanapwon petukquinunk ut mukossáhtu, nutapwam weyaus kah nummechin, kah nawhutche woh nutayimun onkquontam8onk? sun woh nunnauwaéhtam mehtug.
E.44.19 And none considereth in his heart, neither is there knowledge nor understanding to say, I have burned part of it in the fire; yea, also I have baked bread upon the coals thereof; I have roasted flesh, and eaten it: and shall I make the residue thereof an abomination? shall I fall down to the stock of a tree?

α.44.20 Mechu pukquee: as8kekodteamwe metah wutamaunukqun, matta woh pohquohwhunóou ukketeahogkôunoh, asuh n8wóou, sunnummatta pann8waonganinn8 nuttinohkôunit?
E.44.20 He feedeth on ashes: a deceived heart hath turned him aside, that he cannot deliver his soul, nor say, Is there not a lie in my right hand?

α.44.21 Yeush mehquontash, (woi Jakob kah Israel) newutche ken nuttinninneum: kukkuhkenauwéhinup: ken nutinninneum, woi Israel, matta pish k8wanánumun8h.
E.44.21 Remember these, O Jacob and Israel; for thou art my servant: I have formed thee; thou art my servant: O Israel, thou shalt not be forgotten of me.

α.44.22 Nutjiskham kummatcheseongash onátuh kuhpogki matokqsit, kah onatuh ongquohqut kuppanneseongásh, qushkek en nuhhogkat, newutche kuppohquohwhunush.
E.44.22 I have blotted out, as a thick cloud, thy transgressions, and, as a cloud, thy sins: return unto me; for I have redeemed thee.

α.44.23 Ket8ham8k, woi kesukquog, newutche Jehovah ummahche ussen: mishont8wagk agwe ohkekontu: kuss8homunk, woi wadchuash, woi touohkomuk, kah nishnoh metug na ohtag, newutche Jehovah pohquohwhunau Jakoboh, kah sohsumwaheau wuhhogkuh ut Israelut.
E.44.23 Sing, O ye heavens; for the LORD hath done it: shout, ye lower parts of the earth: break forth into singing, ye mountains, O forest, and every tree therein: for the LORD hath redeemed Jacob, and glorified himself in Israel.

α.44.24 Yeu wussin Jehovah kummanouhuwaéneum, kah noh kahkenauwéhikquean wutch ôontomukqut, nen Jehovah noh ayik wame teanteaquassinish, noh nahse sepákinuk kesuk noh sepagenuk ohke, nusse[u]:
E.44.24 Thus saith the LORD, thy redeemer, and he that formed thee from the womb, I am the LORD that maketh all things; that stretcheth forth the heavens alone; that spreadeth abroad the earth by myself;

α.44.25 Noh mat toh ken tuppehteo8k ukkehkinneasuongan8 pann8waenuog: kah kogkeaheont pauwauwoh, noh quoshkeaheont waantamwoh, kah mattammagwutteunk 8wahteauongan8.
E.44.25 That frustrateth the tokens of the liars, and maketh diviners mad; that turneth wise men backward, and maketh their knowledge foolish;

α.44.26 Nóh manuhkehteunk wuttinn8waonk wuttinnúmoh, kah asit ukkuhqutteam8ongan8 wutann8naéneumoh, noh anont Jerusalem, ken pish wutohtuonk Judae keitotanash pish kutayeuwutteamw8, kah nuttahshinum mahchum8e ayeuongash.
E.44.26 That confirmeth the word of his servant, and performeth the counsel of his messengers; that saith to Jerusalem, Thou shalt be inhabited; and to the cities of Judah, Ye shall be built, and I will raise up the decayed places thereof:

α.44.27 Noh anont m8naiyeuoh, nunnappesish kah pish nunnunassum kussepeumash.
E.44.27 That saith to the deep, Be dry, and I will dry up thy rivers:

α.44.28 Noh anont papaume Cyrus, noh nunnanau shepsueneum kah pish pakodche ussen, wame nukkodtantamoonk, anont Jerusalem pish kutayeuit, kah Templeut, kukquenohtagom pish wunnushitteáuun.
E.44.28 That saith of Cyrus, He is my shepherd, and shall perform all my pleasure: even saying to Jerusalem, Thou shalt be built; and to the temple, Thy foundation shall be laid.

α.45.1 YEu wuttinnon Jehovah Cyruṣoh sasequnoncheh; wuttinohkou nuttinnumau sohkomunat wutohtimoneash ut anaquabit: kah nutompinim wussegan8ash tahs8tamwog, wohshinumunat ut anaquabit neesikkuphouune squontamash, kah sqúontamash matta pish kuphôsin8ash.
E.45.1 Thus saith the LORD to his anointed, to Cyrus, whose right hand I have holden, to subdue nations before him; and I will loose the loins of kings, to open before him the two leaved gates; and the gates shall not be shut;

α.45.2 Kenegonuhkouush, kah nussámpweteoh woonki ayeuongash, nussohquetahham wompohshogque squontamash, kàh nuppohshittahham moúhshogque pummetunkqshitteungash.
E.45.2 I will go before thee, and make the crooked places straight: I will break in pieces the gates of brass, and cut in sunder the bars of iron:

α.45.3 Káh kuttinnumoush pohkenae nompak8unash, kah adtahtoe w[é]nauwetuongash assampámukquehtu, onk woh k8wahteoh, nen Jehovah ne as8wenimuk, nen um-Manitt8moh Israel.
E.45.3 And I will give thee the treasures of darkness, and hidden riches of secret places, that thou mayest know that I, the LORD, which call thee by thy name, am the God of Israel.

α.45.4 Newutche Jakob nuttinneum kah Israel pepenauog, kuttehenush: kuttohtoe wesuonganuhkoush, tohkonogque matta k8wahein.
E.45.4 For Jacob my servant's sake, and Israel mine elect, I have even called thee by thy name: I have surnamed thee, though thou hast not known me.

α.45.5 Nen Jehovah kah matta onkatog, matta Manitt8un8h webe nen: kupputtugquabinuh tohkonogque mo k8wahein.
E.45.5 I am the LORD, and there is none else, there is no God beside me: I girded thee, though thou hast not known me:

α.45.6 Onk wutch wutchepwoiyeu kah wutcheksuiyeu woh wahteauog, matta onkatog qut webe nen, nen Jehovah kah matta onkatok.
E.45.6 That they may know from the rising of the sun, and from the west, that there is none beside me. I am the LORD, and there is none else.

α.45.7 Nukkuhkenauwehteop wequai kah nukkezteop pohkenai: n8nohteahuam, kah matchit nukkezteoh: nen Jehovah wame yeush nutussenash.
E.45.7 I form the light, and create darkness: I make peace, and create evil: I the LORD do all these things.

α.45.8 Padtippashunk, kenaau kesukquog wutch waabe, kah kesukquash sokenumohettich sampweusseonk: ohke wóhshwem8utch, kah paudtauehettich wadchanittuonk kah sampweusseonk moae sonkitch: nen Jehovah nukkezteauunah.
E.45.8 Drop down, ye heavens, from above, and let the skies pour down righteousness: let the earth open, and let them bring forth salvation, and let righteousness spring up together; I the LORD have created it.

α.45.9 Missi wutonkapunaonk noh mekonont kezhikqutcheh: kodchuhkishq mekontaj ohkee kodchuhkishq: sun woh man8nsk unnau neh kahkenauehhikqutcheh, teag kutayim? asuh kutanakausuonk, matta wunnutcheeu?
E.45.9 Woe unto him that striveth with his Maker! Let the potsherd strive with the potsherds of the earth. Shall the clay say to him that fashioneth it, What makest thou? or thy work, He hath no hands?

α.45.10 Missi wutonkapunaonk noh anont 8shoh teaguas k8naumoni? asuh mittamwussissoh, teaguas keneecham:
E.45.10 Woe unto him that saith unto his father, What begettest thou? or to the woman, What hast thou brought forth?

α.45.11 Yeu wussin Jeh[ó]vah 8neetupan[a]tam8moh Israel, kah kezhukqutch[é]h, nat8tomah papaume nish pish anagish, papaume nunnaumonuh, kah papaume nunnutchegane ánakausuonk, ann8negk.
E.45.11 Thus saith the LORD, the Holy One of Israel, and his Maker, Ask me of things to come concerning my sons, and concerning the work of my hands command ye me.

α.45.12 Nutayimup ohke, kah nukkezheap wosketomp na$ut: nen nunnutcheg sepagunumup kesukquash kah wame ne kenauwameonk nutann8tamun.
E.45.12 I have made the earth, and created man upon it: I, even my hands, have stretched out the heavens, and all their host have I commanded.

α.45.13 Nutomohkinumauup ut wunnomwausseonganit, kah nussampweteoh wame ummayásh: noh pish ayim nukkeitotan, kah noh pish moncheaheau nummissinomon, matta unnoadtuut asuh onkquatunkanit, n8wau Jehovah ayeuteaunit.
E.45.13 I have raised him up in righteousness, and I will direct all his ways: he shall build my city, and he shall let go my captives, not for price nor reward, saith the LORD of hosts.

α.45.14 Yeu wussin Jehovah, wutanakausuonk Egypté wutan[á]qushaongash Ethiopia kah Sabeansog, qunuhqussuenuog pish kuppeyaonukquog, kah kuttaiheog, nag pish kutassuhkungquog, kah nashpe chainsash, nag pish quṣhkodteaog: kah nag pish kenauwaehtunkquog, pish k8wehquetumunkquog, n8waog wunnamuhkut God kutapehtunk, kah matta onkatog, matta Manitt8[un]8.
E.45.14 Thus saith the LORD, The labour of Egypt, and merchandise of Ethiopia and of the Sabeans, men of stature, shall come over unto thee, and they shall be thine: they shall come after thee; in chains they shall come over, and they shall fall down unto thee, they shall make supplication unto thee, saying, Surely God is in thee; and there is none else, there is no God.

α.45.15 Wunnamuhkut ken Manit padtogquean, woi Israelle Manit, wadchanuwaenin.
E.45.15 Verily thou art a God that hidest thyself, O God of Israel, the Saviour.

α.45.16 Nag pish akodchuog, kah nag wame wonk pish quehquenauanumoog, nag pish moaeu naswaiyeuog neg ayeuoncheg nunneukontunkoh.
E.45.16 They shall be ashamed, and also confounded, all of them: they shall go to confusion together that are makers of idols.

α.45.17 Qut Israel pish wadchanau ut Jehovahut nashpe michemohtae wadchanittuonk, matta pish kutakodchu, asuh kukkuhquenauanum8h yeoyatche.
E.45.17 But Israel shall be saved in the LORD with an everlasting salvation: ye shall not be ashamed nor confounded world without end.

α.45.18 Newutche yeu wussin Jehovah noh kezteunk kesukquash, God nagum nehenwonche noh kuhkenauwehteunkup ohke, kah kezteunkup, ummenuhkehteáuun, matta táhn8che ukkezteaúouun, wuttinuk|kezteauun wutohkineat, nen Jehovah kah matta onkatok.
E.45.18 For thus saith the LORD that created the heavens; God himself that formed the earth and made it; he hath established it, he created it not in vain, he formed it to be inhabited: I am the LORD; and there is none else.

α.45.19 Matta nukkeme eyin, ut pohkenaiyeue ayeuonkanit ohkéit: matta nuttinnoh 8skannemuneoh Jakob, tahn8che natinneahwhegk: nen Jehovah sampweusseonk nussim, n8wahteauwahuwam nish sampwagish.
E.45.19 I have not spoken in secret, in a dark place of the earth: I said not unto the seed of Jacob, Seek ye me in vain: I the LORD speak righteousness, I declare things that are right.

α.45.20 Miyaek, kah peyunk moae pas8tshagk, kenau pohquohhamogish ut [vv]utohtimoneat nag matta wahteauunganaeog, neg wanohtunkig nunneukontungane mehtug, kah wowussumaog Manitto neh woh mo wadchanuwanegeh.
E.45.20 Assemble yourselves and come; draw near together, ye that are escaped of the nations: they have no knowledge that set up the wood of their graven image, and pray unto a god that cannot save.

α.45.21 Unnok pas8tshan8k, nux miyae kogahq[ú]ttehettich: howan yeu wahteauwahuwon wutch n8wadt? sunnummatta nen Jehovah? kah na matta Manitt8un8 webe nen sampwu Manit, kah wadchanuwaenin, matta onkatuk webe nen.
E.45.21 Tell ye, and bring them near; yea, let them take counsel together: who hath declared this from ancient time? who hath told it from that time?  have not I the LORD? and there is no God else beside me; a just God and a Saviour; there is none beside me.

α.45.22 Monunnéiegk, kah wadchanitteagk, wame kenaau wehqshit ohke, newutch[é] nen God, kah matta wonk howan.
E.45.22 Look unto me, and be ye saved, all the ends of the earth: for I am God, and there is none else.

α.45.23 Nutchad[c]h[e]keyeuwop nashpe nen, nuttinn8waonk sohham8m8 wutch nutt8nut ut sampweyeuong[a]nit kah matta pish qushkemun8ash, onk woh nish$noh mukkuttuk nunnauwaehtunk, kah nish$noh meenan pish nutchadchekeimuk.
E.45.23 I have sworn by myself, the word is gone out of my mouth in righteousness, and shall not return, That unto me every knee shall bow, every tongue shall swear.

α.45.24 Pish pásuk n8wau wunnamuhkut, ut Jehova[ú]t n8nomwausseonk, k[á]h nummenuhkesuonk ohteau: noh$ut pish wosketompáog peyoneau, k[a]h wame neg musq[ú]anumonch[e]g pish akod[c]huog.
E.45.24 Surely, shall one say, in the LORD have I righteousness and strength: even to him shall men come; and all that are incensed against him shall be ashamed.

α.45.25 Ut Jehovah$ut wame Israelle wuskannem pish sampweogquanittamun, kah pish waeenowaog.
E.45.25 In the LORD shall all the seed of Israel be justified, and shall glory.

α.46.1 BEL nauwaeu, Nebo nauwôsu, wuttinn[é]ukontunk[a]nouh woskeche puppinashimwut, ka[h] nee[t]asuut: k8weanunn8ash tuhkekomeechummuash, neg tuhkequane weanun sauunum8e puppinashimwut.
E.46.1 Bel boweth down, Nebo stoopeth, their idols were upon the beasts, and upon the cattle: your carriages were heavy loaden; they are a burden to the weary beast.

α.46.2 Nauwoseog, nauwaeog moaeu, matta pohquohwuttauoog weanun, qut nag nehenwonche missinohkonunk.
E.46.2 They stoop, they bow down together; they could not deliver the burden, but themselves are gone into captivity.

α.46.3 N8tiek woi Jakob week, k[à]h wame sequttahwhutcheg wekit Israel, neg konunutcheg wutch munnogkussit, kah tahshinutcheg wutch ôontomukqut.
E.46.3 Hearken unto me, O house of Jacob, and all the remnant of the house of Israel, which are borne by me from the belly, which are carried from the womb:

α.46.4 Kah pajeh kukkehchiyeuunneaout, nen nnoh, kah pajeh wompoquonat kukkinnunnumw8: nukkezteop, kah kutashinnumw8 kah kukkinnunumw8, kah kuppohquohwhununumw8.
E.46.4 And even to your old age I am he; and even to hoar hairs will I carry you: I have made, and I will bear; even I will carry, and will deliver you.

α.46.5 Howan kuttatupanumimw8, kah keananumimw8, kah kuttatupinomw8, onk woh nutogqueneunkqussin?
E.46.5 To whom will ye liken me, and make me equal, and compare me, that we may be like?

α.46.6 Mahtshadtoog Gold wutch munn8tadt kah quttompagh8teog silver ut quthompak8teganit, kah ann8naog gold$smithoh, kah um-Manitt8hkou, neg penushaog, kah wowussummuwaog.
E.46.6 They lavish gold out of the bag, and weigh silver in the balance, and hire a goldsmith; and he maketh it a god: they fall down, yea, they worship.

α.46.7 Wuttahshinouh ut wuttugkeout, ukkenunnouh, upponouh ut wutayeuonganit, kah neepau: wutch wutayeuonganit matta pish ontappu: nux pasuk pish ummauunnitteauoh, qut matta woh wunnamp8hamunk8oh, kah matta 8wadchanuk8oh wutch 8tamehpunnaonganit.
E.46.7 They bear him upon the shoulder, they carry him, and set him in his place, and he standeth; from his place shall he not remove: yea, one shall cry unto him, yet can he not answer, nor save him out of his trouble.

α.46.8 Yeu mehquontam8k, kah nahtitteagk k8skeetompoongan8: wonk mehquontamwahuwagk, woi kenaau panneusséógish.
E.46.8 Remember this, and shew yourselves men: bring it again to mind, O ye transgressors.

α.46.9 Mehquontam8k nish n8adt anagkupash, newutche nen God, kah matta onkatog, nen God, kah matta howan nean[é]yeuw8.
E.46.9 Remember the former things of old: for I am God, and there is none else; I am God, and there is none like me,

α.46.10 Wahteauwahuwáan wohkukquoshik waj kutchishik, kah wutch n8wadt, nish asquam anán8gish, an8waon, nukkogahk8waonk pish menuhkohteau, kah pish nutussen wame nean tapeneam.
E.46.10 Declaring the end from the beginning, and from ancient times the things that are not yet done, saying, My counsel shall stand, and I will do all my pleasure:

α.46.11 N8wehkom mahchipp8áe psukses wutch wutchepwoiyeu, wosketomp noh kezteunk ne pakodtantam, wutch noadtit wutohtimóneat: nux nussinneap, kah wonk pish n[u]tussen, nuppogkodtantamunap, kah wonk nutussen.
E.46.11 Calling a ravenous bird from the east, the man that executeth my counsel from a far country: yea, I have spoken it, I will also bring it to pass; I have purposed it, I will also do it.

α.46.12 N8tiek manuhkitteahô[ó]gish, nô8sukómógish wunn[o]mw[a]usseonk.
E.46.12 Hearken unto me, ye stouthearted, that are far from righteousness:

α.46.13 Nuppas8chewuttoh n8nomwausseonk: matta pish nôadtit ahtano, kah n8wadchanuwaonk matta pish pahtsúmun8, kah n8nohto wadchanittuonk ut Zion wutche Israel nussohsumoonk.
E.46.13 I bring near my righteousness; it shall not be far off, and my salvation shall not tarry: and I will place salvation in Zion for Israel my glory.

α.47.1 NOOkish kah apsh puppissiyeuut: woi penomp Babilone wuttaunin, apsh ohkeit: wanne t[a]hs8tamoe appuonganinno woi Caldeanse wuttaunin: newutche matta pish wonk kuttéhennitteoh kehkéchumwit kah mam[a]ttanumwit.
E.47.1 Come down, and sit in the dust, O virgin daughter of Babylon, sit on the ground: there is no throne, O daughter of the Chaldeans: for thou shalt no more be called tender and delicate.

α.47.2 Nemunush toguhwóngan[ó]mp[u]sk, kah n8khikanehteaush, wohshinush kummeesunk, poskis kuhkont, poskinush kehquau, qushkodteash seipu[a]sh.
E.47.2 Take the millstones, and grind meal: uncover thy locks, make bare the leg, uncover the thigh, pass over the rivers.

α.47.3 Kukkôussuonk pish wohshwohteau, nux kutakodchuonk pish naumun, kuttann8toush, matta kutogque nogkuṣhauun8 wosketompaut.
E.47.3 Thy nakedness shall be uncovered, yea, thy shame shall be seen: I will take vengeance, and I will not meet thee as a man.

α.47.4 Numman8whunnuaéneum, Jehovah ut ayeuteaunit, ne 8wesuonk, 8neetupanatam8moh Israel.
E.47.4 As for our redeemer, the LORD of hosts is his name, the Holy One of Israel.

α.47.5 Chequnapsh, âush pohkenaiyeuut, woi Caldeanse wutta[u]nin: newutche matta pish wonk kutehennitteoh, ass8tam8e sonksq
E.47.5 Sit thou silent, and get thee into darkness, O daughter of the Chaldeans: for thou shalt no more be called, The lady of kingdoms.

α.47.6 Numm8squanum nummissinninnúmog? nunnishketeoh nutohtoonk, kah neg nummagununk en kenutcheganit: matta kummonanumoog, ut kutchisetu tuhkéque yoak kuppon.
E.47.6 I was wroth with my people, I have polluted mine inheritance, and given them into thine hand: thou didst shew them no mercy; upon the ancient hast thou very heavily laid thy yoke.

α.47.7 Kah kussip, pish nummicheme sonksquau: newaj matta yeush ponam8an kuttahhut, kah matta kummehquontamoh ogkomáe ônag.
E.47.7 And thou saidst, I shall be a lady for ever: so that thou didst not lay these things to thy heart, neither didst remember the latter end of it.

α.47.8 Newutche yeu n8tash n8sukog weekontam8ongash, kah mat toh hentupánatamwée ayig: kussim ut kuttahhut, nen, kah matta howan w[e]be nen, matta pish nussekousquaappu, kah matta pish n8wahteo8h wannehteaonk mukkiesog.
E.47.8 Therefore hear now this, thou that art given to pleasures, that dwellest carelessly, that sayest in thine heart, I am, and none else beside me; I shall not sit as a widow, neither shall I know the loss of children:

α.47.9 Qut yeush nesinash pish kénuppe kuppeyogqunash, pasuk kesukod: wanneheaonk mukkiog, kah sekousquaonk: nish pish papannuppe kenuhkuhkongqunash, wutche mataanukish kuppauwauongash, kah wutche kumm8cheke moneetue usseongash.
E.47.9 But these two things shall come to thee in a moment in one day, the loss of children, and widowhood: they shall come upon thee in their perfection for the multitude of thy sorceries, and for the great abundance of thine enchantments.

α.47.10 Newutche kuppabuhtantam kummatcheseonk, kussip, matta howan nunnogk8, k8waantam8onk kah k8wahteauonk k8wounkhik, kah kussip, ut kuttahhut, nen, kah matt[a] onkatuk webe nen.
E.47.10 For thou hast trusted in thy wickedness: thou hast said, None seeth me. Thy wisdom and thy knowledge, it hath perverted thee; and thou hast said in thine heart, I am, and none else beside me.

α.47.11 Newaj machuk nuhkuhkongquean, mata pish k8wahteoh uttoh waj tahsheem8uk: kah woskeetuonk pish kenuhkuhkunk, kah matta pish kuttapenum8un kutamaunumunat: kah touushin tean[ú]k pish kenuhkuhkunk, ne matta pish wahteauouan,
E.47.11 Therefore shall evil come upon thee; thou shalt not know from whence it riseth: and mischief shall fall upon thee; thou shalt not be able to put it off: and desolation shall come upon thee suddenly, which thou shalt not know.

α.47.12 Eyeu nepaush nashpe kuppauwa[u]ongash, kah mataane[k] kummonetuonk, uttoh adt anakausean wutch k8ske[m]unneat, tapenuman kah so[h]koman.
E.47.12 Stand now with thine enchantments, and with the multitude of thy sorceries, wherein thou hast laboured from thy youth; if so be thou shalt be able to profit, if so be thou mayest prevail.

α.47.13 Kussauunum nashpe mataanukish kukkog[a]hquttuongash: Astrologersog, wauwacheg ut anogqsut, kah nepauzsae mashogig, neepauwehettich, kah nag wadchanuk8k wutch yeush pish nuhkuhkongqueogish.
E.47.13 Thou art wearied in the multitude of thy counsels. Let now the astrologers, the stargazers, the monthly prognosticators, stand up, and save thee from these things that shall come upon thee.

α.47.14 Kusseh, neg pish tatuppeyeu8og sequekepuneganit: n8teau pish nah wutchikohsoh, nag matta pish pohquohwhunau8og wuhhogkauh wutch menuhke n8n8naut: na matta mohkussaun8 kutauwossinneat, asuh n8tau apinneat anaquohtag.
E.47.14 Behold, they shall be as stubble; the fire shall burn them; they shall not deliver themselves from the power of the flame: there shall not be a coal to warm at, nor fire to sit before it.

α.47.15 Yeu pish wuttatuppeyeuunneau, neg weetanakausumacheg, kutanaqu[s]haeneumog wutch k8skenuuneat, nag pish nanwiyeuog nish$noh pasuk ut wutayeuonganit, matta howan pish k8wadchanuk8h.
E.47.15 Thus shall they be unto thee with whom thou hast laboured, even thy merchants, from thy youth: they shall wander every one to his quarter; none shall save thee.

α.48.1 YEU n8tam8k woi Jakob wek, neg ahenutcheg 8wesuonk Israel, kah neg wutch sohhogig Judae nippekontu, neg chadchekeyeuwacheg nashpe 8wesuonk Jehovah, kah mâs[a]whoncheg 8wesuonk um-Manitt8moh Israel, qut matta wunnamuhkuteyeuut asuh sampwesuonganit.
E.48.1 Hear ye this, O house of Jacob, which are called by the name of Israel, and are come forth out of the waters of Judah, which swear by the name of the LORD, and make mention of the God of Israel, but not in truth, nor in righteousness.

α.48.2 Newutche nag hennaog wuhhogkauh wutch wunnetupanatamwe otanat, kah quensinwog um-Manitt8moh Israel, Jehovah ayeuteanit ne 8wesuonk.
E.48.2 For they call themselves of the holy city, and stay themselves upon the God of Israel; The LORD of hosts is his name.

α.48.3 N8wahteauwahuwam négonne ânagish wutch waj|kutchissik, kah yeush sohham8m8ash wutch nutt8nut, kah nish nunnahtukonash: nukkenuppe ussenash, kah n$niyeupash.
E.48.3 I have declared the former things from the beginning; and they went forth out of my mouth, and I shewed them; I did them suddenly, and they came to pass.

α.48.4 Newutche n8wahteop kussiogkus, kah kussittipuk moohshog kutchoht, kah kushkodtuk wompohshag.
E.48.4 Because I knew that thou art obstinate, and thy neck is an iron sinew, and thy brow brass;

α.48.5 Waj kutchissik k8wahteauwahunun, asquam anan8g, kenahtinununah: ishkont woh kussim, nuttinneukontunk yeu wutussen, kah nukkogkoksumwe kah sabassumwe nunnúkontunk, nah wutann8nuh
E.48.5 I have even from the beginning declared it to thee; before it came to pass I shewed it thee: lest thou shouldest say, Mine idol hath done them, and my graven image, and my molten image, hath commanded them.

α.48.6 Ken8tamup, wame yeu, naish, kah sunnummatta k8wahteauwahuaneau? kenahtinush wuske teagwahsinish yeu$wutch, adtuhtosikish kah matta k8wahteau8unapash.
E.48.6 Thou hast heard, see all this; and will not ye declare it? I have shewed thee new things from this time, even hidden things, and thou didst not know them.

α.48.7 Nish yeuyeu kezteauunash, qut matta waj kutchissik negonae kesukod asquam n8tam8an ishkont woh kussim, kusseh nish n8wahteauunash,
E.48.7 They are created now, and not from the beginning; even before the day when thou heardest them not; lest thou shouldest say, Behold, I knew them.

α.48.8 Nux, matta ken8tam8, nux, matta k8wahteou, nux wutch na ahquompag kehtauog matta wohshinum8muk: newutch n8wahteoh, woh ahche k8nass8muwae ussem, & kuttehenit panneseaenin wutch ôontomukqut.
E.48.8 Yea, thou heardest not; yea, thou knewest not; yea, from that time that thine ear was not opened: for I knew that thou wouldest deal very treacherously, and wast called a transgressor from the womb.

α.48.9 Wutche n8wesuonk nutassanumun nummusquantamoonk: kah wutch n8woweenomitteaonk, kummukk8naush, ishkont kuttummeswush.
E.48.9 For my name's sake will I defer mine anger, and for my praise will I refrain for thee, that I cut thee not off.

α.48.10 Kusseh, kuppahkhesh, qut matt[a] nashpe silver, kuppepe[n]aush ut sabassumwe onkapunnaonganit.
E.48.10 Behold, I have refined thee, but not with silver; I have chosen thee in the furnace of affliction.

α.48.11 Wutche nen nehenwonche, nux wutche nen nehenwonche pish nutussen: newutche u[t]toh woh n8wesuonk nishketeauun? kah m[á]tta howan nuttinnumauoh nussohsumoonk.
E.48.11 For mine own sake, even for mine own sake, will I do it: for how should my name be polluted? and I will not give my glory unto another.

α.48.12 N8tah woi Jakob, kah Israel n8wehkumog: nen n$noh nen negonne, nen wonk maumachish.
E.48.12 Hearken unto me, O Jacob and Israel, my called; I am he; I am the first, I also am the last.

α.48.13 Nunnutcheg wonk wunohtau quenohtag ohke, kah nuttinnohkou qutomskinnau kesukquash; nag wehkumog moae neepoog
E.48.13 Mine hand also hath laid the foundation of the earth, and my right hand hath spanned the heavens: when I call unto them, they stand up together.

α.48.14 Wame kenaau moegk kah n8tam8k, howan kenugke nagoh yeush wahteauwáhuwachish? Jehovah 8womonuh: pish ussu wuttenantam8onk ut Babilon, kah wuhpit pish nuhkuhkauau Caldeansoh.
E.48.14 All ye, assemble yourselves, and hear; which among them hath declared these things? The LORD hath loved him: he will do his pleasure on Babylon, and his arm shall be on the Chaldeans.

α.48.15 Nen nen Nussin, nux n8wehkom: nuppas8, kah pish wutchayeuhteau ummay.
E.48.15 I, even I, have spoken; yea, I have called him: I have brought him, and he shall make his way prosperous.

α.48.16 Pas8sukiek, yeu n8tam8k, matta nukkeme eyin wutch waj|kutchissik, wutch na ahquompak ne ânag, na nen, kah eyeu Lord Jehovah, kah wunnashauanitt8moh nutann8nuk.
E.48.16 Come ye near unto me, hear ye this; I have not spoken in secret from the beginning; from the time that it was, there am I: and now the Lord GOD, and his Spirit, hath sent me.

α.48.17 Yeu wussin Jehovah kummanouhuwaeneum, 8neetupanatam8moh Isra[a]l, nen Jehovah kum$Manitt8m, noh kohk8tomungquean k8chiinneat, noh sagkompagunukquean en mayut ut$toh woh aóan.
E.48.17 Thus saith the LORD, thy Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel; I am the LORD thy God which teacheth thee to profit, which leadeth thee by the way that thou shouldest go.

α.48.18 Woi n8tamas nutann8team8ongash! neit k8nohteaonk woh tatuppeyeu8 sepuut, kah k8nomwausseonk onatuh ketahhanne tukk8ut.
E.48.18 O that thou hadst hearkened to my commandments! then had thy peace been as a river, and thy righteousness as the waves of the sea:

α.48.19 K8skannemuneunk wonk woh tatuppeyeu8og naguntu; kah k8nogkusseeu ontseonk onatuhyeu8 mamossompsquehtu: 8wesuonk woh matta tummussum8un, asuh pagwotoouun wutch anaquabeh.
E.48.19 Thy seed also had been as the sand, and the offspring of thy bowels like the gravel thereof; his name should not have been cut off nor destroyed from before me.

α.48.20 Sohham8k Babilon: wussem8k wutch Caldeansog nashpe ket8homae wadtautaonkqussuonk, wahteauwahuwak, yeu n8wak, unn8wak adt wehqshit ohken8wagk Jehovah man8whau wuttinnumoh Jakoboh.
E.48.20 Go ye forth of Babylon, flee ye from the Chaldeans, with a voice of singing declare ye, tell this, utter it even to the end of the earth; say ye, The LORD hath redeemed his servant Jacob.

α.48.21 Kah nag matta kuhkutt8n8og pamuwunont touohkomukquash: wussohwhutchuw[a]nehkauoh nippe wutch qussukquanit, pasehtham wonk qussuk, kah nippe sohwhutchuan.
E.48.21 And they thirsted not when he led them through the deserts: he caused the waters to flow out of the rock for them: he clave the rock also, and the waters gushed out.

α.48.22 Na matta wunohteaonganinn8, n8wau Jehovah, matcheetunutcheh.
E.48.22 There is no peace, saith the LORD, unto the wicked.

α.49.1 KUhkehtiegk woi munnáhannog, kah n8tiek woi missinninnuog wutch n8adtut, Jehovah n8wehkomuk wutch ôontomukqut, wutch wunnogkussit nokas missohham n8wesuonk.
E.49.1 Listen, O isles, unto me; and hearken, ye people, from far; The LORD hath called me from the womb; from the bowels of my mother hath he made mention of my name.

α.49.2 Kah ogquehteau nutt8n kenu togkodteg, ut wunnuppawhunne onkóohtómut nutadtahshik, kah nutayimunk kussenausue kôuhquod: ut uppetauwónut nutadtahshik.
E.49.2 And he hath made my mouth like a sharp sword; in the shadow of his hand hath he hid me, and made me a polished shaft; in his quiver hath he hid me;

α.49.3 Kah nuttinuk, ken nuttinninneum woi Israel, ut kuhhogkat sohsumm8w[ô]nit.
E.49.3 And said unto me, Thou art my servant, O Israel, in whom I will be glorified.

α.49.4 Neit nussip, tahn8tanakausip, nummohtshadtoh nummenuhkesuonk wutche monteag, kah tahn8che, wunnamuhkut n8sumitteaonk ohteau ut Jehovah, kah nutanakausuonk weechayeumukqun num-Manitt8m.
E.49.4 Then I said, I have laboured in vain, I have spent my strength for nought, and in vain: yet surely my judgment is with the LORD, and my work with my God.

α.49.5 Kah eyeu, n8wau Jehovah noh kahkénauwéhit wutch ôontomukqut 8tinninnúmuneat, wonk uppaudtauónat Jakoboh: tókónogque Israel matta môunnôun, qut onch pish nussohsum ut wuskesukqut Jehovah, kah num-Manitt8m pish n8menuhkesuonkanin.
E.49.5 And now, saith the LORD that formed me from the womb to be his servant, to bring Jacob again to him, Though Israel be not gathered, yet shall I be glorious in the eyes of the LORD, and my God shall be my strength.

α.49.6 
E.49.6 And he said, It is a light thing that thou shouldest be my servant to raise up the tribes of Jacob, and to restore the preserved of Israel: I will also give thee for a light to the Gentiles, that thou mayest be my salvation unto the end of the earth.

α.49.7 
E.49.7 Thus saith the LORD, the Redeemer of Israel, and his Holy One, to him whom man despiseth, to him whom the nation abhorreth, to a servant of rulers, Kings shall see and arise, princes also shall worship, because of the LORD that is faithful, and the Holy One of Israel, and he shall choose thee.

α.49.8 
E.49.8 Thus saith the LORD, In an acceptable time have I heard thee, and in a day of salvation have I helped thee: and I will preserve thee, and give thee for a covenant of the people, to establish the earth, to cause to inherit the desolate heritages;

α.49.9 
E.49.9 That thou mayest say to the prisoners, Go forth; to them that are in darkness, Shew yourselves. They shall feed in the ways, and their pastures shall be in all high places.

α.49.10 
E.49.10 They shall not hunger nor thirst; neither shall the heat nor sun smite them: for he that hath mercy on them shall lead them, even by the springs of water shall he guide them.

α.49.11 
E.49.11 And I will make all my mountains a way, and my highways shall be exalted.

α.49.12 
E.49.12 Behold, these shall come from far: and, lo, these from the north and from the west; and these from the land of Sinim.

α.49.13 
E.49.13 Sing, O heavens; and be joyful, O earth; and break forth into singing, O mountains: for the LORD hath comforted his people, and will have mercy upon his afflicted.

α.49.14 
E.49.14 But Zion said, The LORD hath forsaken me, and my Lord hath forgotten me.

α.49.15 
E.49.15 Can a woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have compassion on the son of her womb? yea, they may forget, yet will I not forget thee.

α.49.16 
E.49.16 Behold, I have graven thee upon the palms of my hands; thy walls are continually before me.

α.49.17 
E.49.17 Thy children shall make haste; thy destroyers and they that made thee waste shall go forth of thee.

α.49.18 
E.49.18 Lift up thine eyes round about, and behold: all these gather themselves together, and come to thee. As I live, saith the LORD, thou shalt surely clothe thee with them all, as with an ornament, and bind them on thee, as a bride doeth.

α.49.19 
E.49.19 For thy waste and thy desolate places, and the land of thy destruction, shall even now be too narrow by reason of the inhabitants, and they that swallowed thee up shall be far away.

α.49.20 
E.49.20 The children which thou shalt have, after thou hast lost the other, shall say again in thine ears, The place is too strait for me: give place to me that I may dwell.

α.49.21 
E.49.21 Then shalt thou say in thine heart, Who hath begotten me these, seeing I have lost my children, and am desolate, a captive, and removing to and fro? and who hath brought up these? Behold, I was left alone; these, where had they been?

α.49.22 
E.49.22 Thus saith the Lord GOD, Behold, I will lift up mine hand to the Gentiles, and set up my standard to the people: and they shall bring thy sons in their arms, and thy daughters shall be carried upon their shoulders.

α.49.23 
E.49.23 And kings shall be thy nursing fathers, and their queens thy nursing mothers: they shall bow down to thee with their face toward the earth, and lick up the dust of thy feet; and thou shalt know that I am the LORD: for they shall not be ashamed that wait for me.

α.49.24 
E.49.24 Shall the prey be taken from the mighty, or the lawful captive delivered?

α.49.25 
E.49.25 But thus saith the LORD, Even the captives of the mighty shall be taken away, and the prey of the terrible shall be delivered: for I will contend with him that contendeth with thee, and I will save thy children.

α.49.26 
E.49.26 And I will feed them that oppress thee with their own flesh; and they shall be drunken with their own blood, as with sweet wine: and all flesh shall know that I the LORD am thy Saviour and thy Redeemer, the mighty One of Jacob.

α.50.1 
E.50.1 Thus saith the LORD, Where is the bill of your mother's divorcement, whom I have put away? or which of my creditors is it to whom I have sold you?  Behold, for your iniquities have ye sold yourselves, and for your transgressions is your mother put away.

α.50.2 
E.50.2 Wherefore, when I came, was there no man? when I called, was there none to answer? Is my hand shortened at all, that it cannot redeem? or have I no power to deliver? behold, at my rebuke I dry up the sea, I make the rivers a wilderness: their fish stinketh, because there is no water, and dieth for thirst.

α.50.3 
E.50.3 I clothe the heavens with blackness, and I make sackcloth their covering.

α.50.4 
E.50.4 The Lord GOD hath given me the tongue of the learned, that I should know how to speak a word in season to him that is weary: he wakeneth morning by morning, he wakeneth mine ear to hear as the learned.

α.50.5 
E.50.5 The Lord GOD hath opened mine ear, and I was not rebellious, neither turned away back.

α.50.6 
E.50.6 I gave my back to the smiters, and my cheeks to them that plucked off the hair: I hid not my face from shame and spitting.

α.50.7 
E.50.7 For the Lord GOD will help me; therefore shall I not be confounded: therefore have I set my face like a flint, and I know that I shall not be ashamed.

α.50.8 
E.50.8 He is near that justifieth me; who will contend with me? let us stand together: who is mine adversary? let him come near to me.

α.50.9 
E.50.9 Behold, the Lord GOD will help me; who is he that shall condemn me?  lo, they all shall wax old as a garment; the moth shall eat them up.

α.50.10 
E.50.10 Who is among you that feareth the LORD, that obeyeth the voice of his servant, that walketh in darkness, and hath no light? let him trust in the name of the LORD, and stay upon his God.

α.50.11 
E.50.11 Behold, all ye that kindle a fire, that compass yourselves about with sparks: walk in the light of your fire, and in the sparks that ye have kindled. This shall ye have of mine hand; ye shall lie down in sorrow.

α.51.1 
E.51.1 Hearken to me, ye that follow after righteousness, ye that seek the LORD: look unto the rock whence ye are hewn, and to the hole of the pit whence ye are digged.

α.51.2 
E.51.2 Look unto Abraham your father, and unto Sarah that bare you: for I called him alone, and blessed him, and increased him.

α.51.3 
E.51.3 For the LORD shall comfort Zion: he will comfort all her waste places; and he will make her wilderness like Eden, and her desert like the garden of the LORD; joy and gladness shall be found therein, thanksgiving, and the voice of melody.

α.51.4 
E.51.4 Hearken unto me, my people; and give ear unto me, O my nation: for a law shall proceed from me, and I will make my judgment to rest for a light of the people.

α.51.5 
E.51.5 My righteousness is near; my salvation is gone forth, and mine arms shall judge the people; the isles shall wait upon me, and on mine arm shall they trust.

α.51.6 
E.51.6 Lift up your eyes to the heavens, and look upon the earth beneath: for the heavens shall vanish away like smoke, and the earth shall wax old like a garment, and they that dwell therein shall die in like manner: but my salvation shall be for ever, and my righteousness shall not be abolished.

α.51.7 
E.51.7 Hearken unto me, ye that know righteousness, the people in whose heart is my law; fear ye not the reproach of men, neither be ye afraid of their revilings.

α.51.8 
E.51.8 For the moth shall eat them up like a garment, and the worm shall eat them like wool: but my righteousness shall be for ever, and my salvation from generation to generation.

α.51.9 
E.51.9 Awake, awake, put on strength, O arm of the LORD; awake, as in the ancient days, in the generations of old. Art thou not it that hath cut Rahab, and wounded the dragon?

α.51.10 
E.51.10 Art thou not it which hath dried the sea, the waters of the great deep; that hath made the depths of the sea a way for the ransomed to pass over?

α.51.11 
E.51.11 Therefore the redeemed of the LORD shall return, and come with singing unto Zion; and everlasting joy shall be upon their head: they shall obtain gladness and joy; and sorrow and mourning shall flee away.

α.51.12 
E.51.12 I, even I, am he that comforteth you: who art thou, that thou shouldest be afraid of a man that shall die, and of the son of man which shall be made as grass;

α.51.13 
E.51.13 And forgettest the LORD thy maker, that hath stretched forth the heavens, and laid the foundations of the earth; and hast feared continually every day because of the fury of the oppressor, as if he were ready to destroy? and where is the fury of the oppressor?

α.51.14 
E.51.14 The captive exile hasteneth that he may be loosed, and that he should not die in the pit, nor that his bread should fail.

α.51.15 
E.51.15 But I am the LORD thy God, that divided the sea, whose waves roared: The LORD of hosts is his name.

α.51.16 
E.51.16 And I have put my words in thy mouth, and I have covered thee in the shadow of mine hand, that I may plant the heavens, and lay the foundations of the earth, and say unto Zion, Thou art my people.

α.51.17 
E.51.17 Awake, awake, stand up, O Jerusalem, which hast drunk at the hand of the LORD the cup of his fury; thou hast drunken the dregs of the cup of trembling, and wrung them out.

α.51.18 
E.51.18 There is none to guide her among all the sons whom she hath brought forth; neither is there any that taketh her by the hand of all the sons that she hath brought up.

α.51.19 
E.51.19 These two things are come unto thee; who shall be sorry for thee?  desolation, and destruction, and the famine, and the sword: by whom shall I comfort thee?

α.51.20 
E.51.20 Thy sons have fainted, they lie at the head of all the streets, as a wild bull in a net: they are full of the fury of the LORD, the rebuke of thy God.

α.51.21 
E.51.21 Therefore hear now this, thou afflicted, and drunken, but not with wine:

α.51.22 
E.51.22 Thus saith thy Lord the LORD, and thy God that pleadeth the cause of his people, Behold, I have taken out of thine hand the cup of trembling, even the dregs of the cup of my fury; thou shalt no more drink it again:

α.51.23 
E.51.23 But I will put it into the hand of them that afflict thee; which have said to thy soul, Bow down, that we may go over: and thou hast laid thy body as the ground, and as the street, to them that went over.

α.52.1 
E.52.1 Awake, awake; put on thy strength, O Zion; put on thy beautiful garments, O Jerusalem, the holy city: for henceforth there shall no more come into thee the uncircumcised and the unclean.

α.52.2 
E.52.2 Shake thyself from the dust; arise, and sit down, O Jerusalem: loose thyself from the bands of thy neck, O captive daughter of Zion.

α.52.3 
E.52.3 For thus saith the LORD, Ye have sold yourselves for nought; and ye shall be redeemed without money.

α.52.4 
E.52.4 For thus saith the Lord GOD, My people went down aforetime into Egypt to sojourn there; and the Assyrian oppressed them without cause.

α.52.5 
E.52.5 Now therefore, what have I here, saith the LORD, that my people is taken away for nought? they that rule over them make them to howl, saith the LORD; and my name continually every day is blasphemed.

α.52.6 
E.52.6 Therefore my people shall know my name: therefore they shall know in that day that I am he that doth speak: behold, it is I.

α.52.7 
E.52.7 How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him that bringeth good tidings, that publisheth peace; that bringeth good tidings of good, that publisheth salvation; that saith unto Zion, Thy God reigneth!

α.52.8 
E.52.8 Thy watchmen shall lift up the voice; with the voice together shall they sing: for they shall see eye to eye, when the LORD shall bring again Zion.

α.52.9 
E.52.9 Break forth into joy, sing together, ye waste places of Jerusalem: for the LORD hath comforted his people, he hath redeemed Jerusalem.

α.52.10 
E.52.10 The LORD hath made bare his holy arm in the eyes of all the nations; and all the ends of the earth shall see the salvation of our God.

α.52.11 
E.52.11 Depart ye, depart ye, go ye out from thence, touch no unclean thing; go ye out of the midst of her; be ye clean, that bear the vessels of the LORD.

α.52.12 
E.52.12 For ye shall not go out with haste, nor go by flight: for the LORD will go before you; and the God of Israel will be your rereward.

α.52.13 
E.52.13 Behold, my servant shall deal prudently, he shall be exalted and extolled, and be very high.

α.52.14 
E.52.14 As many were astonied at thee; his visage was so marred more than any man, and his form more than the sons of men:

α.52.15 
E.52.15 So shall he sprinkle many nations; the kings shall shut their mouths at him: for that which had not been told them shall they see; and that which they had not heard shall they consider.

α.53.1 
E.53.1 Who hath believed our report? and to whom is the arm of the LORD revealed?

α.53.2 
E.53.2 For he shall grow up before him as a tender plant, and as a root out of a dry ground: he hath no form nor comeliness; and when we shall see him, there is no beauty that we should desire him.

α.53.3 
E.53.3 He is despised and rejected of men; a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief: and we hid as it were our faces from him; he was despised, and we esteemed him not.

α.53.4 
E.53.4 Surely he hath borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows: yet we did esteem him stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted.

α.53.5 
E.53.5 But he was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities: the chastisement of our peace was upon him; and with his stripes we are healed.

α.53.6 
E.53.6 All we like sheep have gone astray; we have turned every one to his own way; and the LORD hath laid on him the iniquity of us all.

α.53.7 
E.53.7 He was oppressed, and he was afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth: he is brought as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearers is dumb, so he openeth not his mouth.

α.53.8 
E.53.8 He was taken from prison and from judgment: and who shall declare his generation? for he was cut off out of the land of the living: for the transgression of my people was he stricken.

α.53.9 
E.53.9 And he made his grave with the wicked, and with the rich in his death; because he had done no violence, neither was any deceit in his mouth.

α.53.10 
E.53.10 Yet it pleased the LORD to bruise him; he hath put him to grief: when thou shalt make his soul an offering for sin, he shall see his seed, he shall prolong his days, and the pleasure of the LORD shall prosper in his hand.

α.53.11 
E.53.11 He shall see of the travail of his soul, and shall be satisfied: by his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many; for he shall bear their iniquities.

α.53.12 
E.53.12 Therefore will I divide him a portion with the great, and he shall divide the spoil with the strong; because he hath poured out his soul unto death: and he was numbered with the transgressors; and he bare the sin of many, and made intercession for the transgressors.

α.54.1 
E.54.1 Sing, O barren, thou that didst not bear; break forth into singing, and cry aloud, thou that didst not travail with child: for more are the children of the desolate than the children of the married wife, saith the LORD.

α.54.2 
E.54.2 Enlarge the place of thy tent, and let them stretch forth the curtains of thine habitations: spare not, lengthen thy cords, and strengthen thy stakes;

α.54.3 
E.54.3 For thou shalt break forth on the right hand and on the left; and thy seed shall inherit the Gentiles, and make the desolate cities to be inhabited.

α.54.4 
E.54.4 Fear not; for thou shalt not be ashamed: neither be thou confounded; for thou shalt not be put to shame: for thou shalt forget the shame of thy youth, and shalt not remember the reproach of thy widowhood any more.

α.54.5 
E.54.5 For thy Maker is thine husband; the LORD of hosts is his name; and thy Redeemer the Holy One of Israel; The God of the whole earth shall he be called.

α.54.6 
E.54.6 For the LORD hath called thee as a woman forsaken and grieved in spirit, and a wife of youth, when thou wast refused, saith thy God.

α.54.7 
E.54.7 For a small moment have I forsaken thee; but with great mercies will I gather thee.

α.54.8 
E.54.8 In a little wrath I hid my face from thee for a moment; but with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee, saith the LORD thy Redeemer.

α.54.9 
E.54.9 For this is as the waters of Noah unto me: for as I have sworn that the waters of Noah should no more go over the earth; so have I sworn that I would not be wroth with thee, nor rebuke thee.

α.54.10 
E.54.10 For the mountains shall depart, and the hills be removed; but my kindness shall not depart from thee, neither shall the covenant of my peace be removed, saith the LORD that hath mercy on thee.

α.54.11 
E.54.11 O thou afflicted, tossed with tempest, and not comforted, behold, I will lay thy stones with fair colours, and lay thy foundations with sapphires.

α.54.12 
E.54.12 And I will make thy windows of agates, and thy gates of carbuncles, and all thy borders of pleasant stones.

α.54.13 
E.54.13 And all thy children shall be taught of the LORD; and great shall be the peace of thy children.

α.54.14 
E.54.14 In righteousness shalt thou be established: thou shalt be far from oppression; for thou shalt not fear: and from terror; for it shall not come near thee.

α.54.15 
E.54.15 Behold, they shall surely gather together, but not by me: whosoever shall gather together against thee shall fall for thy sake.

α.54.16 
E.54.16 Behold, I have created the smith that bloweth the coals in the fire, and that bringeth forth an instrument for his work; and I have created the waster to destroy.

α.54.17 
E.54.17 No weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper; and every tongue that shall rise against thee in judgment thou shalt condemn. This is the heritage of the servants of the LORD, and their righteousness is of me, saith the LORD.

α.55.1 EHoh nish$noh pasuk noh kuhkutt8g, peyonch nippekontu, kah noh mátta ohto8g teaguas: peyonk, adtôagk, kah meets[e]k, nux peyonk, adtóagk wine kah sogkodtunk matta wutch teaguas, kah matta noadtue.
E.55.1 Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to the waters, and he that hath no money; come ye, buy, and eat; yea, come, buy wine and milk without money and without price.

α.55.2 Tohwutch mag8og teagwash ne matta pâdtukqunnunganun8g? kah kutanakausuongan8, wutche ne matta taphuomun8? menuhke n8tiegk, kah meech8k ne wanegik, kah kukketeahogkoun8 weekontaj ut wunogquneat.
E.55.2 Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is not bread? and your labour for that which satisfieth not? hearken diligently unto me, and eat ye that which is good, and let your soul delight itself in fatness.

α.55.3 Ahch8suttah, kah peyaauseh n8tam8k, kah kutteahogkoun8 pish pomantam; kah kutayimauonumw8 m[â]chemohtag wunn8waonk, papane monanumaongash David.
E.55.3 Incline your ear, and come unto me: hear, and your soul shall live; and I will make an everlasting covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David.

α.55.4 Kusseh, nuttinninnumau missinninnuh 8wauwonat, sagkompaginnuen, kah ann8nuwaenin en missinninnuut.
E.55.4 Behold, I have given him for a witness to the people, a leader and commander to the people.

α.55.5 Kusseh, pish k8wehkom wutohtimoin ne matta wahteauo[n]an, kah wutohtimoneash nish matta wahik8unish, pish kukquentunkqunash, wutche Jehovah kum-Manitt8m, k[a]h wutch 8neetupanatam8moh Israel: newutche noh kussohsum8wahik.
E.55.5 Behold, thou shalt call a nation that thou knowest not, and nations that knew not thee shall run unto thee because of the LORD thy God, and for the Holy One of Israel; for he hath glorified thee.

α.55.6 Natinneah8k Jehovah woh ash namhit: wehkomash pas8tappit.
E.55.6 Seek ye the LORD while he may be found, call ye upon him while he is near:

α.55.7 Matchetou nukkotutch ummay, kah matsampweusseaenin wuttenantam8ongash, kah qushkeitch en Jehovah$ut, kah pish ummonanumuh, kah en num-Manitt8mut newutche noh pish m8cheke ahquontam.
E.55.7 Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts: and let him return unto the LORD, and he will have mercy upon him; and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon.

α.55.8 Newutche nuttenantam8ongash matta k8tenantamuonkaneinash, kah kummayash matta nummayash n8wau Jehovah.
E.55.8 For my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways, saith the LORD.

α.55.9 Newutche neane kesukquash anue qunuhquotash onk ne ohke, netatuppe nummayash qunuhquodtash anue onk kummayash kah nuttenantam8ongash, onk kuttenattam8ongash.
E.55.9 For as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts.

α.55.10 Newutche neane n8kem8[u]k sokanon kah k8n wutch kesukqut, kah matta qushkeog, qut nippehkontamwog ohke, kah ummechumuhkon, kah 8nt8nohquamuhkon, onk, onk woh 8skannemunneuhkauonat ahketeanutcheh, kah petukqununk wutch noh meetsit.
E.55.10 For as the rain cometh down, and the snow from heaven, and returneth not thither, but watereth the earth, and maketh it bring forth and bud, that it may give seed to the sower, and bread to the eater:

α.55.11 Ne pish nneu nuttinn8waonk ne sohham8m8ug wutch nutt8nut: matta pish mahchiyeue qushkemun8 en nuhhogkat, qut pish kézteau8m8 nê tapeneam, kah pish wunayeum8 uttôh áne ann8tam.
E.55.11 So shall my word be that goeth forth out of my mouth: it shall not return unto me void, but it shall accomplish that which I please, and it shall prosper in the thing whereto I sent it.

α.55.12 Newutche pish k8wekontamwe sohham8m8, kah pish k8nohteae monchanitteamw8: wadchuash kah wadchuemesash pish mishont8a8hamóm8ash ut anaquabeog, kah wame ohteakon8e mehtugquash pish pohponkinitchahhuog.
E.55.12 For ye shall go out with joy, and be led forth with peace: the mountains and the hills shall break forth before you into singing, and all the trees of the field shall clap their hands.

α.55.13 Nonompu asinnekô[á]s pish wutch sonkin firuhtug, kah nonompu kôus pish wutchegin myrtlúhtug: kah ne pish wutch wesuonk Jehovahut, kah wutch machemohtag kuhkinneasuonk, ne matta pish támuttahham8muk.
E.55.13 Instead of the thorn shall come up the fir tree, and instead of the brier shall come up the myrtle tree: and it shall be to the LORD for a name, for an everlasting sign that shall not be cut off.

α.56.1 YEu wussin Lord, nanawehteau8k wussittumóonk, kah s[a]mpweussek, newutche n8wadchanuwaonk pas8che peyom8: kah nussampweusseonk wahteauwahuwon.
E.56.1 Thus saith the LORD, Keep ye judgment, and do justice: for my salvation is near to come, and my righteousness to be revealed.

α.56.2 Wunánumau wosketomp noh yeu asit, kah wunnaumonuh wosketomp noh másunuk, noh nanawehteunk sabath wutch matta wunnishketeau8unat, kah noh nanawehteunk wunnutcheg wutch matchesenat.
E.56.2 Blessed is the man that doeth this, and the son of man that layeth hold on it; that keepeth the sabbath from polluting it, and keepeth his hand from doing any evil.

α.56.3 Kah wunnaumonuh penuot noh weetashunt wuhhogkuh Lordut, ahque n8waj, n8wonat, Jehovah papaquanne nutchippunuk wutch ummissinninnúmut: kah eunuchsog n8wahettékitch, kusseh, nen nunohtae mehtug.
E.56.3 Neither let the son of the stranger, that hath joined himself to the LORD, speak, saying, The LORD hath utterly separated me from his people: neither let the eunuch say, Behold, I am a dry tree.

α.56.4 Newutche wuttinnon Lord eunuchsoh, neg nanawehteunkig nussabbat8mash, káh neg pepenogig nish woh wohsikkitteahikqueanish, kah neg manúhkenukig n8n8waonk.
E.56.4 For thus saith the LORD unto the eunuchs that keep my sabbaths, and choose the things that please me, and take hold of my covenant;

α.56.5 Nuttinnumauóog ut neekit, kah anóme nuppummenutonganit, ayeuonk kah wesuonk, anue wunnegen onk 8wesuongan8 wunnaumoniitcheg kah wuttaunitcheg: nuttinnumauóog machemohtag wesuonk, ne matta pish támatahham8muk.
E.56.5 Even unto them will I give in mine house and within my walls a place and a name better than of sons and of daughters: I will give them an everlasting name, that shall not be cut off.

α.56.6 Kah wonk wunnaumonuh pen8wot neg agwappéhtauáhettit Jehovah, wowussumónat, kah womantamunat 8wesuonk Jehovah, 8tinninneumuneat, nishnoh pasuk noh nanawehteunk Sabbath matta niṣhketeau8unat, kah noh kônunuk n8n8waonk.
E.56.6 Also the sons of the stranger, that join themselves to the LORD, to serve him, and to love the name of the LORD, to be his servants, every one that keepeth the sabbath from polluting it, and taketh hold of my covenant;

α.56.7 Neg nuppas8oog n8neetupanatamwe wadchúmut, kah n8weekontamwaheóog, ut nuppeantamwáe kommukqut, wutchikohtae mag8ongan8oash, kah wussephausuongan8oash, nish pish tapeneamunash ut nut[-]altarumut; newutche nek pish hettamun peantamwae kommuk wutch wame nummissinninneumog.
E.56.7 Even them will I bring to my holy mountain, and make them joyful in my house of prayer: their burnt offerings and their sacrifices shall be accepted upon mine altar; for mine house shall be called an house of prayer for all people.

α.56.8 Jehovah Manit, noh móunont pakenitcheh nummissinninneumoh, n8wau, nano nummóunúmau, chabesitcheg neh m[o]etunkqutcheh.
E.56.8 The Lord GOD, which gathereth the outcasts of Israel saith, Yet will I gather others to him, beside those that are gathered unto him.

α.56.9 Wame kenaaú ohteakóne puppinashimwog peyunk mahchipwunneat, wame kenaau touohkomukque puppinashimwog,
E.56.9 All ye beasts of the field, come to devour, yea, all ye beasts in the forest.

α.56.10 Wutaskwhôsuéneumoh pogkenumwoh: nag wame as8tuog, nag wame mokákutt8e anumwog, matta wohwóhteau8og: kouéog, sepsinwog, wekontamwog kogkouequon.
E.56.10 His watchmen are blind: they are all ignorant, they are all dumb dogs, they cannot bark; sleeping, lying down, loving to slumber.

α.56.11 Nux, nag nehnehteáp8e anumwog, neg woh mo wamep8gig, kah nag nanaushepsaenuog matta wohwohtamóog: nag wame moninneamwog nehenwonche ummayyeu, nishnoh pasuk wutch wutonts8nam8onk, wutch wutchippaiyeumut.
E.56.11 Yea, they are greedy dogs which can never have enough, and they are shepherds that cannot understand: they all look to their own way, every one for his gain, from his quarter.

α.56.12 Peyunk, n8waog, nunneemskom wine, kah nunnumwohtauómun nuhhogkanonog onkuppe, kah saup pish neyane yeuyeu kesukok, kah m8cheke muttae.
E.56.12 Come ye, say they, I will fetch wine, and we will fill ourselves with strong drink; and to morrow shall be as this day, and much more abundant.

α.57.1 SAmpweusseaen nup, kah matta howan upponam8un wuttahhut: kah monaneteaénuog amaunóog, matta howàn wunnatwontam8un, sampweusseaenin am[à]unau wutch machuk ne paóm8ug.
E.57.1 The righteous perisheth, and no man layeth it to heart: and merciful men are taken away, none considering that the righteous is taken away from the evil to come.

α.57.2 Noh pish petutteau wunohteaonganit, nag pish anwôsinwog ut wutapinneaóut, nish$noh pasuk paumwushadt ut wussampweusseonganit.
E.57.2 He shall enter into peace: they shall rest in their beds, each one walking in his uprightness.

α.57.3 Qut pas8tshagk, kenaau wunnaumonauh pauwásq, 8skannem mamussuaenin, kah nanwun8dsquâsuen.
E.57.3 But draw near hither, ye sons of the sorceress, the seed of the adulterer and the whore.

α.57.4 Howan ayeuuhkonittue chétwhók kuhhogkaóog? howan ayeuuhkonittue mashe kushkutt8naéhtauóg, kah sonkhénanúwaéhtauóg? sunnummatta kenaau panneseae wunneechaninneunk? pann8wae wuskannem?
E.57.4 Against whom do ye sport yourselves? against whom make ye a wide mouth, and draw out the tongue? are ye not children of transgression, a seed of falsehood.

α.57.5 Kukkussináheomw8 kuhhogkaóog nashpe nunneukontunkkanog, ut agwe nish$noh askuh[n]kq nushonat mukkiesog 8nôuhkôiyeutu, ut agwe pass[o]mpsk[o]déhtu.
E.57.5 Enflaming yourselves with idols under every green tree, slaying the children in the valleys under the clifts of the rocks?

α.57.6 Ut kenugke kussitchuáne m8sompsquéhtu, ne kutchippiyeum: nish, nish kutittanohtôadtuonk: kussókanumau[ô]og nag wuttattam8e sephausuonk, kummag meetsue mag8onk, sun woh nutattumunum taphettuonk yeush ut?
E.57.6 Among the smooth stones of the stream is thy portion; they, they are thy lot: even to them hast thou poured a drink offering, thou hast offered a meat offering. Should I receive comfort in these?

α.57.7 Ut qunuhqui kodohk[ó]ag na kupponamun kutappin: na kuttinne kuhkuhquen kumm[à]gunat sephausuongash.
E.57.7 Upon a lofty and high mountain hast thou set thy bed: even thither wentest thou up to offer sacrifice.

α.57.8 Onkauùssquont wonk, kah pogkomukquongash ne kupponamun kummequantam8onk: newutche kuposkehtau onkatok onk nen, kah kukkuhkuhquem: kummisheu kuskéhteop kutappin, kah nag k8n8wón[a]óog, k8womontam wutappinneau ut$toh ut nauman.
E.57.8 Behind the doors also and the posts hast thou set up thy remembrance: for thou hast discovered thyself to another than me, and art gone up; thou hast enlarged thy bed, and made thee a covenant with them; thou lovedst their bed where thou sawest it.

α.57.9 Kah kutóm ketass8tamwut nashpe pummee, kah nano kummishteo k8weetemunkquot8mash, kah kutann8n kutann8naeneumog wutch n8adtut, kah kuttiahquonkqueh kuhhog wehque chepiohkomuk.
E.57.9 And thou wentest to the king with ointment, and didst increase thy perfumes, and didst send thy messengers far off, and didst debase thyself even unto hell.

α.57.10 Kussauunuk kumishe mayuk8m, qut onch matta kussú, matt[a] annoôsuonganinno: kummishkom kenutchegane pomantam8onk, newajeh matta n8henn8muk.
E.57.10 Thou art wearied in the greatness of thy way; yet saidst thou not, There is no hope: thou hast found the life of thine hand; therefore thou wast not grieved.

α.57.11 Howan wabesuônadt kah quoshadt, waj pann8wáan, kah matta kummequanumu, asuh kupponam8un kuttahhut? sunnummatta nutchepappu wutch n8adt, kah matta kukqushéu?
E.57.11 And of whom hast thou been afraid or feared, that thou hast lied, and hast not remembered me, nor laid it to thy heart? have not I held my peace even of old, and thou fearest me not?

α.57.12 N8wahteauwáhuam kussampweusseonk, kah kutanakausuongash: newutche nish matta pish n8chiéinash.
E.57.12 I will declare thy righteousness, and thy works; for they shall not profit thee.

α.57.13 Máuan, weechógquéaneg pohquohwhunukqush: qut waban pish 8wame monchanuh: tan8cheéyeuuk pish wunneemunuh; qut noh pabahtanumit, pish ohtau ohke, kah pish ahtou n8neetupanatamwe wadchúm.
E.57.13 When thou criest, let thy companies deliver thee; but the wind shall carry them all away; vanity shall take them: but he that putteth his trust in me shall possess the land, and shall inherit my holy mountain;

α.57.14 Kah pish n8waog, kuhkuhquonteagk, kuhkuhquonteagk quoshauwehtam8k may, amaunum8k togkussittassunóonk wutch ummayeuont nummissinninnúmog.
E.57.14 And shall say, Cast ye up, cast ye up, prepare the way, take up the stumblingblock out of the way of my people.

α.57.15 Newutche yeu wussin noh quanunkqussit kah masugkenuk noh áyit machemóhtagit, noh as8wésit wanetupanatamweyeuit: nuttai qunuhqui kah wunneetupanatamwe ayeuonganit: n8weetom wonk, pohquehteáheont, kah ahohpateáhont, quaquakqheónat ahhohpanitcheh, kah quaquakqheonat pohqueteahónitcheh.
E.57.15 For thus saith the high and lofty One that inhabiteth eternity, whose name is Holy; I dwell in the high and holy place, with him also that is of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of the contrite ones.

α.57.16 Newutche matta nummicheme mekónteóh, kah matta nagwutteae pish nummusquanittam8: newutche wunnashaongan8 woh sauunum8m8 ut anaquabeh, kah keteahogkôunog neg kezheógig.
E.57.16 For I will not contend for ever, neither will I be always wroth: for the spirit should fail before me, and the souls which I have made.

α.57.17 Wutche wutiahchewont[à]m8e matcheséonk, nummusquantamup, kah nuttogkomop; nupputtogquep, kah nummusquantamop, kah pittuanumwu kutchitáushóp ut wuttahh8wáe mayut.
E.57.17 For the iniquity of his covetousness was I wroth, and smote him: I hid me, and was wroth, and he went on frowardly in the way of his heart.

α.57.18 Nunnaumup ummayash, kah nunneetke[h] nussagkompagun wonk, kah nunnompinnumau taphettuonk, kah ummauunnitteaéneumoh.
E.57.18 I have seen his ways, and will heal him: I will lead him also, and restore comforts unto him and to his mourners.

α.57.19 Nukkezteóh ummeechummúonk mussissitt8n, wunohteaonk, wunohteaj noh nóapit, kah noh pas8tappit, n8wau Lord, kah nunneetskeh.
E.57.19 I create the fruit of the lips; Peace, peace to him that is far off, and to him that is near, saith the LORD; and I will heal him.

α.57.20 Qut matchetukeg tatuppeyeu8og mishontuk8e kehtahhanit, matta ch[é]pohtan8g, noh nippe sohwanúhtog pissag, kah nishkeneunkquok.
E.57.20 But the wicked are like the troubled sea, when it cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt.

α.57.21 Matta 8nohteaonganúmu matcheetou n8wau num-Manitt8m.
E.57.21 There is no peace, saith my God, to the wicked.

α.58.1 MIshont8ash, wohquontogan, ogque mishont8ash monuhpuhpequonut kah náhtus nummissinninnúmog uppanneseongan8oash, kah wek Jakob ummatcheseongan8oash.
E.58.1 Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and shew my people their transgression, and the house of Jacob their sins.

α.58.2 Qut onch nag natinneáhikquog asekesukokish, kah weekontamwog wahteauun nummayash, onatuh sampweusseae wutohtimóin, kah matta ahquontamoe ukkuhk8waongash um-Manitt8m8uh: nunnat8tamunkquog sampweusseae kuhk8waongash: weekontamup pas8sukauunat God
E.58.2 Yet they seek me daily, and delight to know my ways, as a nation that did righteousness, and forsook not the ordinance of their God: they ask of me the ordinances of justice; they take delight in approaching to God.

α.58.3 Tohwutch mat meetseog, kah matta kenaum8un? tohwutch onkapunnanogkut nukketeahogkôunoh, kah matta kukkehkinneaséin? kusseh, matmeetsue kesukkodtut kutohtóm8 weekontamóonk, kah chekée usséhuwom8 wame kutanakausuongánooash.
E.58.3 Wherefore have we fasted, say they, and thou seest not? wherefore have we afflicted our soul, and thou takest no knowledge? Behold, in the day of your fast ye find pleasure, and exact all your labours.

α.58.4 Kusseh, mekonittue, kah penuánittue matkummeetsúmw8, tattéohtinat machetoe menutcheg: matta pish matkummeetsumw8, neáseóg yeu kesukok kukqunúhque n8tunkqunuhkônaóut k8wadtauatonkqussuongan8.
E.58.4 Behold, ye fast for strife and debate, and to smite with the fist of wickedness: ye shall not fast as ye do this day, to make your voice to be heard on high.

α.58.5 Sun nein matmeetsuonk ne pepenam? kesuk neadt wosketomp uhquanumwéheunt ukketeahogkounoh? sun ne wunnauánumunat uppuhkuk onatuh bulrush, kah ogque upponamunat man8tiónak kah pukquee? sun yeu kuttéhettamun matmeetsuonk, kah 8sekitteae kesukodt8m Jehovah?
E.58.5 Is it such a fast that I have chosen? a day for a man to afflict his soul? is it to bow down his head as a bulrush, and to spread sackcloth and ashes under him? wilt thou call this a fast, and an acceptable day to the LORD?

α.58.6 Sunnummatta yeu matmeetsuonk ne pepenam? ompinimunat matcheetowongane kishpissuongash, ompenimunat tuhkequanne weanunash, kah sânukahwhut wutchippinnúinneat, kah pokshanónat nishnoh yoak?
E.58.6 Is not this the fast that I have chosen? to loose the bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go free, and that ye break every yoke?

α.58.7 Sunnummatta ne kuttinnumauónat kuppetukqunnunk kodtupwutcheg, kah kuppasuonat kekit, matcheku noh sohwohteamuk: nauadt poskissu, kutonk8h, & matta kutadtahsh[o]h kuhhog wutch nehenwonche keyaus.
E.58.7 Is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the poor that are cast out to thy house? when thou seest the naked, that thou cover him; and that thou hide not thyself from thine own flesh?

α.58.8 Neit k8wequáiyeum pish ogque sonkqsúm8 mahtompanut, kah k8niyeuonk pish kenuppe sonksum8: kah kussampweusseonk pish kenegonuhkunk, wussohsumóonk Jehovah, noh pish kuppisquane nanauhik.
E.58.8 Then shall thy light break forth as the morning, and thine health shall spring forth speedily: and thy righteousness shall go before thee; the glory of the LORD shall be thy rereward.

α.58.9 Neit pish k8wehquetum, kah Jehovah pish kenamp8hamunk, pish kummauunnitteau, kah noh pish n8wau, nen yeu: amaunadt yoak wutch kenashómut, kenutcheg sontikquanuwóm8ut, kah tahn8che keket8kaonk.
E.58.9 Then shalt thou call, and the LORD shall answer; thou shalt cry, and he shall say, Here I am. If thou take away from the midst of thee the yoke, the putting forth of the finger, and speaking vanity;

α.58.10 Kôdtunadt kukketeahogkou en noh kodtupwit, kah wampwehe[à]dt unkuppunáe keteahogkou, neit k8wequaiyeum pish waapem8 ut pohkenaouut, kah kuppohkenaiyeum pish tatuppeyeu8 pohshaquadt.
E.58.10 And if thou draw out thy soul to the hungry, and satisfy the afflicted soul; then shall thy light rise in obscurity, and thy darkness be as the noon day:

α.58.11 Kah Jehovah pish nagwutteae kussamp8wunuk, kah pish wamepwéheau kukketeahogkounoh, kunkohteadtag, kah wunogquehteau koskonash: kah pish kuttatuppeyeu wuttadtippadtaueu tanohketeaonganit, kah tohkekomuut, noh wunnippe matta ahquohtán8g.
E.58.11 And the LORD shall guide thee continually, and satisfy thy soul in drought, and make fat thy bones: and thou shalt be like a watered garden, and like a spring of water, whose waters fail not.

α.58.12 Kah nag wágig kuhhogkat, pish ayimwog nukkonne ayeuongash nish matchteomukish: pish kuttashinum monaash pometeongash quenohtagish: kah pish kuttehenit, onchteunk pokqshunk, kah nompenuk ayeuongane mayash.
E.58.12 And they that shall be of thee shall build the old waste places: thou shalt raise up the foundations of many generations; and thou shalt be called, The repairer of the breach, The restorer of paths to dwell in.

α.58.13 Qushkinnuman kusseet wutch sabbath$dayut, matta kutusseinat nehenwonche k8wekontam8onk, ut n8eetupantamwe kesukodtumut, kah hettaman sabbath n8wekontam8onk, 8neetupanatam8m Jehovah, quohtianumukquok, kah noh quttianumadt, matta ussean nehenwonche kummayash asuh mat kenemunnum8unat nehenwonche wekontam8onk, kah matta kusseinat nehenwonceh kukk8ttwongash.
E.58.13 If thou turn away thy foot from the sabbath, from doing thy pleasure on my holy day; and call the sabbath a delight, the holy of the LORD, honourable; and shalt honour him, not doing thine own ways, nor finding thine own pleasure, nor speaking thine own words:

α.58.14 Neit pish k8wekontamwah kuhhog Jehovahut, kah kenayeúmukqu[éb]esh ut qunuhqui ayeuonganéhtu ut ohkeit, & pish kussohkom8nsh nashpe wutohtoonk Jacob k8sh, newutche wutt8n Jehovah ukkutt8kontamun.
E.58.14 Then shalt thou delight thyself in the LORD; and I will cause thee to ride upon the high places of the earth, and feed thee with the heritage of Jacob thy father: for the mouth of the LORD hath spoken it.

α.59.1 KUsseh, wunnutcheg Jehovah tiohqutteauóuun, onk ne woh mo adchanuómun8, kah wehtauog matta tuhkequanun8 woh moh wunn8tam8unat.
E.59.1 Behold, the LORD's hand is not shortened, that it cannot save; neither his ear heavy, that it cannot hear:

α.59.2 Qut kummatcheseongash chippemoash ut nashaue kenaau, kah kum-Manitt8m8óut, kah kummatcheseongash adtahtau wuskesuk wutch kenaau, woh mo n8tam8unat.
E.59.2 But your iniquities have separated between you and your God, and your sins have hid his face from you, that he will not hear.

α.59.3 Newutche kenutcheoash wunnishketeauunash musqueheonk, kah kuttinwhunutchegash nashpe matcheseonk, kah kussissitt8n8ash pann8wom8ash, keenan woonki m8m8sk8womo.
E.59.3 For your hands are defiled with blood, and your fingers with iniquity; your lips have spoken lies, your tongue hath muttered perverseness.

α.59.4 Wanne howan wehqueteum8 sámpweusseonk, kah matta howan ket8konshittam8 wanamuhkuteyeuuk: nag pabahtantamwog tahn8cheyeuuk, káh pann8waog, wompequo8og woskehuwaonk, kah neechaog panneusseonk.
E.59.4 None calleth for justice, nor any pleadeth for truth: they trust in vanity, and speak lies; they conceive mischief, and bring forth iniquity.

α.59.5 Ahtinnasinwog 8woanash cokatrice, kah monakeneheaog manunapit wuthashabpoh: noh meechik nag 8woano8ash nup, kah ne sanukehthamuk, ⟦sohwutchuanu viper.⟧
E.59.5 They hatch cockatrice' eggs, and weave the spider's web: he that eateth of their eggs dieth, and that which is crushed breaketh out into a viper.

α.59.6 Ummonakenehteaongan8 matta pish onkwhooog wuhhogkauh nashpe wutanakausuongash: wutanakausuongan8oash matcheseae anakausuongash, kah chekee usseonk ohteau wunnutcheganit.
E.59.6 Their webs shall not become garments, neither shall they cover themselves with their works: their works are works of iniquity, and the act of violence is in their hands.

α.59.7 Wusseetoash u[h]shom8ash matchitut, & kenupshaaog sokohkonat mat woskehuwae musqueheonk: wuttenantam8ongan8oash matcheseae unnantam8ongash, mahchumwehtoonk kah paguanuonk ut ummayeuout.
E.59.7 Their feet run to evil, and they make haste to shed innocent blood: their thoughts are thoughts of iniquity; wasting and destruction are in their paths.

α.59.8 Wunohteae may matta wahteau8og, kah na matta wussittum8onganun8 ut ummoncheongan8out: neg ayimauaog woonki mayash wuttinniin howan na aont, matta pish wunohteaonk.
E.59.8 The way of peace they know not; and there is no judgment in their goings: they have made them crooked paths: whosoever goeth therein shall not know peace.

α.59.9 Newaj na8sukongqueog wussittumoonk, kah sampweusseonk matta kumatanuk8unan: nuppahtómun wequai kah kusseh pohkenai: wompag, qut nuppomushomun pohkenáhtu.
E.59.9 Therefore is judgment far from us, neither doth justice overtake us: we wait for light, but behold obscurity; for brightness, but we walk in darkness.

α.59.10 Nunn8sweemun qussukquaneuntunk onatuh pohp[ôg]kenumuk, kah nuppopogkénumunun, onatuh mat wuskesuk8og: nuttogkussittássunumun pohshequaeu, onatuh nohkog, touishinne ayeuonganehtu onatuh nápumuk.
E.59.10 We grope for the wall like the blind, and we grope as if we had no eyes: we stumble at noon day as in the night; we are in desolate places as dead men.

α.59.11 Nutogquont8wómun mosqut, kah nutogque mishe maumun wuskuhwunanáut: nunnátauwompattamumun wussittumoonk, qut na matta ohtano, wadchanittuonk qut nô óhteau.
E.59.11 We roar all like bears, and mourn sore like doves: we look for judgment, but there is none; for salvation, but it is far off from us.

α.59.12 Newutche nuppaneseonganónash muttaánutash ut anaquabean, kah nummatcheseonganunonash nutayeuuhkônittue wauwaónukqunánonash: newutche nuppanneseonganunonash n8weetómukqunánonash, kah nummatcheseonganunonash n8wahteauunánonash.
E.59.12 For our transgressions are multiplied before thee, and our sins testify against us: for our transgressions are with us; and as for our iniquities, we know them;

α.59.13 Panneséog kah ayeuuhkonittue pann8waheogkut Jehovah, kah amaéog wutch num-Manitt8munónut, an8wáogish sunukkôwhuttuonk kah ontogquéhtam8onk, ananatamog, kah metass8wae kodt8kôog pann8waongash.
E.59.13 In transgressing and lying against the LORD, and departing away from our God, speaking oppression and revolt, conceiving and uttering from the heart words of falsehood.

α.59.14 Kah wussittum8onk qushkem8: kah sampweusseonk nôadtit neepattau: newutche wanamuhkutéyeuuk pógkishin maikontu, kah tatuppenéhettuonk matta petutteamun8.
E.59.14 And judgment is turned away backward, and justice standeth afar off: for truth is fallen in the street, and equity cannot enter.

α.59.15 Nux, wunnamuhkutéyeuuk panushean, kah noh nôkodtuk machuk, muk8kinnuwaheau wuhh[h]ogkuh, kah Jehovah wunnaumun, kah matta 8sekitteáhik8un newutche matta wussittum8wonganinn8.
E.59.15 Yea, truth faileth; and he that departeth from evil maketh himself a prey: and the LORD saw it, and it displeased him that there was no judgment.

α.59.16 Kah naum na matta wosketompaunn8, kah monchanatam matta howan ukken8tamwanshuh, newaj 8hpit paudtauont wadchanittuonk, kah wussampweusseonk ukqukquninukqun.
E.59.16 And he saw that there was no man, and wondered that there was no intercessor: therefore his arm brought salvation unto him; and his righteousness, it sustained him.

α.59.17 Newutche ogque hogk8 sampweusseonk mohpanáganit ahhohtag, kah wadchanittue uppuhkukqut ahhohtag uppuhkukqut? kah hogk8 ann8tôadtue hogk8unash wutche wuthogk8onk, kah hogk8 zeale onatuh petashqusháonk.
E.59.17 For he put on righteousness as a breastplate, and an helmet of salvation upon his head; and he put on the garments of vengeance for clothing, and was clad with zeal as a cloak.

α.59.18 Neaunak wutusseongan8oash, ne wuttinonkquttauun ayeuuhkonukqutcheh musquanittam8onk, kah onkquatunk en ummatwomut, pish onkquttauau munóhhanoh onkquatunk.
E.59.18 According to their deeds, accordingly he will repay, fury to his adversaries, recompence to his enemies; to the islands he will repay recompence.

α.59.19 Neit pish wabesuontamwog 8wesuonk Jehovah wutch wutcheksuiyeu, kah wussohsumóonk waj pashpishont: matwau ogque petutteadt tomogkanit, wunnashauanitt8moh Jehovah pish wutáyeuuhkonittue tahshinnumauoh muttaagk.
E.59.19 So shall they fear the name of the LORD from the west, and his glory from the rising of the sun. When the enemy shall come in like a flood, the Spirit of the LORD shall lift up a standard against him.

α.59.20 Kah man8hhuwaenin pish peyau Zion, kah en nahoh ámaécheg wutch pannesénut ut Jakob, wussin Jehovah.
E.59.20 And the Redeemer shall come to Zion, and unto them that turn from transgression in Jacob, saith the LORD.

α.59.21 Qut nen, yeu n8n8waonganun nagoh wussin Jehovah, nunnashauanitt8m noh apehtunkquean, kah nukkutt8wongash nish ponamunish kutt8nit, nish matta pish amaémunoash wutch kutt8nut, kah matta wutch wutt8n8óut k8skannemuneog, asuh matta wutch wutt8n8wout k8skannemuneog 8skannémun8óut, wussin Lord, yeu wutche kah micheme.
E.59.21 As for me, this is my covenant with them, saith the LORD; My spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seed's seed, saith the LORD, from henceforth and for ever.

α.60.1 TOOkish, wôhsish, newutche k8wequa8m peyom8, kah wussohsum8onk Lord k8waabéhtunkqun.
E.60.1 Arise, shine; for thy light is come, and the glory of the LORD is risen upon thee.

α.60.2 Newutche kusseh, pohkenái pish nuhkuhkom ohke, kah kuhpogke pohkenái ut missinninnutu: qut Jehovah pish kuppashpishaónuk, kah wussohsumóonk pish kenaumontean.
E.60.2 For, behold, the darkness shall cover the earth, and gross darkness the people: but the LORD shall arise upon thee, and his glory shall be seen upon thee.

α.60.3 Kah Gentilsog pish peyaog k8wequaiyeumut, kah ketass8tamwog ut kussohsumóe omohkeonganit.
E.60.3 And the Gentiles shall come to thy light, and kings to the brightness of thy rising.

α.60.4 Spadtauomps waéenu, kah naish, nag wame miyaéog, kuppeyaônukquog, kenaumonunk pish nóadtit 8mwog, kah kuttaunog pish nanukkehéoog ut kishke ken.
E.60.4 Lift up thine eyes round about, and see: all they gather themselves together, they come to thee: thy sons shall come from far, and thy daughters shall be nursed at thy side.

α.60.5 Neit pish kenaum, kah kummoáeu tomogkem, kah kuttah pish wabesu, kah pish misheheau; newutche kehtahhanne monacheg pish qunnuppekompauog en kuhhogkat, ummenuhkesuongan8 Gentilsog pish kuppeyaónukqunash.
E.60.5 Then thou shalt see, and flow together, and thine heart shall fear, and be enlarged; because the abundance of the sea shall be converted unto thee, the forces of the Gentiles shall come unto thee.

α.60.6 Mataánukeg Camelsog pish kenuhkuhkunk, Midiane kah Ephahe dromedarisog: wame neg apitcheg Sheba pish peyaog, neg pish paudtoog gold, kah weetemungquok, kah nag pish wahteauwahuwáog waeenomaongash Jehovah.
E.60.6 The multitude of camels shall cover thee, the dromedaries of Midian and Ephah; all they from Sheba shall come: they shall bring gold and incense; and they shall shew forth the praises of the LORD.

α.60.7 Wame Kedare floksog pish miyaéog en kuhhogkat: Nebajothe ramsog pish k8wowussehitteaonganog: nag pish tapenumoe kuhkuhqueog en nut-altarumut, kah nussohsum8wahteoh sohsumóe nek.
E.60.7 All the flocks of Kedar shall be gathered together unto thee, the rams of Nebaioth shall minister unto thee: they shall come up with acceptance on mine altar, and I will glorify the house of my glory.

α.60.8 Howanig yeug agque pt8écheg matokqsit, kah onatuh wsk[uh]whunanáout en 8wadshaoont?
E.60.8 Who are these that fly as a cloud, and as the doves to their windows?

α.60.9 Wunnamuhkut munnáhanash pish nuppahtsuónukqunash, kah Tarshishe kuht8nogquash negonne, pas8ónat kenaumonunk wutch nôadtit, pas8ónat kenaumonunk wutch nôadtit, wus$silverum8, kah uk-goldum8 weeche nagoh; en 8wesuonganit Jehovah kum-Manitt8m, kah en 8neetupanatam8moh Israel, newutche kussohsum8ónuk
E.60.9 Surely the isles shall wait for me, and the ships of Tarshish first, to bring thy sons from far, their silver and their gold with them, unto the name of the LORD thy God, and to the Holy One of Israel, because he hath glorified thee.

α.60.10 Kah wunnaumonaoh pen8wohteaog pish ayimwog kuthassunninneutungash, kah ukketass8tam[o]m8uh pish kutannumunkquog: newutche musquantamon kuttagkomunup, qut kodtumonteánitteon kummonánumunup.
E.60.10 And the sons of strangers shall build up thy walls, and their kings shall minister unto thee: for in my wrath I smote thee, but in my favour have I had mercy on thee.

α.60.11 Newaj pish kutishquontamash nagwutteáe wôshwohtag, nish matta pish kuppuhhaúsin8ash kesukodaeu asuh nukkonáeu, onk woh wosketompaog kuppaudtunkquog 8weenauweetuongan8 Gentilsog, kah ukketass8tam8m8uh woh paudtauonauh.
E.60.11 Therefore thy gates shall be open continually; they shall not be shut day nor night; that men may bring unto thee the forces of the Gentiles, and that their kings may be brought.

α.60.12 Newutche wutohtimoin kah ass8tamóonk ne matta wadtinninneumuhkonk8an, neg pish unkquanumôog, nux yeush wutohtimoneash pish papaquáne mohchimoash.
E.60.12 For the nation and kingdom that will not serve thee shall perish; yea, those nations shall be utterly wasted.

α.60.13 Wussohsumóonk Lebanon pish kenuhkuhkunk, firuhtug, pineuhtug, kah boxuhtug moeu, wunnehteauunat nus-sanctuarie ayeuonk, kah nussohsumwáhto nusseetoe ayeuonk.
E.60.13 The glory of Lebanon shall come unto thee, the fir tree, the pine tree, and the box together, to beautify the place of my sanctuary; and I will make the place of my feet glorious.

α.60.14 Wunnaumonáuh wonk neg unkquanumwehikqueaneg, nag pish nauwaée kuppéyogquog kah wame neg jishanumukqueaneg, nag pish nauwaeog ut agwe kusseetut, kah pish kuttéhenukquog ukkeitotan Jehovah wus-Zion8m 8neetupanatam8moh Israel.
E.60.14 The sons also of them that afflicted thee shall come bending unto thee; and all they that despised thee shall bow themselves down at the soles of thy feet; and they shall call thee; The city of the LORD, The Zion of the Holy One of Israel.

α.60.15 Uttôhadt, ohquanumunumukup káh jishanumunumukup, newaj matta wosketomp pannuppuhkongk8an; kutáyimáush michemohtae wunneetuonk, 8wekontam8ongan8 monaash pometeaonganash.
E.60.15 Whereas thou has been forsaken and hated, so that no man went through thee, I will make thee an eternal excellency, a joy of many generations.

α.60.16 Ken8n wonk pish wussogkodtunkan8 gentilsog: kah pish ken8nontam wohpanágun8 ketass8tamoh, kah pish k8wahteoh nen Jehovah k8wadchanuaeneum, kah kummanouhuwaeneum, ummissugkeneumoh Jakob.
E.60.16 Thou shalt also suck the milk of the Gentiles, and shalt suck the breast of kings: and thou shalt know that I the LORD am thy Saviour and thy Redeemer, the mighty One of Jacob.

α.60.17 Nompéeu brasse nuppaudtoh gold, kah nompéeu m8óhsh nuppaudtoh silver, kah nompeeu wudtuk brasse: kah nompe qussukquanash m8óhshag; kah n8nohteahéog kutannohsuénúmog, kah koshkomunukeg nussampweusseaenúheoog.
E.60.17 For brass I will bring gold, and for iron I will bring silver, and for wood brass, and for stones iron: I will also make thy officers peace, and thine exactors righteousness.

α.60.18 Chekeayeu8k matta pish wonk n8tam8un ut kutohkit, mohchumoonk asuh pagwanuonk ut kussissippóiyeumut: qut pish ku[téh]ettam kuthassunninnútungash, wadchanittuonk, kah k8squontamash waeenomaonk.
E.60.18 Violence shall no more be heard in thy land, wasting nor destruction within thy borders; but thou shalt call thy walls Salvation, and thy gates Praise.

α.60.19 Nepauz matta pish wonk k8wôhsumungk8 kesukodae kah wutche wôhsittae nanepâuhshad matta pish k8wôhsumunk8. qut Jehovah pish noh kummicheme weequaiy8m, kah kum-Manitt8m noh pish kussohsum8onk.
E.60.19 The sun shall be no more thy light by day; neither for brightness shall the moon give light unto thee: but the LORD shall be unto thee an everlasting light, and thy God thy glory.

α.60.20 Kenepauz8m màtta pish wonk wayau8, & kenanepauhshadt matta pish monchu, newutche Jehovah pish kummicheme ohtae wequai8m, kah kummauongane kesukodtash pish wohkukquoshinash.
E.60.20 Thy sun shall no more go down; neither shall thy moon withdraw itself: for the LORD shall be thine everlasting light, and the days of thy mourning shall be ended.

α.60.21 Kummissinninnumog wonk wame pish sampweusseaenúog; pish ohtoog ohke micheme, 8tuhqunnum ne ahketeaomp, nunnutchegane anakausuonk, onk woh nussohsum8ónit.
E.60.21 Thy people also shall be all righteous: they shall inherit the land for ever, the branch of my planting, the work of my hands, that I may be glorified.

α.60.22 Noh peississit pish muttannonganeyeu8, noh n8chumwesit pish menuhki wutohtimóin, nen Lord nukkenuppe ussen ut wutaquompiyeum8ut.
E.60.22 A little one shall become a thousand, and a small one a strong nation: I the LORD will hasten it in his time.

α.61.1 WUnnashauanitt8moh Lord Jehovah nutapéhtunk, newutche Jehovah nussusséqunuk kuhk8tomauonat manunnissitcheg wunaunchem8kaonk, nutann8[n]uk aseepinónat pohqutteahhoncheg, wahteauwaheonat chippinnú8onk en missinôut, kah wôshinnumauónat kuppishagkinnittuonk neg kashpissitcheg.
E.61.1 The Spirit of the Lord GOD is upon me; because the LORD hath anointed me to preach good tidings unto the meek; he hath sent me to bind up the brokenhearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of the prison to them that are bound;

α.61.2 Wahteauwahuónat 8weekontamwae kodtum8m Jehovah, kah wutann8t8wae ukkesukkodtum num-Manitt8mun, tapheonat wame neg mógig.
E.61.2 To proclaim the acceptable year of the LORD, and the day of vengeance of our God; to comfort all that mourn;

α.61.3 Kehtimónaóont neg mogig ut Zion, aninnumauonát, wunn[é]tuonk nompee onk ne pukquee, weekontamoe pummee nompee mauonk, tabuttantamoe hogk8onk nompee tohkéqunoe nashauonk, onk woh neg hennóog sampweusseae mehtugquash, wutohketeaonk Jehovah, onk woh sohsum8waheau.
E.61.3 To appoint unto them that mourn in Zion, to give unto them beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness; that they might be called trees of righteousness, the planting of the LORD, that he might be glorified.

α.61.4 Kah nag pish ayimwog nukkône mohchum8e ayeuongash pish tahshinumwog negonáe touushinneash, kah pish onchehteóog mohchim8e keitotanash, nish tauuhshikish m8cheke pometuongash.
E.61.4 And they shall build the old wastes, they shall raise up the former desolations, and they shall repair the waste cities, the desolations of many generations.

α.61.5 Kah penuohteaog pish neepóog, kah pish assamóog kuf-flocksum8uh, kah wunnaumonáuh penuwoht neg pish kutanaskúhhamwaenúm8óog, kah neg wánteunkeg k8weenominneohtekonash.
E.61.5 And strangers shall stand and feed your flocks, and the sons of the alien shall be your plowmen and your vinedressers.

α.61.6 Qut pish kuttiss8wésimw8 wussephàusuéneumoh Jehovah: wosketompaog pish kuttéhenukkumw8 wuñohtompeantog8moh num-Manitt8mun: pish kummeechimw8 8wenauwetuongan8 Gentilsog, kah ut wussohsum8ongan8wout pish k8woweenauómw8.
E.61.6 But ye shall be named the Priests of the LORD: men shall call you the Ministers of our God: ye shall eat the riches of the Gentiles, and in their glory shall ye boast yourselves.

α.61.7 Nompeeu kutakodchuongan8, pish keneese tahshe attumumunumw8: kah nompeeu naswáiyeuonk pish weekontamwog ut wutchippiyeum8óut: newaj ut wutuhkeout, pish neese pishkeu wutohteauuneau: machemohtag wekontamóonk pish apehtunkquog.
E.61.7 For your shame ye shall have double; and for confusion they shall rejoice in their portion: therefore in their land they shall possess the double: everlasting joy shall be unto them.

α.61.8 Newutche nen Jehovah n8womontam wussittumóonk, nusskeneam mukk8kinnuáonk wutche chikohtáe mag8ongash, kah nussampwehte[ó]h wutanakausuongan8 ut wanummuhkutéyeuuk, kah nag nutayimauóog machemohtag wunn8waonk.
E.61.8 For I the LORD love judgment, I hate robbery for burnt offering; and I will direct their work in truth, and I will make an everlasting covenant with them.

α.61.9 Kah 8skannemun8 pish wahteauun ut kenugke Gentilsut, kah wutontseongan8 ut kenug[h]e missinninnuut: wame neg nauoncheg pish samp8áog, neg wuskannemuneog neh Jehov[á]h wunnanumoncheh.
E.61.9 And their seed shall be known among the Gentiles, and their offspring among the people: all that see them shall acknowledge them, that they are the seed which the LORD hath blessed.

α.61.10 Pish nummishe wekontamut Jehovahut, nukketeahogkou pish wekontam ut num-Manitt8mut, newutche noh nuthogkquanuk wadchanittue hogk8unash, nutunkqwhuk sampweusseae petashqushaonk, onatuh wussentamwaen agwheont wuhhogkuh wu[n]hogk8ongash, kah onatuh weetauadteáenúnt hogqunn[ú]mont nompakouunash.
E.61.10 I will greatly rejoice in the LORD, my soul shall be joyful in my God; for he hath clothed me with the garments of salvation, he hath covered me with the robe of righteousness, as a bridegroom decketh himself with ornaments, and as a bride adorneth herself with her jewels.

α.61.11 Newutche onatuh ohke sonketeunk wunnéht8nunk, kah neane tanohketeaonk, so[h]kenuwáhtunk nish ne adt tanohketeamukish: ne ne Lord Jehovah sonketeauwáhteauun sampwuss[é]onk kah woweenomaonk ut anaquohtag wame wutohtimóneash.
E.61.11 For as the earth bringeth forth her bud, and as the garden causeth the things that are sown in it to spring forth; so the Lord GOD will cause righteousness and praise to spring forth before all the nations.

α.62.1 WUtche Zion matta nutchequnappu, kah wutche Jerusalem matta nutannósin8, nô pajeh wussampweusseonk ogquesohham8m8ut wôhsittag, kah 8wadchanuáonk onatuh lamp châgkossit.
E.62.1 For Zion's sake will I not hold my peace, and for Jerusalem's sake I will not rest, until the righteousness thereof go forth as brightness, and the salvation thereof as a lamp that burneth.

α.62.2 Kah Gentilsog pish naumwog kussampweusseonk, kah wame ketass8tamwog kuss[ó]hsum8onk: kah pish kuttéhenit wuske wesuonl, ne wutt8n Jehovah pish waésuonganehteunk.
E.62.2 And the Gentiles shall see thy righteousness, and all kings thy glory: and thou shalt be called by a new name, which the mouth of the LORD shall name.

α.62.3 Kah wonk pish sohsum8ongane kutchetuhquabéyeu ut wunnutcheganit Jehovah; kah tahs8tamoe chetuhquab ut wunnutcheganit kum-Manitt8m.
E.62.3 Thou shalt also be a crown of glory in the hand of the LORD, and a royal diadem in the hand of thy God.

α.62.4 Matta pish wonk kuttéhennitteóh, ohquánumit, kah kutohke matta pish wonk hettam8un tawushik: qut pish kuttéhennit Hephzibah, kah kutohke Beulah: newutche Jehovah kuttapeneúnk, kah kutohke pish weetauadteom8.
E.62.4 Thou shalt no more be termed Forsaken; neither shall thy land any more be termed Desolate: but thou shalt be called Hephzibah, and thy land Beulah: for the LORD delighteth in thee, and thy land shall be married.

α.62.5 Newutche neane wusken weetauomont peenompoh, kenaumonuk pish k8weetauómunk: k[a]h neane wessentamwaen weekontam8ônont weetauadteánutcheh, ne ne pish kum-Manitt8m k8weekontam8ónuk.
E.62.5 For as a young man marrieth a virgin, so shall thy sons marry thee: and as the bridegroom rejoiceth over the bride, so shall thy God rejoice over thee.

α.62.6 Nuppon askuhwhosuenuog ut kukqussukquaneutonganit, woi Jerusalem, neg matta pish chequnapékeg kesukodtae kah nukkonáe: ken[à]au masuhwhógish Jehovah chequn[á]péhteok.
E.62.6 I have set watchmen upon thy walls, O Jerusalem, which shall never hold their peace day nor night: ye that make mention of the LORD, keep not silence,

α.62.7 Kah anwôhsumûhteogk nô pajeh menehkhit, kah nô pajeh woweenomwáheónat Jerusalemoh ut ohkeit.
E.62.7 And give him no rest, till he establish, and till he make Jerusalem a praise in the earth.

α.62.8 Jehovah chadchekeyeuau nashpwe wuttinuhkou, kah nashpe menuhke wuhpit, wunnamuhkut, matta wonk nummagou k8weatchimineash kummatwom8óog 8meechuminneaóont, kah wunnaumonáuh penuohte[a]og matta pish wuttattam8og k8winum, ne anakausuontaman.
E.62.8 The LORD hath sworn by his right hand, and by the arm of his strength, Surely I will no more give thy corn to be meat for thine enemies; and the sons of the stranger shall not drink thy wine, for the which thou hast laboured:

α.62.9 Qut nag magunukeg pish ummeechineau kah pish wowussumaog Jehovah, kah neg mom[ó]unukeg, pish 8tattamuneau ut n8neetupanatamwe chippinneutunkanit.
E.62.9 But they that have gathered it shall eat it, and praise the LORD; and they that have brought it together shall drink it in the courts of my holiness.

α.62.10 Pannupwushak, pannupwushak squontamash, quashauwéhtam8k ummay8m missinninnuog: pogkétimómukquag, pogketimomuhquag may mukkinnumok qussukquanash, tahshinum8k muttoagk wutche missinninnúog.
E.62.10 Go through, go through the gates; prepare ye the way of the people; cast up, cast up the highway; gather out the stones; lift up a standard for the people.

α.62.11 Kusseh, Jehovah wahteauwáhuwau en wéhqshik muttaok, unnók wuttaunoh Zion, kusseh, k8wadchanitteaonk peyom8: kusseh, wutonkquatunk nashpeu, kah wutanakausuonk ohteau anaquabit.
E.62.11 Behold, the LORD hath proclaimed unto the end of the world, Say ye to the daughter of Zion, Behold, thy salvation cometh; behold, his reward is with him, and his work before him.

α.62.12 Kah pish wuttehenóuh, wunneetupanatamwe missinninnuog, man8whoncheh Jehovah: kah pish kuttehenit, nátinneáwhut, matta ahquontamoe keitotan.
E.62.12 And they shall call them, The holy people, The redeemed of the LORD: and thou shalt be called, Sought out, A city not forsaken.

α.63.1 HOwan yeuoh wag Edom, wag Bozrah, nashpe adtissohs8e hogk8unash? noh wanegik wuthogk8onk, noh paumushadt ut mishe ummenuhkesuonganit? nen an8wi ut sampwesuonganit, menuhkesue n8wadchánuam.
E.63.1 Who is this that cometh from Edom, with dyed garments from Bozrah?  this that is glorious in his apparel, travelling in the greatness of his strength? I that speak in righteousness, mighty to save.

α.63.2 Toh waj musquag kuthogk8onk, kah kuth[ó]gk8ongash onatuh noh tahtahtushkog wine wisq?
E.63.2 Wherefore art thou red in thine apparel, and thy garments like him that treadeth in the winefat?

α.63.3 Nunnusse tahtaskom wine-presse, kah matta howae missinninnuog n8weetomuk8: newutche nag nuttahtaskuskauóog ut nummusquanittam8onganit, kah nussissequohkauóog musquantamon, kah wusqueheonk pish séahôsu ut nuthogk8onganit, kah nunnishketeóh wame nuthogk8unash.
E.63.3 I have trodden the winepress alone; and of the people there was none with me: for I will tread them in mine anger, and trample them in my fury; and their blood shall be sprinkled upon my garments, and I will stain all my raiment.

α.63.4 Newutche ann8tóadtue kesukod nuttahhut ohteau, kah ukkodtum8m8 man8hogig peyom8.
E.63.4 For the day of vengeance is in mine heart, and the year of my redeemed is come.

α.63.5 Kah nunnatauwompip, kah na matta howan aninnohsu: kah nummonchanatamup na matta howan wuttit tahshinnuwáun: newaj nehenwonche nuhpit paudtunkquée wadchanittuonk, kah nummusquantamóonk nuttahshinukqun.
E.63.5 And I looked, and there was none to help; and I wondered that there was none to uphold: therefore mine own arm brought salvation unto me; and my fury, it upheld me.

α.63.6 Kah nuttahtashkuhkáu missinninnuog ut nummusquantam8onganit, kah nukkogkeissippamwuhheog ut nummusquantam8onganit, kah nuppaudto ummenuhkesuongan8 ohkeit.
E.63.6 And I will tread down the people in mine anger, and make them drunk in my fury, and I will bring down their strength to the earth.

α.63.7 Nummisham 8womoausuongash Jehovah, kah woweenomaonk Lord, neaunak wame ne Jehovah aninnumunkqueog: kah mohsag 8netuonk nogque en wekit Israel, ne a[n]inn[u]mauont, neaunak ummo[n]anitteuonk, kah neaun[á]k mataanukish 8w[ó]moauwuongash.
E.63.7 I will mention the lovingkindnesses of the LORD, and the praises of the LORD, according to all that the LORD hath bestowed on us, and the great goodness toward the house of Israel, which he hath bestowed on them according to his mercies, and according to the multitude of his lovingkindnesses.

α.63.8 Newutche n8wop, wunnamuhkut nag nummissinninnúmog, matta pann8w[à]e mukkiesog: neit nag 8wad[c]hanuaenum8uh.
E.63.8 For he said, Surely they are my people, children that will not lie: so he was their Saviour.

α.63.9 Ut wame 8tamehpunaongan8out noh wuttamehpunóp, kah wutanaquabee angelumoh nah 8wadchanuh: ut womoausuonganit, kah ut ukkitteamonteanitteaonganit nah umman8whuh, kah wuttahshinuh, kah ukké[n]unuh ut wame nôadte kesukodtut.
E.63.9 In all their affliction he was afflicted, and the angel of his presence saved them: in his love and in his pity he redeemed them; and he bare them, and carried them all the days of old.

α.63.10 Qut nag wutcheketauóuh, kah m8m8sqheáog 8neetupanatamwe nashauonk: n[é]waj quinnuppeit nag 8matwóminneaóut, kah nah wutayeuuhkonuh.
E.63.10 But they rebelled, and vexed his holy Spirit: therefore he was turned to be their enemy, and he fought against them.

α.63.11 Neit mehquontam nukóne kesukodtash Moses kah ummissinninnúmoh, n8wau, ut$toh wutappin noh pas8omp wutch ketahhannit, weeche uf$flocksumoe nanáshi[p]seaneumoh? uttoh wutapin noh ponamauont 8neetupanat[a]mwe nashauonganoh?
E.63.11 Then he remembered the days of old, Moses, and his people, saying, Where is he that brought them up out of the sea with the shepherd of his flock? where is he that put his holy Spirit within him?

α.63.12 Noh sagkompanomp ut wuttinohkôunit Moses, nashpe wussohsumoe wuhpit, pohshinuk nippe ut anaquabenit, ummicheme wesuonganúhkau[ó]nat wuhhogkuh?
E.63.12 That led them by the right hand of Moses with his glorious arm, dividing the water before them, to make himself an everlasting name?

α.63.13 Noh sagkompanomp papannuppe m8noiyeuut, onatuh horse ut touo[h]komukqut, onk woh nag matta togkussittassun8og?
E.63.13 That led them through the deep, as an horse in the wilderness, that they should not stumble?

α.63.14 Onatuh puppinashim 8mussit ut 8nôuhkoiyeuut, wunnashauanitt8moh Jehovah wutanw[ô]hsum8wáheuh: ne kuttinne sagkompanánuh kummissinninnumog kutáyimauwonat sohsumoe wesuonk.
E.63.14 As a beast goeth down into the valley, the Spirit of the LORD caused him to rest: so didst thou lead thy people, to make thyself a glorious name.

α.63.15 Womómpsh wutch kesukqut, kah naish wutch k8neetupanatamwe kah kussohsumoe ayeuonganit: uttiyeu kus-zealum kah kummenuhkesuonk, mishont8wae kenogkus, kah kummonánummuongash? sun kohkôunôsuash?
E.63.15 Look down from heaven, and behold from the habitation of thy holiness and of thy glory: where is thy zeal and thy strength, the sounding of thy bowels and of thy mercies toward me? are they restrained?

α.63.16 Wunnamuhkut ken n8shun, tohkônogque Abraham matta k8wahikk8unan, kah Israel matta k8wahik8un: ken woi Jehovah, n8shun numman8huwaeneumun, k8wesuonk wutch machemohtag.
E.63.16 Doubtless thou art our father, though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel acknowledge us not: thou, O LORD, art our father, our redeemer; thy name is from everlasting.

α.63.17 Woi Jehovah tohwutch panneseáheog wutch kummayut? kah menehketeaháheog wutch kukqushitteaonganit? qushkish wutche [h]itti[n]ninnumog, kutohtoongane chippan8ongash
E.63.17 O LORD, why hast thou made us to err from thy ways, and hardened our heart from thy fear? Return for thy servants' sake, the tribes of thine inheritance.

α.63.18 K8neetupanatamwe missinninnuog wutogguhse ohtauuneau: ayeúqueagig neg tahtashkuhkauóog ut k8neetupanatamwe ayeuonganit.
E.63.18 The people of thy holiness have possessed it but a little while: our adversaries have trodden down thy sanctuary.

α.63.19 Nenawun kuttaiheog, nag matta kenánaánawunóog, nag matta hennóog k8wesuonk.
E.63.19 We are thine: thou never barest rule over them; they were not called by thy name.

α.64.1 WOI napehnont nehnekikoman kesukquash onk woh ken8kem, onk woh wadchuash n8konóhanash ut anaquabean.
E.64.1 Oh that thou wouldest rend the heavens, that thou wouldest come down, that the mountains might flow down at thy presence,

α.64.2 Netatupe sabasumwae n8tau chagohtag, n8teau quô[qu]ônche[k]o[m]euteau nippe: wahteauwahuonat, k8wesuonk ayeuqueaneg, onk woh wutohtimoneash nunnukshaash ut anaquabean.
E.64.2 As when the melting fire burneth, the fire causeth the waters to boil, to make thy name known to thine adversaries, that the nations may tremble at thy presence!

α.64.3 Ase[à]n uhqueneunkquokish nish matta anantam8ágish, k8w8msip, wadchuash [n]8konóhanupash ut anaquabean.
E.64.3 When thou didst terrible things which we looked not for, thou camest down, the mountains flowed down at thy presence.

α.64.4 Newutche nadteoh kádshi[k] muttaok, wosketompaog matta n8tam8og, asuh matta mehtauoge nunnáuhtam8og, asuh matta muskesukque naumoog, woi God, webe ken, uttoh an quoshauwehtauont neh pahtsuónukqutcheh.
E.64.4 For since the beginning of the world men have not heard, nor perceived by the ear, neither hath the eye seen, O God, beside thee, what he hath prepared for him that waiteth for him.

α.64.5 Nog kenogskau weekontog, kah asit sampweusseonk, yeug mequanumukqueaneg ut kummayut: kusseh, ken kummusquantam, newutche nummatchesemun: yeush ut ohteau matchemohtag, kah pish k8wadchanitteamun.
E.64.5 Thou meetest him that rejoiceth and worketh righteousness, those that remember thee in thy ways: behold, thou art wroth; for we have sinned: in those is continuance, and we shall be saved.

α.64.6 Qut nenawun wame onátuh nishkeneunkquok, kah wame nussampweseonganonash tatuppeyeu8ash nishkeneungque monakenissit, kah nenawun wame nummass8pussimun onatuh wunnepogqut: kah nummatcheseonganonash, onatuh wabanit nutamaunukqun.
E.64.6 But we are all as an unclean thing, and all our righteousnesses are as filthy rags; and we all do fade as a leaf; and our iniquities, like the wind, have taken us away.

α.64.7 Kah matta howan wequttum8un k8wesuonk, noh wogkouunuk wuhhog kuttohqunukqunat: newutche kutunkhumaimun kuskesuk, kah kummahchukkussukqun newutche nuppanneseongash.
E.64.7 And there is none that calleth upon thy name, that stirreth up himself to take hold of thee: for thou hast hid thy face from us, and hast consumed us, because of our iniquities.

α.64.8 Qut [e]yeu, woi Jehovah, ken n8shun: nenawun man8nsk, ken nutohkuhquéhteaeneumun, kah nenawun wame kenutchegane anakausuonk.
E.64.8 But now, O LORD, thou art our father; we are the clay, and thou our potter; and we all are the work of thy hand.

α.64.9 Mishe musquanittogkon, woi Jehovah, mehquantogkon matcheseonk micheme, kuhkinneash, naish k8wehquetumauunumun, nenawun wame kummissinninneumog.
E.64.9 Be not wroth very sore, O LORD, neither remember iniquity for ever: behold, see, we beseech thee, we are all thy people.

α.64.10 K8neetupanatamwe keitotanash touohkomukqueyeu8ash: Zion touohkomukk88: Jerusalem touwushin.
E.64.10 Thy holy cities are a wilderness, Zion is a wilderness, Jerusalem a desolation.

α.64.11 N8neetupanatamwe kah n8neetue wetuómun, uttoh n8shunónog adt, wowussumukqueap, ne mahchekutteau wutche n8teau, kah wame n8ne teagwasinnumunónash mohtuppashinash.
E.64.11 Our holy and our beautiful house, where our fathers praised thee, is burned up with fire: and all our pleasant things are laid waste.

α.64.12 Sun woh kutchequnapeh kuhhog yeush wutche, woi Jehovah? sun woh kummanunap, kah kumm8cheke onkuppunasimun?
E.64.12 Wilt thou refrain thyself for these things, O LORD? wilt thou hold thy peace, and afflict us very sore?

α.65.1 NAg nunnatinneóhikquog, neg matta nat8mukqueaneg: nag nunnamhikquog matta natinneawh[e]gig: nussip, mónunneaiek monunneaiek, nuttinnomp wutohtimóin, ne matta ahettam8muk n8wesuonk.
E.65.1 I am sought of them that asked not for me; I am found of them that sought me not: I said, Behold me, behold me, unto a nation that was not called by my name.

α.65.2 Nussepagenum nunnutchegash, qunnikesuk, en cheketamwe missinninnúut, neg aóncheg may ne matta wanegeninn8g, neaunak nehenwonche wuttenantam8ongan8.
E.65.2 I have spread out my hands all the day unto a rebellious people, which walketh in a way that was not good, after their own thoughts;

α.65.3 Missinninnúog m8m8sqh[ú]kqutche nagwutte[à]eu, neg sephausitcheg ut tanohketeaonganéhtu, kah chogkositcheg weetemungquok ut brikse Altarsut.
E.65.3 A people that provoketh me to anger continually to my face; that sacrificeth in gardens, and burneth incense upon altars of brick;

α.65.4 Neg apitcheg weenohkekontu, kah kaecheg wadchuuhkontu, neg mechikeg swinese weyaus, kah sabahheg ne ayimuk wutch nishkeneunkquokish, ohteau 8wishquóut:
E.65.4 Which remain among the graves, and lodge in the monuments, which eat swine's flesh, and broth of abominable things is in their vessels;

α.65.5 Neg án8wacheg, nussikkompau, pas8suksuhkon, newutche n8neetupanatamweyeu anue onk ken: yeug ogqueyeu8og pukut ut nutchânut, n8teau ne náhteagun[a]g.
E.65.5 Which say, Stand by thyself, come not near to me; for I am holier than thou. These are a smoke in my nose, a fire that burneth all the day.

α.65.6 Kusseh wussukwhosu anaquabean: matta nutchequnappu, qut nutonkquodtauoog, nutonkquodtauoog ut upp8chenauóun8out.
E.65.6 Behold, it is written before me: I will not keep silence, but will recompense, even recompense into their bosom,

α.65.7 Kummatcheseonganooash, kah ummatcheseonganooash k8sh8oog moaeu (wussin Jeh[h]vah) neg châgossitcheg weetemungquok ut wadchuuhkontu, kah nup-blasphemónukquog wadchuésukontu: newaj pish quttuhhum nôadte wutanakausuongan8 ut upp8chenauón8óut.
E.65.7 Your iniquities, and the iniquities of your fathers together, saith the LORD, which have burned incense upon the mountains, and blasphemed me upon the hills: therefore will I measure their former work into their bosom.

α.65.8 Yeu wussin Jehovah, neane wuske wine naméhteómuk ut nequttachéiyeuut, kah howan n8wau, nehtóhkon newutche wunanitteaonk ohteau: ne nutussen newutche nuttinneum, onk woh mat nuppagwanoog wame.
E.65.8 Thus saith the LORD, As the new wine is found in the cluster, and one saith, Destroy it not; for a blessing is in it: so will I do for my servants' sakes, that I may not destroy them all.

α.65.9 Kah pish nussohh8wutto wuskannem wutch Jakob, kah wutche Judah noh ohtunk n8wadchumash kah pepenauogig pish wutahtauuneau kah nuttinneumog na pish 8tohkinneau.
E.65.9 And I will bring forth a seed out of Jacob, and out of Judah an inheritor of my mountains: and mine elect shall inherit it, and my servants shall dwell there.

α.65.10 Kah Sharon pish flokse chippinneutunkanu8 kah Achoré 8nouhkoi, ne herdse sepsinóe ayeuunk, wutche nummissinninneumog neg natinneóhikqueaneg.
E.65.10 And Sharon shall be a fold of flocks, and the valley of Achor a place for the herds to lie down in, for my people that have sought me.

α.65.11 Qut kenaau ahquanumoncheg Jehovah, neg wananatogeg n8neetupanatamwe wadchum, neg quoshauwéhtogig table wutche chipwushaog, kah quoshwéhtogig wuttattamoe mag8onk, ut neg adtasúkeg.
E.65.11 But ye are they that forsake the LORD, that forget my holy mountain, that prepare a table for that troop, and that furnish the drink offering unto that number.

α.65.12 Newaj pish ogkémunóg wutch togkodteg, kah pish wame kenauwaemw8 en pagwanittinneat: newutche wehqutteamweon matta kenamp8ham8mw8, ket8kôon, matta ken8tam8m8, qut kummatcheussemw8 ut anaquohtag nuskesukquash, kah kuppepenamumw8 ne matta tapeneám8:
E.65.12 Therefore will I number you to the sword, and ye shall all bow down to the slaughter: because when I called, ye did not answer; when I spake, ye did not hear; but did evil before mine eyes, and did choose that wherein I delighted not.

α.65.13 Newaj yeu n8wadt Lord Jehovah, kusseh nuttinneumog pish meetsuog, qut pish kenaau kukkodtuppumw8, kusseh nuttinneumog pish wuttattamwog, qut pish kenaau kukkuhkutt8numw8, kusseh nuttinneumog pish muskouantamwog, qut pish kutakodchimw8.
E.65.13 Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD, Behold, my servants shall eat, but ye shall be hungry: behold, my servants shall drink, but ye shall be thirsty: behold, my servants shall rejoice, but ye shall be ashamed:

α.65.14 Kusseh nuttinninneumog pish weekontamwutte[a]hae ket8hamoog, qut kenaau pish ken[e]uántamwutteahaeu kummaumw8, kah pish pohquetteahaeu kutt8numw8.
E.65.14 Behold, my servants shall sing for joy of heart, but ye shall cry for sorrow of heart, and shall howl for vexation of spirit.

α.65.15 Kah pish kenukkodtumumw8 k8wesuonkan8 wutch matánumáonk pepenauog: newutche Lord Jehovah pish kenushh[ú]k, kah pish penoweseonganeheau wuttinninneumoh.
E.65.15 And ye shall leave your name for a curse unto my chosen: for the Lord GOD shall slay thee, and call his servants by another name:

α.65.16 Noh wunánumont wuhhogkuh ut ohkeit, noh pish wun[à]numau wuhhogkuh ut wunnamuhkut[e]é Manitt8ut: kah noh chadchekeyeuadt ut ohkit, pish nashpe chadchekeyeuau wunnamuhkuttee Manitto, newutche negonáeu wuttamehpunaongash wunanittamunash, kah newutche nish adtahtásuash wutch nuskesukqut
E.65.16 That he who blesseth himself in the earth shall bless himself in the God of truth; and he that sweareth in the earth shall swear by the God of truth; because the former troubles are forgotten, and because they are hid from mine eyes.

α.65.17 Newutche kusseh nukkesteoh wuske kesukquash & wuske ohke: kah negoneyeuit matta pish mequontam8un, asuh 8waantam8un.
E.65.17 For, behold, I create new heavens and a new earth: and the former shall not be remembered, nor come into mind.

α.65.18 Qut kenaau wekontam8k kah micheme muskouanatam8k ut ne kestéau: newutche kusseh nukkesteau Jerusalem, wekontamoonk, kah ummissinninumoh wutch wekontam8onk.
E.65.18 But be ye glad and rejoice for ever in that which I create: for, behold, I create Jerusalem a rejoicing, and her people a joy.

α.65.19 Kah pish nummuskouantam ut Jerusalem, kah pish n8wekontam ut nummissinninnúut, kah wussippég8e wuttauatonkqussuonk matta pish wonk n8tam8un naut, asuh wadtaúatonkqussue mauonk.
E.65.19 And I will rejoice in Jerusalem, and joy in my people: and the voice of weeping shall be no more heard in her, nor the voice of crying.

α.65.20 Na pish matta wonk wutch wusketuun8, asuh kehchis, noh matta nómwohto8g ukkesukodtumash: newutche mukkies pish nup nequt pasuk8ekodtumwohkog; qut matcheseaen nequt pasuk8 kodtumwohkog pish mattanum[a]u.
E.65.20 There shall be no more thence an infant of days, nor an old man that hath not filled his days: for the child shall die an hundred years old; but the sinner being an hundred years old shall be accursed.

α.65.21 Kah nag pish ayimwog wetuomash, kah wutáyinaoash[:] pish weenominneohketeaog kah pish ummechineau meechummuonk.
E.65.21 And they shall build houses, and inhabit them; and they shall plant vineyards, and eat the fruit of them.

α.65.22 Nag matta pish wekittea8og kah onkatog 8wekin: nag matta pish ohkehteauouog kah onkatog ummeechin: newutche neane nékuk mehtug ne wuttinnékinneau nummissinninneumog, kah pepenauogeg pish sepohtóog wunnetchegane anakausuonk.
E.65.22 They shall not build, and another inhabit; they shall not plant, and another eat: for as the days of a tree are the days of my people, and mine elect shall long enjoy the work of their hands.

α.65.23 Nag matta pish tahn8tanakauseog, asuh nechauóog wutch wuttamehpunáonk: newutche neh 8skannemun8ch wunnánumoncheh Jehovah, kah wutontseongan8 nag weeche.
E.65.23 They shall not labour in vain, nor bring forth for trouble; for they are the seed of the blessed of the LORD, and their offspring with them.

α.65.24 Kah pish n$nih, ash waeequttumhettékup, nunnamp8hamauóog, kah ashp[à]me keket8kahettit, pish nunn8tauóog.
E.65.24 And it shall come to pass, that before they call, I will answer; and while they are yet speaking, I will hear.

α.65.25 Mukquoshim kah lambe pish weetatupp8t[u]og, kah qunnonou pish ogque meech sekuppoghegash oxinut: kah puppissi pish meechuog ask8og. Nag matta pish woskehuwowog, asuh pagwohteauóog ut wame n8neetupanatamwe wadchúmut, wussin Jehovah.
E.65.25 The wolf and the lamb shall feed together, and the lion shall eat straw like the bullock: and dust shall be the serpent's meat. They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain, saith the LORD.

α.66.1 YEu wussin Jehovah, kesuk nutappuonk, kah ohke nukquenannéhtuonk: uttiyeu weetu ne áyimaiye[o]g? kah uttiyeu nutann8sin8e ayeuonk?
E.66.1 Thus saith the LORD, The heaven is my throne, and the earth is my footstool: where is the house that ye build unto me? and where is the place of my rest?

α.66.2 Newutche wame yeush ukkesteauunash nunnutcheg, kah wame yeush nniyeupash, wussin Jehovah: qut nogque in yeuoh wosketomp nummónunneau, noh matchekit, kah pohqueteáhont, kah nanukshontog nuttinn8waonk.
E.66.2 For all those things hath mine hand made, and all those things have been, saith the LORD: but to this man will I look, even to him that is poor and of a contrite spirit, and trembleth at my word.

α.66.3 Noh nashont oxinoh, onatuh nashont wosketompuh, noh sephausit lamboh, ontauh támehtahhog anum wussittipuk; noh maguk mag8onk, onatuh maguk pigse wusqueheunk: noh chogkussik weetemungquok, onatuh noh wunánumont nunneukontunkan: nux nag pepenamwog nehenwonche ummay[y]euóash, kah ukketeahogk8un8oh wekontamwoh wunnishkeneunkquodt8m8ash.
E.66.3 He that killeth an ox is as if he slew a man; he that sacrificeth a lamb, as if he cut off a dog's neck; he that offereth an oblation, as if he offered swine's blood; he that burneth incense, as if he blessed an idol. Yea, they have chosen their own ways, and their soul delighteth in their abominations.

α.66.4 Nen wonk nuppepenam pohch8wunukquéhetticheh, kah nunnuhkuhkauwaheóog 8wabesuongash, newutche weehqutteamweon matta howan namp8hamunk8, kôdt8hk[ò]on nag matta n8tam8og, qut nag matcheseog ut anaquabeh, kah pepenamwog ne matta wekontam8h.
E.66.4 I also will choose their delusions, and will bring their fears upon them; because when I called, none did answer; when I spake, they did not hear: but they did evil before mine eyes, and chose that in which I delighted not.

α.66.5 N8tam8k wuttinn8waonk Jehovah, kenaau nanukushántamógish wuttinn8waonk: keematt8oog neg pagkénukqueógig wutche n8wesuonk, n8waog, Jehovah sohsumwáhunaj, qut noh pish nogqussu, wutche k8wekontam8wongan8, kah nag pish akodchuog.
E.66.5 Hear the word of the LORD, ye that tremble at his word; Your brethren that hated you, that cast you out for my name's sake, said, Let the LORD be glorified: but he shall appear to your joy, and they shall be ashamed.

α.66.6 Mishont8wae wadtauatonkqussuonk wutch keitotanat, wadtauatonkqussuonk wutch templeut, 8wâdtauatonkqussuonk Jehovah, noh onkquodtauont ummatwomoh.
E.66.6 A voice of noise from the city, a voice from the temple, a voice of the LORD that rendereth recompence to his enemies.

α.66.7 Ahquam kodtauweekheunk, neechau, ash aonkquommam8kup, neechau mukkutchuksoh.
E.66.7 Before she travailed, she brought forth; before her pain came, she was delivered of a man child.

α.66.8 Howan n8tog neahunig? howan nag* neaûnagish? sun woh ohke neechahtauun pasuk kesukod, asuh woh wutohtimoin pasukqut neekin: newutche queenau Zion kodtauweekheont neechau wunneechanoh.
E.66.8 Who hath heard such a thing? who hath seen such things? Shall the earth be made to bring forth in one day? or shall a nation be born at once?  for as soon as Zion travailed, she brought forth her children.

α.66.9 Sun woh n8wompikquáhuwam, kah sun woh matta nunneechahuóh, wussin Jehovah? woh nunneechahuwan, kah sun woh nukkuppoh wussin kum-Manitt8m?
E.66.9 Shall I bring to the birth, and not cause to bring forth? saith the LORD: shall I cause to bring forth, and shut the womb? saith thy God.

α.66.10 Weekontam8k weeche Jerusalem, kah weeche muskouanatam8[é]nuk, kenaau wame womonógish, muskouanatamwe weekontamok noh weeche, kenaau wame mauunuitteauwánshógish.
E.66.10 Rejoice ye with Jerusalem, and be glad with her, all ye that love her: rejoice for joy with her, all ye that mourn for her:

α.66.11 Onk woh ken8numw8, kah woh kuttaphetteamw8 nashpe wekontamwe wussogkodtunk, onk woh kussesenamuneau, onk woh k8wekontam8wontamumw8 madta$áneuk wussohsumóonk.
E.66.11 That ye may suck, and be satisfied with the breasts of her consolations; that ye may milk out, and be delighted with the abundance of her glory.

α.66.12 Newutche yeu wussin Jehovah, kusseh, nukqunteau wunohteaonk onatuh sepuut, kah wussohsum8ongan8 Gentilsog, onatuh kussitchuáne sep: neit pish ken8numw8, pish kukkinuk8, kah pish kuppumukahh8[n]uk8 ut ukkuttukqut.
E.66.12 For thus saith the LORD, Behold, I will extend peace to her like a river, and the glory of the Gentiles like a flowing stream: then shall ye suck, ye shall be borne upon her sides, and be dandled upon her knees.

α.66.13 Onatuh nah ohkasoh taphikquit ne pish kuttinne taphenineau: kah pish kuttaphetteamw8 ut Jerusalemut.
E.66.13 As one whom his mother comforteth, so will I comfort you; and ye shall be comforted in Jerusalem.

α.66.14 Kah yeu naumog, kuttahhou pish weekontamòm8, kah kuskonn8 pish ogque neekin mosketuut, kah wunnutcheg Jehovah pish wahteauun in nogque wuttinneumit, kah ummusquantamoonk nogque in ummatwomut.
E.66.14 And when ye see this, your heart shall rejoice, and your bones shall flourish like an herb: and the hand of the LORD shall be known toward his servants, and his indignation toward his enemies.

α.66.15 Newutche kusseh, Jehovah pish nashpe peyau n8teau, kah nashpe wutchariotsumash onatuh pemsquoh: chekee onkquttauunat ummusquantam8onk, kah wutáuskomuongash nashpe n8n8unáe n8taash.
E.66.15 For, behold, the LORD will come with fire, and with his chariots like a whirlwind, to render his anger with fury, and his rebuke with flames of fire.

α.66.16 Newutche nashpe n8teau kah nashpe wuttogkodteg, Jehovah pish keket8kontam wame weyaus, kah nashoncheh Jehovah pish monaoh.
E.66.16 For by fire and by his sword will the LORD plead with all flesh: and the slain of the LORD shall be many.

α.66.17 Nag waneetupanatamwaheoncheg wuhhogkauh, kah pahkheoncheg wuhhogkauh, ut tanohketeaonganehtu, ut onkauwonkq, ut nashauwe, meechhettit pigse weyaus, kah nishkeneunkquok, kah mishabohques, pish moaeu mohtupaeog wussin Jéhovah.
E.66.17 They that sanctify themselves, and purify themselves in the gardens behind one tree in the midst, eating swine's flesh, and the abomination, and the mouse, shall be consumed together, saith the LORD.

α.66.18 Newutche n8wahteoh wutanakausuonganooash, kah wuttenantam8onganooash: pish peyaum8, pish nummukkinnumunat wame wutohtimoneash, kah unnont8waongash, kah nag pish peyaog, kah pish naumwog nussohsumoonk.
E.66.18 For I know their works and their thoughts: it shall come, that I will gather all nations and tongues; and they shall come, and see my glory.

α.66.19 Kah nupponum kuhkinneasuonk ut kenugke nagoh, kah nutann8noog en wutohtimoinneat, neg pohquohhokig, en Tarshish, Pul, kah Lud, neg p8tonkinoncheg ahtompeh, en Tubal, kah Javan, en noadtit munnohannehtu, neg matta n8tamógig n8woweenomitteaonk, kah matta naum8og nussohsumoonk, kah nag pish wahteauwahuwaog nussohsumoonk ut kenugke Gentilsut.
E.66.19 And I will set a sign among them, and I will send those that escape of them unto the nations, to Tarshish, Pul, and Lud, that draw the bow, to Tubal, and Javan, to the isles afar off, that have not heard my fame, neither have seen my glory; and they shall declare my glory among the Gentiles.

α.66.20 Kah nag pish paudtauaog wame kemat8oh, wutch mag8onk en Jehovahut, wutch wame wutohtimoinneat, ut horsesut chariotsut, kah littersut, kah ut mulsut, kah ut kogkinupshae puppinashimwut, ut n8neetupanatamwe wadchúmut, ut Jerusalem, wussin Jehovah, onatuh wuneechanoh Israel paudtaúunit mag8onk, ut pohkishqúadt, ut wekit Jehovah.
E.66.20 And they shall bring all your brethren for an offering unto the LORD out of all nations upon horses, and in chariots, and in litters, and upon mules, and upon swift beasts, to my holy mountain Jerusalem, saith the LORD, as the children of Israel bring an offering in a clean vessel into the house of the LORD.

α.66.21 Kah wonk nag nawhutch nunneemunoog wutche sephausuenuog kah Levitsog wussin Jehovah..
E.66.21 And I will also take of them for priests and for Levites, saith the LORD.

α.66.22 Newutche neane wuske kesukquash kah wuske ohke, nish pish ayimonish, 
E.66.22 For as the new heavens and the new earth, which I will make, shall remain before me, saith the LORD, so shall your seed and your name remain.

α.66.23 Kah pish nnih, wutch pasuk wuske nepauzsaut en onkatoganit, & wutch pasuk saboth en onkatoganit, wame weyaus pish peyaog wowussitteamuneat ut anaquabeh wussin Jehovah.
E.66.23 And it shall come to pass, that from one new moon to another, and from one sabbath to another, shall all flesh come to worship before me, saith the LORD.

α.66.24 Kah nag pish sohhamwog, kah pish moninneauwáog nupp8e wuhhogkau[h], wosketompaog neg ayeuuhkonittue panneussehtaitcheg, newutche wutask8kin8uh matta pish nupp8oh, kah wunn8tomw8 matta pish onthamm8un, kah nag pish unkquanumukqussuog ut wame weyausut.
E.66.24 And they shall go forth, and look upon the carcases of the men that have transgressed against me: for their worm shall not die, neither shall their fire be quenched; and they shall be an abhorring unto all flesh.