
α.1.1 UKkutt8wongash Jeremiah wunnaumonuh Hilkiah, sephausuen ut Anathoth, ut wutohkit Benjamin.
E.1.1 The words of Jeremiah the son of Hilkiah, of the priests that were in Anathoth in the land of Benjamin:

α.1.2 Ukkutt8wonk Jehovah peyaónuk ut ukkesukodtumut Josiah wunnaumonuh Ammon Judae ketass8t nabo nishwe kodtumwae nanawunnuadt.
E.1.2 To whom the word of the LORD came in the days of Josiah the son of Amon king of Judah, in the thirteenth year of his reign.

α.1.3 Peyuam8 wonk ut ukkesukodtumut Jehoiakim wunnaumonuh Josiah Judae ketass8t: nô pajeh wehqshik nabo nequtte kodtum8m Zedechiah wunnaumonuh Josiah Judae ketass8t, nô pajeh missinóhkonae monchanónat Jerusalem, ut napanna tahshe nepâuzsaut.
E.1.3 It came also in the days of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah, unto the end of the eleventh year of Zedekiah the son of Josiah king of Judah, unto the carrying away of Jerusalem captive in the fifth month.

α.1.4 Neit wuttinn8waonk Jehovah nuppeyaónukqun, n8wau,
E.1.4 Then the word of the LORD came unto me, saying,

α.1.5 Asq kahkenawahenoun ut menogkusseet, k8wahenup, kah asquam sohham8an wutch ôontomukqut, k8neetupanatamwáhenup, kah kukkehtimunup kukquoshodtumwaenúuneat en wutohtimoinnahtu.
E.1.5 Before I formed thee in the belly I knew thee; and before thou camest forth out of the womb I sanctified thee, and I ordained thee a prophet unto the nations.

α.1.6 Neit nussip, Woi Lord Jehovah nuttónteóh ket8hkon, newutche nen Peisses.
E.1.6 Then said I, Ah, Lord GOD! behold, I cannot speak: for I am a child.

α.1.7 Qut Jehovah nuttugqun, n8wóhkon, nen peisses, newutche piṣh kuttom wame uttoh ánan8mun, kah uttoh áne ann8nun, piṣh kussin.
E.1.7 But the LORD said unto me, Say not, I am a child: for thou shalt go to all that I shall send thee, and whatsoever I command thee thou shalt speak.

α.1.8 Wabesuontamúhkon wuskesuk8óash: newutche k8weetomsh, k[u]ppohquohwhununat, wussin Jehovah.
E.1.8 Be not afraid of their faces: for I am with thee to deliver thee, saith the LORD.

α.1.9 Neit Jehovah summagunum wunnutcheg, kah mussinnum nutt8n, kah Jehovah nuttugqun, kusseh nupponam nukkutt8wongash ut kutt8nut.
E.1.9 Then the LORD put forth his hand, and touched my mouth. And the LORD said unto me, Behold, I have put my words in thy mouth.

α.1.10 Naish, yeu kesukok kenanawunnumwahesh wutohtimóneash, kah ketass8tam8ongash, kodohchâbuhkohhamunat, kah soqunnumunat, kah pagwatauunat, kah kepuhkonat, weekuhkonat, kah ohteuhkonat.
E.1.10 See, I have this day set thee over the nations and over the kingdoms, to root out, and to pull down, and to destroy, and to throw down, to build, and to plant.

α.1.11 Nano, wuttinn8waonk Jehovah nuppeyaónuk, n8wau, Jeremiah te[a]gwas kenaum? kah nussip, nunnaum Almonuntugque souobpunk.
E.1.11 Moreover the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, Jeremiah, what seest thou? And I said, I see a rod of an almond tree.

α.1.12 Neit Jehovah nuttugkup, k8nenaum; newutche nukkenuppéhteo nukk8tonk ussenat.
E.1.12 Then said the LORD unto me, Thou hast well seen: for I will hasten my word to perform it.

α.1.13 Kah wuttinn8waonk Jehovah nahohtôeu nuppeyaonuk n8wau, teagwas kenaum? kah nussip, nunnau wussue ohkuk, kah wuskesuk nogwohteau nanummiyeu.
E.1.13 And the word of the LORD came unto me the second time, saying, What seest thou? And I said, I see a seething pot; and the face thereof is toward the north.

α.1.14 Neit Jehovah nuttinuk, wutch nummiyeu mahcuk piṣh pohqusheau ut wame wadohkitcheg ohkeit.
E.1.14 Then the LORD said unto me, Out of the north an evil shall break forth upon all the inhabitants of the land.

α.1.15 Newutche kusseh, n8wehquetum wame nanumie tahs8tam8e teateashiyeuongash, wussin Lord, kah nag piṣh peyaog, kah nag piṣh nishnoh pasuk ponam wutappuonk ahhut petutteamuk ut Jerusaleme squontamut, kah ayeuuhkonitue wame pummenutonganit, nahut weenu, kah ayeuuhkonittue wame Judae keitotanash.
E.1.15 For, lo, I will call all the families of the kingdoms of the north, saith the LORD; and they shall come, and they shall set every one his throne at the entering of the gates of Jerusalem, and against all the walls thereof round about, and against all the cities of Judah.

α.1.16 Kah nukket8hkontam n8sittum8ongash, ayeuuhkonittue nagoh, pa[p]aume wame ummatchseonganooash neg ohquanumukqueaneg, kah chikohsumauwáog weetemungquok o[n]kotagig manitt8og, kah wowussittumwog nehenwonche wunnutchegane anakausuonganooash.
E.1.16 And I will utter my judgments against them touching all their wickedness, who have forsaken me, and have burned incense unto other gods, and worshipped the works of their own hands.

α.1.17 Newutche puttukquobpinoush kusseg, kah neepaush, kah nag us wame ne anan8nun: chepshúhko[n] ut wuskesuk8wóut, ishkont kuss8quttahwhush ut anaquabhettit.
E.1.17 Thou therefore gird up thy loins, and arise, and speak unto them all that I command thee: be not dismayed at their faces, lest I confound thee before them.

α.1.18 Newutche kusseh, yeu kesukok kutogqhesh pummeneutausue keitotanat, & brasse pummeneutongash ayeuuhkonittue mamusse ohke, ayeuuhkonittue Judae ketass8tamwog, ayeuuhkonittue wussontimóm8uh[,] ayeuuhkonittue wussephausueneum8uh, kah ayeuuhkonittúe ohkee missinninnúog.
E.1.18 For, behold, I have made thee this day a defenced city, and an iron pillar, and brasen walls against the whole land, against the kings of Judah, against the princes thereof, against the priests thereof, and against the people of the land.

α.1.19 Kah nag piṣh kutayeuhkonukquog, qut matta piṣh kussohkunkk8og: newutche k8wettomsh wussin Jehovah, kuppohquohwununat.
E.1.19 And they shall fight against thee; but they shall not prevail against thee; for I am with thee, saith the LORD, to deliver thee.

α.2.1 NAno wuttinn8waonk Jehovah nuppeyaonuk n8wau,
E.2.1 Moreover the word of the LORD came to me, saying,

α.2.2 Monchish, kah mishont8ash ut wehtauogkut Jerusalem, n8wash, yeu wussin Jehovah, kummehquanumouṣh, k8skenúe womoausuonk, k8weetauânumwae womoausuonk, asuhkiean ut touohkomukqut, ut mat ohteuhkausue ohkeit.
E.2.2 Go and cry in the ears of Jerusalem, saying, Thus saith the LORD; I remember thee, the kindness of thy youth, the love of thine espousals, when thou wentest after me in the wilderness, in a land that was not sown.

α.2.3 Israel wunneetupanatamweyeuop ut Lordut, kah ukk[a]keneumunne pénaeetuonk: wame neh mahchipwónukqutcheh piṣh matchenehéoog, machuk piṣh nukkuhkongquog wussin Jehovah.
E.2.3 Israel was holiness unto the LORD, and the firstfruits of his increase: all that devour him shall offend; evil shall come upon them, saith the LORD.

α.2.4 N8tam8k wuttinn8waonk Jehovah, woi wek Jakob, kah wame teateashiyeuonga[s]h ut wekit Israel.
E.2.4 Hear ye the word of the LORD, O house of Jacob, and all the families of the house of Israel:

α.2.5 Yeu wussin Jehovah, teagwe matcheseonk k8sh8wóog nunnámteunk, waj nô8sukoihettit, kah asuhkomwog tahn8cheyeuuk, kah tahn8cheyeu8og?
E.2.5 Thus saith the LORD, What iniquity have your fathers found in me, that they are gone far from me, and have walked after vanity, and are become vain?

α.2.6 Kah matta n8wo8og, uttiyeu woh Jehovah noh kohkuhk8unukqueog wutch Egypte ohkeit? noh pannuppe sagkompagunogkup touohkomuk, papashpe touushinne kah pasohthegane ohkit, papashpe kunkohteadteáeu kah nupp8ongane onkauohtáe ohkeit, papashpe ohke, ne matta howan woh panupwushog, kah uttoh matta howan wadohkeg.
E.2.6 Neither said they, Where is the LORD that brought us up out of the land of Egypt, that led us through the wilderness, through a land of deserts and of pits, through a land of drought, and of the shadow of death, through a land that no man passed through, and where no man dwelt?

α.2.7 Kah kuppas8unumw8 ut misségene ohkeit, meechinat ne meechummúonk, kah ne noh adt wunnegit: qut petutteáog, kenishketeomwop nutohke, kah kutunkquontam8wáhtomw8 nutohtóonk.
E.2.7 And I brought you into a plentiful country, to eat the fruit thereof and the goodness thereof; but when ye entered, ye defiled my land, and made mine heritage an abomination.

α.2.8 Sephausuenuog matta n8wo8og, uttiyeuoh Jehovah? kah neg weoggehheoncheg naumatuonk, nag matta n8wahik8og: Pastorsog wonk nuppann[e]setunkquog, kah quoshodtumwaenuog, quoshodtumwog nashpe Baaloh; kah asuhkomwog niṣh matta wadchiéhettégish.
E.2.8 The priests said not, Where is the LORD? and they that handle the law knew me not: the pastors also transgressed against me, and the prophets prophesied by Baal, and walked after things that do not profit.

α.2.9 Newaj, ashpumme keket8kauunog, wussin Jehovah, kah keneechan8óog wunneechan8oh nukkeket8kauóog.
E.2.9 Wherefore I will yet plead with you, saith the LORD, and with your children's children will I plead.

α.2.10 Newutche paumhkash Chittimme munnuhhanaṣh, kah naish, kah ann8teamsh en Kedar, kah menuhke natwontaṣh, kah naiṣh ne nnák.
E.2.10 For pass over the isles of Chittim, and see; and send unto Kedar, and consider diligently, and see if there be such a thing.

α.2.11 Sun wutohtimóin ôsowunáog ummanitt8m8oh, qut onch neg matta manitt88og? qut nummissinninnúmog ôs8wunnumwog wussohsum8ongan8, ne matta nompe wutcheihetteg.
E.2.11 Hath a nation changed their gods, which are yet no gods? but my people have changed their glory for that which doth not profit.

α.2.12 Yeu chepshontam8k, woi kesukquog, kah mishu wabesek, kah mishe touussinok, wussin Jehovah.
E.2.12 Be astonished, O ye heavens, at this, and be horribly afraid, be ye very desolate, saith the LORD.

α.2.13 Newutche nummissinninnumog usseog neesinaṣh machukiṣh: nag nutohquanumukquog nen pâmachúane tohkekomue, kah nag wunnehthamóog wônogquash, poksháe woonogquaṣh ne matta woh ohtan8g nippe.
E.2.13 For my people have committed two evils; they have forsaken me the fountain of living waters, and hewed them out cisterns, broken cisterns, that can hold no water.

α.2.14 Sun Israel wuttinneumun? sun noh missináe neetu? tohwutch mukk8kinit?
E.2.14 Is Israel a servant? is he a homeborn slave? why is he spoiled?

α.2.15 Wuske qunnon8og mishont8wae mehnehte[a]og, kah mahchumwéhtôog ohke: ukkeitotanaṣh chikohtaaṣh, matta wutohkeina[t].
E.2.15 The young lions roared upon him, and yelled, and they made his land waste: his cities are burned without inhabitant.

α.2.16 Wunnaumonuh wonk Noph kah Tahapanes, nag pohquenumwog kuppuhkuk8e chetuhquab.
E.2.16 Also the children of Noph and Tahapanes have broken the crown of thy head.

α.2.17 Sunnummatta yeu kuppaudtauònas kuhhog, waj ohquánumadt kum-Manitt8m Jehovah, sagkompágunukquean en mayut?
E.2.17 Hast thou not procured this unto thyself, in that thou hast forsaken the LORD thy God, when he led thee by the way?

α.2.18 Kah yeuyeu toh|kutussen ut Egipte mayut, wuttattamunat wunnippeaṣh Sihor? asuh toh kutussen ut Assyriae mayut, wuttattamunat sepupogquaṣh?
E.2.18 And now what hast thou to do in the way of Egypt, to drink the waters of Sihor? or what hast thou to do in the way of Assyria, to drink the waters of the river?

α.2.19 Nehenwonche kummatcheseonk piṣh kussasamatuhhuk, kah kutt8nequssinn8wongaṣh piṣh kutáushk[ó]mukqunaṣh: newutche wahteaush, kah naish, ne matchit kah weesogkon kenukkenònat Jehovah kum-Manitt8m, kah n8wabesuonitteáonk matta ohtáno kuhhogkat, wussin Lord Jehovah ayeuteaunit.
E.2.19 Thine own wickedness shall correct thee, and thy backslidings shall reprove thee: know therefore and see that it is an evil thing and bitter, that thou hast forsaken the LORD thy God, and that my fear is not in thee, saith the Lord GOD of hosts.

α.2.20 Newutche nôadt nuppohquetahwhomp keyoakum, kah nuppaskukkomup keneepissuongaṣh, kah kussip, matta nuppannesu: nanwiyean kah nanwun8dsquaosean nishnoh kussohkôi, kah nishnoh ut ashkuhquamut.
E.2.20 For of old time I have broken thy yoke, and burst thy bands; and thou saidst, I will not transgress; when upon every high hill and under every green tree thou wanderest, playing the harlot.

α.2.21 Qut onch kutohtekônunup wunnégenne weenomwussippog, papannuppe wunnamuhkut[é]e wuskannem: uttoh kuttin neit quinnuppein nano matchékinne penoe weenomwussippog en nuhhogkat.
E.2.21 Yet I had planted thee a noble vine, wholly a right seed: how then art thou turned into the degenerate plant of a strange vine unto me?

α.2.22 Newutche uttohkônogque kukkitsumwin nashpe nitre, kah kumm8chekiyimunat sope, onch kummatcheseonk kuhkinneasin ut anaquabeh wussin Lord Jehovah.
E.2.22 For though thou wash thee with nitre, and take thee much soap, yet thine iniquity is marked before me, saith the Lord GOD.

α.2.23 Uttoh woh kuttin unn8won, matta nunnishkhetteoh, matta nutasuhkauoh Baalim? naish kummay ut 8noikoiyeuut, wahteaush uttoh aséan: ken kenupshae dromedary papaumwushadt ummayash.
E.2.23 How canst thou say, I am not polluted, I have not gone after Baalim?  see thy way in the valley, know what thou hast done: thou art a swift dromedary traversing her ways;

α.2.24 Touohkomukque asse, nukkodchu touohkomuk, assanómau wabanoh tapeneogish, tapeneog howan ukqushkinuh? wame neg natinneahwhoncheg, matta sauwunâou wuhhogkuh, ut wunnepâuzsómut piṣh wunnamheouh.
E.2.24 A wild ass used to the wilderness, that snuffeth up the wind at her pleasure; in her occasion who can turn her away? all they that seek her will not weary themselves; in her month they shall find her.

α.2.25 Nanawehteoush kusseet matta mokkussinnohhôsin8ut, kah kukquttunk wutch kuhkutt8nat: qut kussip, na matta annoósuonganinno, matchaog, newutche n8womon penuowhteaog, kah nag m8hche nutasuhkauóog.
E.2.25 Withhold thy foot from being unshod, and thy throat from thirst: but thou saidst, There is no hope: no; for I have loved strangers, and after them will I go.

α.2.26 Neane komm8towaen akodchik namehit: nene Israel wek akodchum8, nag ukketass8tam8m8uh, wussontimom8uh, kah wussephausueneum8uh, kah ukquoshodtumwaenúm8uh.
E.2.26 As the thief is ashamed when he is found, so is the house of Israel ashamed; they, their kings, their princes, and their priests, and their prophets.

α.2.27 Adtamwéhettit weehquanunk ken n8sh[ú]n: kah qussuk, keneechansup; newutche|n[a]g nukquinnuppinumunkquog uppusquan8, qut matta wuskes[u]k8: qut wuttaméhpunáhettit, piṣh n8waog, omohkish kah wadchâninnean.
E.2.27 Saying to a stock, Thou art my father; and to a stone, Thou hast brought me forth: for they have turned their back unto me, and not their face: but in the time of their trouble they will say, Arise, and save us.

α.2.28 Qut uttiyeug kummatt8mog neg kezheácheg? neg omohkehettich, woh neg wadchanukquean w[a]dtaméhpunáon: newutche na adtahshik kukkeitotanash, ne wuttinniinneau kummanitt8mog woi Judah.
E.2.28 But where are thy gods that thou hast made thee? let them arise, if they can save thee in the time of thy trouble: for according to the number of thy cities are thy gods, O Judah.

α.2.29 Tohwaj keket8kieóg? kenaau wame kuppanneséhtayimw8 wussin Jehovah.
E.2.29 Wherefore will ye plead with me? ye all have transgressed against me, saith the LORD.

α.2.30 Tahn8che nuttogkom keneech[â]n8oog, nag matta attumunum8og sasamatahwhuttuonk: nehenwonche kuttogkodtegan8 mahchipp8 kukquoshodtumwaéneumog, onauh pagwohteae qunnono[u].
E.2.30 In vain have I smitten your children; they received no correction: your own sword hath devoured your prophets, like a destroying lion.

α.2.31 Woi pometuonk, naish wuttinn8waonk Jehovah, sun nuttouohkomuk8imis ut Israel? pohkenâe ohke? tohwutch nummissinninnúmog n8wahettit, nenawun nussontimôumun, matta wonk kuppeyaónunómun?
E.2.31 O generation, see ye the word of the LORD. Have I been a wilderness unto Israel? a land of darkness? wherefore say my people, We are lords; we will come no more unto thee?

α.2.32 Sun woh peenomp wanánatam 8nhogk8unaṣh, asuh weetauwadteaénin wuthogqunnumaongaṣh? qut onch nummissinninnúmog n8wanánumuk ánu[ā]nittu kesukkodtaṣh.
E.2.32 Can a maid forget her ornaments, or a bride her attire? yet my people have forgotten me days without number.

α.2.33 Tohwutch m8sittahhaman kummay natinnehamunat womonittuonk? newaj wonk kuhk8tomauadt matchet8wog kummayaṣh.
E.2.33 Why trimmest thou thy way to seek love? therefore hast thou also taught the wicked ones thy ways.

α.2.34 Ut sissippoe kuthogk8wonganit wonk namehteauun wusqueheonk kuttummunge mat woskhúog: matta nummiskom8un keme natinteaon, qut ut wame yeush.
E.2.34 Also in thy skirts is found the blood of the souls of the poor innocents: I have not found it by secret search, but upon all these.

α.2.35 Onch kuttinn8wam, newutche matta n8woskhuwoh, wunnamuhkut ummusquanitteaonk piṣh qushkemo wutch nuhhogkat: kusseh, kukkeket8hkoush, newutche kussim, matta nummatchesu.
E.2.35 Yet thou sayest, Because I am innocent, surely his anger shall turn from me. Behold, I will plead with thee, because thou sayest, I have not sinned.

α.2.36 Tohwaj m8cheke papaumsháan kutôs8wunumunat kummayash? ken wonk piṣh kutakodchawahik Egypt, neane akojheup Assyria.
E.2.36 Why gaddest thou about so much to change thy way? thou also shalt be ashamed of Egypt, as thou wast ashamed of Assyria.

α.2.37 Nux, pish kussohwéhtau, kah kenutchegash ohtag kuppuhkukqut: newutche Jehovah pogketam kuppabahtantamóongaṣh, kah nish matta pish k8niéhikk8unáṣh.
E.2.37 Yea, thou shalt go forth from him, and thine hands upon thine head: for the LORD hath rejected thy confidences, and thou shalt not prosper in them.

α.3.1 NOOwaog, wosketomp pogkenont ummittamwussoh, kah noh nukkonont, kah mittamwussit onkatog, sun woh wonk noh en qushkeu: sunnummatta ohke woh mishe nishketeauun? qut ken kenanwun8dsquáus monaog womónadcheg: qut onch quinnuppish en nuhhogkat, wussin Lord.
E.3.1 They say, If a man put away his wife, and she go from him, and become another man's, shall he return unto her again? shall not that land be greatly polluted? but thou hast played the harlot with many lovers; yet return again to me, saith the LORD.

α.3.2 Tohshiniṣh kuskesukquash en qunuhqui ayeuonganehtu, kah naish uttoh kittin matta k8weepámutteanás: ut mayut kutaskwhonóog, onatuh Arabian ut touohkomukqut, kah kenishketeop ohke, nashpe kenanwun8dsquaôsuongaṣh, kah nashpe kummatcheseongaṣh.
E.3.2 Lift up thine eyes unto the high places, and see where thou hast not been lien with. In the ways hast thou sat for them, as the Arabian in the wilderness; and thou hast polluted the land with thy whoredoms and with thy wickedness.

α.3.3 Newaj sokanonaṣh kogkôunumuk, kah kutogque pehtùquom nanwu[n]8dsquoôsuenuut, kussekeneam akodchinat.
E.3.3 Therefore the showers have been withholden, and there hath been no latter rain; and thou hadst a whore's forehead, thou refusedst to be ashamed.

α.3.4 Sunnummatta yeu wutch kummauunnitteiyeu, n8sh, ken n8skenue nanawunnuaenéum?
E.3.4 Wilt thou not from this time cry unto me, My father, thou art the guide of my youth?

α.3.5 Sun piṣh nagwutteánum ummusquantamóonk, sun piṣh wunnagwutteánumun pajeh wohkukquoshik? kusseh, kussip kah kutussep machukish neahunukukqunnittean.
E.3.5 Will he reserve his anger for ever? will he keep it to the end?  Behold, thou hast spoken and done evil things as thou couldest.

α.3.6 Jehovah wonk nuttugkup, pamontog Josiah ketass8t, sun kenaum uttoh asit asóeposue Israel? noh kukkuhq[e]u en nishnoh kussohkôi wadchu, kah ut agwe nishnoh askunkquomut, kah na wuttit nanwun8dsquaôsin.
E.3.6 The LORD said also unto me in the days of Josiah the king, Hast thou seen that which backsliding Israel hath done? she is gone up upon every high mountain and under every green tree, and there hath played the harlot.

α.3.7 Kah nussip mahche yeush wame usseit, quinnuppish en nuhhogkat: qut noh matta qushkeu, kah wunass8muwae weetompassuin Judah wunnaumun.
E.3.7 And I said after she had done all these things, Turn thou unto me. But she returned not. And her treacherous sister Judah saw it.

α.3.8 Kah nunnaumunah, aquompak, wutche wame newaj omponcheposue Israel mamussit, nuppogkenóp, kah nuttinninnumauop pogkenittue wussukwhonk: qut onch wunass8muwae weetikkusquoh Judah, matta wabeseupoh, qut monchup, kah nanwun8dsquaausip wonk.
E.3.8 And I saw, when for all the causes whereby backsliding Israel committed adultery I had put her away, and given her a bill of divorce; yet her treacherous sister Judah feared not, but went and played the harlot also.

α.3.9 Kah niyeup, nashpe mataunchemoe, wunnanwun8dsquaosuonk, nishketeauop ohke, kah mamussup qussukquanash kah wehquanunkquamaṣh.
E.3.9 And it came to pass through the lightness of her whoredom, that she defiled the land, and committed adultery with stones and with stocks.

α.3.10 Qut onch wame yeush, wunass8muwáe weetompasu Judah, matta quinnuppu en nuhhogkat nashpe mamusse wuttah, qut eiantukiyeue, wussin Jehovah.
E.3.10 And yet for all this her treacherous sister Judah hath not turned unto me with her whole heart, but feignedly, saith the LORD.

α.3.11 Kah Jehovah nuttugkup, assôeposue Israel anue sampwe ogquanumau wuhhogkuh, onk wunass8muwáe Judah.
E.3.11 And the LORD said unto me, The backsliding Israel hath justified herself more than treacherous Judah.

α.3.12 Monchish kah yeush wahteauwahuaṣh kut8wongaṣh nogque nanumiyeu, kah n8wash, qushkiṣh ken asôepôsue Israel, n8wau Lord, matta ken8konkaúun8mw8 nummusquantam8onk: newutche nummómonaneteam, wussin Jehovah, matta nunnagwutteánum8 nummusquanittam8onk.
E.3.12 Go and proclaim these words toward the north, and say, Return, thou backsliding Israel, saith the LORD; and I will not cause mine anger to fall upon you: for I am merciful, saith the LORD, and I will not keep anger for ever.

α.3.13 Webe samp8ash kummatcheseonk, kuppanneséhtáu Jehovah kum-Manitt8m; kah kusseáhham kummayash en penuwohteaut, ut agwe nishnoh ashkuhquamut, kah matta ken8sweetam8mw8 n8wadtauatonkqussuon, n8wau Lord.
E.3.13 Only acknowledge thine iniquity, that thou hast transgressed against the LORD thy God, and hast scattered thy ways to the strangers under every green tree, and ye have not obeyed my voice, saith the LORD.

α.3.14 Qushkek, woi asôep8sue mukkiog, wussin Lord, newutche k8weetauómunumw8: kah keneemununumw8, pasuk en pasuk otanat, kah kenehneesinunnénaôont, kah pish kuppas8unumw8 Zion.
E.3.14 Turn, O backsliding children, saith the LORD; for I am married unto you: and I will take you one of a city, and two of a family, and I will bring you to Zion:

α.3.15 Kah kittinnumauunumw8 pastorsog neaunak nuttah, neg sohkom8nukqueog wahteauonk kah wohwohtam8onk.
E.3.15 And I will give you pastors according to mine heart, which shall feed you with knowledge and understanding.

α.3.16 Kah piṣh n$nih, muttaán8óg, kah nanom8naóg ut ohkeit: yeush ut kesukodtash n8wau Jehovah, nag matta piṣh wonk n8wo8og, 8n8wae wut-arkum Jehovah: matta piṣh waantam8un, matta pish mehquontam8un, matta pish nátauwohtau8un, asuh matta piṣh wonkusséin.
E.3.16 And it shall come to pass, when ye be multiplied and increased in the land, in those days, saith the LORD, they shall say no more, The ark of the covenant of the LORD: neither shall it come to mind: neither shall they remember it; neither shall they visit it; neither shall that be done any more.

α.3.17 Na ahquompak piṣh hettamwog Jerusalem, wutass8tamappuonk Lord, kah wame wutahtimoneaṣh en piṣh miyaém8aṣh, en 8wesuonganit Jehovah, en Jerusalem: kah matta piṣh wonk asuhkom8og uppehchuánumwe matche wuttahhou.
E.3.17 At that time they shall call Jerusalem the throne of the LORD; and all the nations shall be gathered unto it, to the name of the LORD, to Jerusalem: neither shall they walk any more after the imagination of their evil heart.

α.3.18 Yeush ut kesukodtash wek Judah, piṣh weechaáog wek Israel, kah nag piṣh mo[à]e peyaog wutch nánumohkit, en ohkit numauogkup k8sh8wóog wutche ohtóonk.
E.3.18 In those days the house of Judah shall walk with the house of Israel, and they shall come together out of the land of the north to the land that I have given for an inheritance unto your fathers.

α.3.19 Qut nussip, uttoh woh kuttin kenugke ponunu[n] mukkiésut, kah kittinninnumauunat wunne ohke, wunne wutohtoongan8 mataànukeg wutohtimoneash? kah nussip, piṣh kuttehenneh, n8sh, kah matta piṣh kenukkoss8h.
E.3.19 But I said, How shall I put thee among the children, and give thee a pleasant land, a goodly heritage of the hosts of nations? and I said, Thou shalt call me, My father; and shalt not turn away from me.

α.3.20 Wunnamuhkut, neane mittamwussin wunass8muwáe nukkonont wessukeh, netatuppe kuttin wunass8muwae unnehhinneau, woi wek Israel wussin Jehovah.
E.3.20 Surely as a wife treacherously departeth from her husband, so have ye dealt treacherously with me, O house of Israel, saith the LORD.

α.3.21 Wadtauatonkqussuonk n8tunkup ut qunuhqui ayeuonganéhtu, mauonk, kah uppeantam8ongash wunneechanoh Israel: newutche woónkitteauog ummayeu, k[a]h nag wannanumaog Lord um-Manitt8m8h.
E.3.21 A voice was heard upon the high places, weeping and supplications of the children of Israel: for they have perverted their way, and they have forgotten the LORD their God.

α.3.22 Qushkek kenaau asouhp8sue mukkiog, kah piṣh nunneetskehteoh kutasôep8suongan8oash: kusseh kuppeyaónunumun, newutche ken Jehovah num-Manitt8mun.
E.3.22 Return, ye backsliding children, and I will heal your backslidings. Behold, we come unto thee; for thou art the LORD our God.

α.3.23 Wunnamuhkut tahn8che wadchanittuonk annoontamun wutch wadchuut, kah wutch mataánukish wadchuash, wunnamuhkut, ut Jehovah num$Manitt8mut wadchanaongan8 Israel ohteau.
E.3.23 Truly in vain is salvation hoped for from the hills, and from the multitude of mountains: truly in the LORD our God is the salvation of Israel.

α.3.24 Newutche akodchuonk mahcheteo wutanakausuongan8 n8shunônog, wutch n8skenúunneanónut: uffloksum8ash, kah wutheardsum8ash, wunnaumonauh kah wuttôn8uh.
E.3.24 For shame hath devoured the labour of our fathers from our youth; their flocks and their herds, their sons and their daughters.

α.3.25 Nussepsinumun nutogkojchuwonganunónut, kah nutchepshaonganun nunnuhkuhkonkumun: newutche nummatcheneheómun Jehovah num-Manitt8muh: nenawun kah n8shunonog, wutch n8skenúunneanónut pajeh yeu kesukok, kah matta n8sweetam8mun 8wadtautatonkqussuonk Jehovah num-Manitt8mun.
E.3.25 We lie down in our shame, and our confusion covereth us: for we have sinned against the LORD our God, we and our fathers, from our youth even unto this day, and have not obeyed the voice of the LORD our God.

α.4.1 QUshkean, woi Israel, wussin Jehovah, qushkish en nuhhogkat, kah am[a]unuman kenishkeneunkquodt8mash wutch anaquabeh, neit matta piṣh kutontsappu.
E.4.1 If thou wilt return, O Israel, saith the LORD, return unto me: and if thou wilt put away thine abominations out of my sight, then shalt thou not remove.

α.4.2 Kah piṣh kutchadchekeyeuwam, Lord pomantog, ut wunnamuhkutéyeuuk, wut wussittum8onganit, kah ut sampweusseonganit, kah wutohtimóneash piṣh wunánumáog wuhhogkauh, ut wuhhogkat, kah ut wuhhogkat piṣh woweenauwaog.
E.4.2 And thou shalt swear, The LORD liveth, in truth, in judgment, and in righteousness; and the nations shall bless themselves in him, and in him shall they glory.

α.4.3 Newutche Jehovah yeu wuttinnon Judae, kah Jerusaleme wosketompuh, anaskham8k kenukkonohkomuk8, kah tanohketéhteók asinnekôusséhtu.
E.4.3 For thus saith the LORD to the men of Judah and Jerusalem, Break up your fallow ground, and sow not among thorns.

α.4.4 Quôshquss8k kuhhogkaóog en JEhovahut, kah amaunum8k woskechee wuttahh8wae kodtuhquabeyeu, kenaau Judae wosketompaog, kah wadohkitcheg Jerusalem, ishkont nummusquanitteaonk ogque sohham8m8 n8taut, kah chikohteau ne woh mat howan ontham8g, wutche kummatcheseongan8oash.
E.4.4 Circumcise yourselves to the LORD, and take away the foreskins of your heart, ye men of Judah and inhabitants of Jerusalem: lest my fury come forth like fire, and burn that none can quench it, because of the evil of your doings.

α.4.5 Wahteauwahuwak ut Judah, kah n8tamwáhuwak ut Jerusalem, kah n8wak, puhpéquagk ut ohkeit: mishont8wak, miyaegk, kah n8wak, moek, kah ontuh pummenutausue keitotanéhtu.
E.4.5 Declare ye in Judah, and publish in Jerusalem; and say, Blow ye the trumpet in the land: cry, gather together, and say, Assemble yourselves, and let us go into the defenced cities.

α.4.6 Neepattau8k muttauákinash nogque Zion, menehketeau8k, pitchinnoéhteok, newutche nuppaudto machuk wutch nanumiyeu, kah mishe paguanuonk.
E.4.6 Set up the standard toward Zion: retire, stay not: for I will bring evil from the north, and a great destruction.

α.4.7 Qunnonou kuhkuhqueu wutch ukkuppiyeumut; kah noh pagwanont gentilsoh appu mayut: sohham wutch wutayeuonganit, wttauwushitteauunat kutohke, kah kutotanáoash piṣh mahchim8ash, matta wutohkeinat.
E.4.7 The lion is come up from his thicket, and the destroyer of the Gentiles is on his way; he is gone forth from his place to make thy land desolate; and thy cities shall be laid waste, without an inhabitant.

α.4.8 Yeu wutche, puttukquobpussuontam8k man8tionak, mau8k, kah 8n8k, newutche wutunkque musquanitteaonk Jehovah matta qushkemun8 wutch kuhhogkanónut.
E.4.8 For this gird you with sackcloth, lament and howl: for the fierce anger of the LORD is not turned back from us.

α.4.9 Kah piṣh nnih ne kesukok, wussin Jehovah, ketass8t wuttah piṣh nupp8m8, kah wuttahhou sontimoog kah sephausuenuog piṣh chepsheau, kah quoshodtumwaenuog piṣh monchanatamwog.
E.4.9 And it shall come to pass at that day, saith the LORD, that the heart of the king shall perish, and the heart of the princes; and the priests shall be astonished, and the prophets shall wonder.

α.4.10 Neit nussip, woi Lord Jehovah, wunnamuhkut, kummishe yeug as8kekomâog missinninnuog, kah Jerusalem, kussip, piṣh k8nohteamw8, qut togkodteg missigquonont keteahogkou
E.4.10 Then said I, Ah, Lord GOD! surely thou hast greatly deceived this people and Jerusalem, saying, Ye shall have peace; whereas the sword reacheth unto the soul.

α.4.11 Na ahquompak piṣh unnôog yeug missinninnúog, kah Jerusalem, ponkque wuttin wutch qunuhqui ayeuonganit, ut touohkomuk, en nogque wutton8óont nummissinninnúmog, matta páuunontusseneat, asuh pahketeàuunat.
E.4.11 At that time shall it be said to this people and to Jerusalem, A dry wind of the high places in the wilderness toward the daughter of my people, not to fan, nor to cleanse,

α.4.12 Pokkodche wuttin, wutch yeush ayeuongash, piṣh nuppeyaónuk: yeuyeu wonk nutayeuuhkonittue kut8kontamauóog wussittumoonk.
E.4.12 Even a full wind from those places shall come unto me: now also will I give sentence against them.

α.4.13 Kusseh, noh piṣh ogque kuhkuhqueu matohqshit, kah wutchariotsumash piṣh onatuhyeuash pemsquaut: wuthorsesumoh anue kenupshaog onk neg wompsikukquaog: missi nutonkapunnaongan8, newutche nummatchhetteamun.
E.4.13 Behold, he shall come up as clouds, and his chariots shall be as a whirlwind: his horses are swifter than eagles. Woe unto us! for we are spoiled.

α.4.14 Woi Jerusalem, kutchishittaush kuttah, wutch matchetowonganit, onk woh k8wadchanit: toh utt8che piṣh tahn8che kuttenantam8ongash kutappehtunk?
E.4.14 O Jerusalem, wash thine heart from wickedness, that thou mayest be saved. How long shall thy vain thoughts lodge within thee?

α.4.15 Newutche wadtauatonkqussuonk wahteauahuau wutch Dan, kah n8tamwahuwau onkapunáonk wutch Ephraimme wadchuut.
E.4.15 For a voice declareth from Dan, and publisheth affliction from mount Ephraim.

α.4.16 N8tamwáhuk wutohtimóneash, kusseh, ayeuuhkonittue wahteauwahuk Jerusalem, askuhwheteaenuog 8mwog nôadtit wutohtimoneat, kah ayeuuhkonittue mishont8waontamwog Judae keitotanash.
E.4.16 Make ye mention to the nations; behold, publish against Jerusalem, that watchers come from a far country, and give out their voice against the cities of Judah.

α.4.17 Onatuh nanwohkontogig ohteuk wutayeuuhkontamuneau waeénu: newutche ayeuuhkonittue nutcheketunk, wussin Jehovah
E.4.17 As keepers of a field, are they against her round about; because she hath been rebellious against me, saith the LORD.

α.4.18 Kummay kah kutusseongash, kuppautunkqunash yeush, yeu kummatcheetowonk newutche wesogkon, newutche mussishin kuttahhut.
E.4.18 Thy way and thy doings have procured these things unto thee; this is thy wickedness, because it is bitter, because it reacheth unto thine heart.

α.4.19 Nunnogkus, nunnogkus, nutonkquomom ut nuttahhut, nuttah mishont8wau ut nuttinnómiyeumut, n8nanum chequnappin, newutche ken8tamup, woi nukketeahogkou, ummishont8waonk monopuhpeg, ayeuteáont8waonk.
E.4.19 My bowels, my bowels! I am pained at my very heart; my heart maketh a noise in me; I cannot hold my peace, because thou hast heard, O my soul, the sound of the trumpet, the alarm of war.

α.4.20 Paguanuonk asuhkaue pagwanuonganit mishont8wóm8, newutche mamusse ohke matchehteauun: kenuppe neekash matchehteauunash, kah nutonkwonganog kenuppe.
E.4.20 Destruction upon destruction is cried; for the whole land is spoiled: suddenly are my tents spoiled, and my curtains in a moment.

α.4.21 Toh utt8che woh nunnaumun muttaag, kah n8tamunat monopuhpékque mishont8waonk?
E.4.21 How long shall I see the standard, and hear the sound of the trumpet?

α.4.22 Newutche numissinninnúmog mattammag88og, matta n8wahik8og, nag as8tue mukkiog, kah matta wohwohtam8og: waantamwog matchesenat, qut wunnesenat matta wahteau8og.
E.4.22 For my people is foolish, they have not known me; they are sottish children, and they have none understanding: they are wise to do evil, but to do good they have no knowledge.

α.4.23 Nukkehkeneamup ohke kah kusseh, matta kuhkénauwéhteósin8, kah monteagwuninno: & kesukquosh, & mat wequaiyeuméog.
E.4.23 I beheld the earth, and, lo, it was without form, and void; and the heavens, and they had no light.

α.4.24 Nukkehkinneamup wadchuash, & kusseh, nag nunnukshaog, kah wame wadchuash keme ontohtaash.
E.4.24 I beheld the mountains, and, lo, they trembled, and all the hills moved lightly.

α.4.25 Nummomunneamup kah kusseh na matta wosketompaun8, kah wame kesukque puppinshasog wussem8og.
E.4.25 I beheld, and, lo, there was no man, and all the birds of the heavens were fled.

α.4.26 Nummonunneamup, kah kusseh, mishummeechume ayeuonk touohkomukqueyeu8, kah wame nish keitotanaṣh pohquetahhamunaṣh ut anquabit Jehovah, kah nashpe ummishe musquantamôonk.
E.4.26 I beheld, and, lo, the fruitful place was a wilderness, and all the cities thereof were broken down at the presence of the LORD, and by his fierce anger.

α.4.27 Newutche yeu wussin Jehovah, mamusse ohke piṣh touwushin, qut onch matta n8wame mohtupanôog.
E.4.27 For thus hath the LORD said, The whole land shall be desolate; yet will I not make a full end.

α.4.28 Yeu 8ch pish ohke mauun, kah kesukquash wohqut pish m8iyeuaṣh: newutche nussin, nuppogkodtantamun, & matta nutaiuskoianatam8, & matta nukqushkinnum8un.
E.4.28 For this shall the earth mourn, and the heavens above be black; because I have spoken it, I have purposed it, and will not repent, neither will I turn back from it.

α.4.29 Mamusse keitotan piṣh wusseem8 wutche ummishont8waongan8 horsesoh na8mukqutcheg kah wadohtompéitcheg, nag piṣh petutteaog kuppáhtu, kah piṣh tohk8tauaog kussampskôiyeuut: nishnoh keitotan piṣh ahquontamun, kah matta wosketomp wutaiyéin.
E.4.29 The whole city shall flee for the noise of the horsemen and bowmen; they shall go into thickets, and climb up upon the rocks: every city shall be forsaken, and not a man dwell therein.

α.4.30 Kah matchéhenumuk, toh piṣh kutussen? tokonogque kuthogqunneat waneemsquag, tohkonogque gold k8n8whósuohtineat, tohkonogque kenenekinum8e wussukhumunat kuskesuk, tahn8che piṣh k8nekuhhog, womonukqueanig piṣh kussekanunkquog, piṣh kukkodtinneánukquog.
E.4.30 And when thou art spoiled, what wilt thou do? Though thou clothest thyself with crimson, though thou deckest thee with ornaments of gold, though thou rentest thy face with painting, in vain shalt thou make thyself fair; thy lovers will despise thee, they will seek thy life.

α.4.31 Newutche nutogquesittamup wuttauatonkqussuonk mittamwossis kodtauwekheont, kah ogque wutonkquommom8onk noh weske neechadt, 8wadtauatonkqussuonk wuttaunoh Zion, noh mawémont wuhhogkuh, noh sepaginuk wunnutchegash, n8wau, missi nutonkapunnáonk yeuyeu, newutche nukketeahogkou sauwunum wutche nushehteaenúog.
E.4.31 For I have heard a voice as of a woman in travail, and the anguish as of her that bringeth forth her first child, the voice of the daughter of Zion, that bewaileth herself, that spreadeth her hands, saying, Woe is me now! for my soul is wearied because of murderers.

α.5.1 AH[a]úhsukque u[s]ishunk ut pannuppe Jerusaleme toumáogquehtu, kah yeuyeu naum8k kah wahteau8k, kah nuttinneohteagk na$ut mishe ayeuonganehtu: woh naméheadt wosketomp, noh asein wussittum[ò]onk, kah piṣh nutahquontamwòntamun
E.5.1 Run ye to and fro through the streets of Jerusalem, and see now, and know, and seek in the broad places thereof, if ye can find a man, if there be any that executeth judgment, that seeketh the truth; and I will pardon it.

α.5.2 Kah tohkônogque wussinneau, Lord pomantog, wunnamuhkut pann8wae chadchekeyeuwaog.
E.5.2 And though they say, The LORD liveth; surely they swear falsely.

α.5.3 Woi Jehovah, sunnummatta kuskesukquash ohtano wunnamuhkuteyeuuk? nag kuttogkomóog, qut nag neuantam8og, nag kummahtupanòog, qut sekeneamwog attumunumun sasamatawhuttuonk, nag anue menehketeoog wuskesuk8oaṣh onk ne qussuk, sekenamwog qushke[u].
E.5.3 O LORD, are not thine eyes upon the truth? thou hast stricken them, but they have not grieved; thou hast consumed them, but they have refused to receive correction: they have made their faces harder than a rock; they have refused to return.

α.5.4 Newaj n8wau, wunnamuhkut yeug matchekuog, as8tuog, newutche mat wahteau8og umm[a]y Jehovah; asuh 8sittum8onk um-Manitt8m8oh.
E.5.4 Therefore I said, Surely these are poor; they are foolish: for they know not the way of the LORD, nor the judgment of their God.

α.5.5 Nutauon masugkenukeg, kah nag nukken8naog, newutche neg wahteauog ummay Jehovah, kah 8sittum8onk um-Manitt8m8uh: qut yeug papannuppe pokqshanáog yoakoh, kah paskúhkomwog kenepsuongash.
E.5.5 I will get me unto the great men, and will speak unto them; for they have known the way of the LORD, and the judgment of their God: but these have altogether broken the yoke, and burst the bonds.

α.5.6 Newaj piṣh qunnonou wutch touohkomukqut pagwanon, kah wunnonkquae mukquoshim piṣh ummatchhheuh; Leopard piṣh askuhhum ukkeitotanáoaṣh: nishnoh pasuk na waj sohhog piṣh sokshanau, newutche uppanneseonganoaṣh monaaṣh, kah wutasôep8suongan88aṣh nano m8naaṣh.
E.5.6 Wherefore a lion out of the forest shall slay them, and a wolf of the evenings shall spoil them, a leopard shall watch over their cities: every one that goeth out thence shall be torn in pieces: because their transgressions are many, and their backslidings are increased.

α.5.7 Uttoh woh kuttin yeu ahquontamauunun: kummukkiésumwog nutohquanumunk, & chadchekeimáog neh mat manitt8enégeh: nag wamepwuhheog, neit mamussuog, & miaweog ut nanwun8dsquasenuog wek8ôut
E.5.7 How shall I pardon thee for this? thy children have forsaken me, and sworn by them that are no gods: when I had fed them to the full, they then committed adultery, and assembled themselves by troops in the harlots' houses.

α.5.8 Nag tatuppeyeu8og sohkom8nae horsesut nompoáeu, nishnoh pasuk kogkeahchewánumau ummittamwussoh weetatteamungoh.
E.5.8 They were as fed horses in the morning: every one neighed after his neighbour's wife.

α.5.9 Sunnummatta yeush pish nunnátauwohtauòunaṣh, wussin Jehovah, kah sunnummatta piṣh kukketeahogkou ann8tauòntam8 yeu ânak wutohtimoin?
E.5.9 Shall I not visit for these things? saith the LORD: and shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation as this?

α.5.10 Kuhkuhquegk uppummeneutonganit, kah pagwohteagk, qut ahque wámeneán8k, amaunumau wutonkk8asuongaṣh, newutche nish matta wuttaiheaṣh Jehovah.
E.5.10 Go ye up upon her walls, and destroy; but make not a full end: take away her battlements; for they are not the LORD's.

α.5.11 Newutch wek Israel, kah wek Judah, ayeuuhkonittue ahche n8nass8mukquog wussin Jehovah.
E.5.11 For the house of Israel and the house of Judah have dealt very treacherously against me, saith the LORD.

α.5.12 Pann8waheáog Jehovah, kah n8waog, noh matta, kah machuk matta piṣh nunnuhkukkongk8mun, kah matta piṣh naum8mun togkodteg kah muhshagquodt.
E.5.12 They have belied the LORD, and said, It is not he; neither shall evil come upon us; neither shall we see sword nor famine:

α.5.13 Kah quoshodtumwaenuog piṣh wabanu8og, kah wuttinn8waonk matta appehtunk8og: yeu piṣh unneheóneau.
E.5.13 And the prophets shall become wind, and the word is not in them: thus shall it be done unto them.

α.5.14 Newaj yeu n8wadt Lord God ayeuuhteanit, newutche yeu kutt8onk kussinneau, kusseh nuttinn8waongaṣh nunn8taúhteam ut kutt8nut, kah yeug missinninnuog wuttuhqunnú8og, kah piṣh ummahchipwunneuh.
E.5.14 Wherefore thus saith the LORD God of hosts, Because ye speak this word, behold, I will make my words in thy mouth fire, and this people wood, and it shall devour them.

α.5.15 Kusseh, kuppaudtauunumw8 wutohtim[ó]in wutch nôadtit, woi wek Israel, wussin Lord: ne menuhki wutohtimóin, ne kehchiyeue wutohtimóin, neg ukkutt8wongan8 mo wahteau8un, kah matta k8wohtam8 uttoh an8wahettit.
E.5.15 Lo, I will bring a nation upon you from far, O house of Israel, saith the LORD: it is a mighty nation, it is an ancient nation, a nation whose language thou knowest not, neither understandest what they say.

α.5.16 Uppetan[o]nou ne pohquohshine wenohke, nag wame menuhkesuenúog.
E.5.16 Their quiver is as an open sepulchre, they are all mighty men.

α.5.17 Kah nag pish meechwog kukkepenum8onk, kah kuppetukqunnunk, ne woh kenaumonog kah kuttaunog meechhetteup: pish m8whóog kuf-flocksumoh, kah kut-herdsumoh: nag piṣh mahchipp8og k8weenomwussippogquash, kah figsuhtugquash: nag piṣh matcheketeauog pummeneutausue kukkeitotanaṣh, uttoh adt pabahtantaman, nashpe togkodteg.
E.5.17 And they shall eat up thine harvest, and thy bread, which thy sons and thy daughters should eat: they shall eat up thy flocks and thine herds: they shall eat up thy vines and thy fig trees: they shall impoverish thy fenced cities, wherein thou trustedst, with the sword.

α.5.18 Qut onch ut yeush kesukkodt[a]ṣh wussin Lord, matta kutóshkoméh[e]n8mw8.
E.5.18 Nevertheless in those days, saith the LORD, I will not make a full end with you.

α.5.19 Kah pish n$nih, piṣh n8waog, tohwutch yeush wame unnéhenog Lord num-Manitt8mun? neit pish nag kenamp8hamauóog; neane ohquanumeógkup, kah k8wowussumómw8 pen8e mánitt8og ut kutohk8wóut, ne kuttattuppe piṣh wuttinneumuhkauóneau pen8wohteaog, ut ohkeit ne matta wadtiheéóg.
E.5.19 And it shall come to pass, when ye shall say, Wherefore doeth the LORD our God all these things unto us? then shalt thou answer them, Like as ye have forsaken me, and served strange gods in your land, so shall ye serve strangers in a land that is not your's.

α.5.20 Yeu wahteauwáhuwagk ut wekit Jakob, kah n8tamwahuagk ut Judah, n8wagk,
E.5.20 Declare this in the house of Jacob, and publish it in Judah, saying,

α.5.21 Yeu n8tam8k yeuyeu, woi mattammag8weógish missinninnuog, kah matta wohwohtam8gig, neg wuskesukqutcheg qut matta naum8og, neg wohtauogkutcheg, kah matta n8tamóog.
E.5.21 Hear now this, O foolish people, and without understanding; which have eyes, and see not; which have ears, and hear not:

α.5.22 Sun matta k8wabesúonumw8 wussin Jehovah? sun matta kenunukushomw8 ut anaquabeh, noh wanohtunk nagunt wutche kuhkuhheg ut ketahhannit, nashpe michemohtae kuhk8waonk, matta woh anùwushómun8, kah tôhkonogque wuttugk8moh 8wahwáabpénin, qut onch matta sohkom8uneau, tôhkonogque mishont8wóneau, qut onch matta wutaneukom8uneau?
E.5.22 Fear ye not me? saith the LORD: will ye not tremble at my presence, which have placed the sand for the bound of the sea by a perpetual decree, that it cannot pass it: and though the waves thereof toss themselves, yet can they not prevail; though they roar, yet can they not pass over it?

α.5.23 Qut yeug missinninnuog ontsogquéhtamwutteaháog, kah cheketamwutteahaog: ontsogquehtamwog kah moncheog.
E.5.23 But this people hath a revolting and a rebellious heart; they are revolted and gone.

α.5.24 Kah matta n8wawog ut wuttahh8wout, yeuyeu qushontuh Jehovah num-Manitt8mun, noh sokenonteadt, negonáe kah maumachish ut wutaquompiyeumut: kenanawehteunkqun kuhquttum8e kepenum8e weekaṣh.
E.5.24 Neither say they in their heart, Let us now fear the LORD our God, that giveth rain, both the former and the latter, in his season: he reserveth unto us the appointed weeks of the harvest.

α.5.25 Kummatcheseonganooaṣh yeuṣh wutamaunumunáoaṣh, kah kummatcheseonganooaṣh kukkushpâdtamunk8 wanegukish.
E.5.25 Your iniquities have turned away these things, and your sins have withholden good things from you.

α.5.26 Newutche ut kenugke nummissinninnumog, matchetoweenuog wáhsháog: nag unnaskwheteaog noh wânashont ahpehanoh[,] ponaog ápehanoh, puttawhôog wosketompuh.
E.5.26 For among my people are found wicked men: they lay wait, as he that setteth snares; they set a trap, they catch men.

α.5.27 Onatuh wadshiùhquneg numwabhettit psuksesog, ne ne numwohteau wekuwoont as8kekodteam8onk, ne waje nag mussugkenhettit, kah weenauweetuog.
E.5.27 As a cage is full of birds, so are their houses full of deceit: therefore they are become great, and waxen rich.

α.5.28 Nag nano wunogk8og, wunampamukqussuog, nux paumuhkomwog wutusseongan8oash matchet8wog, matta wussittumoog pissaumatuonk, uppissaumatuonk touies, qut onch wunayeuog: kah wussampiyeum qunauwahikquit matta 8sittum8uneau.
E.5.28 They are waxen fat, they shine: yea, they overpass the deeds of the wicked: they judge not the cause, the cause of the fatherless, yet they prosper; and the right of the needy do they not judge.

α.5.29 Sun matta woh yeush n8ch nátauwahuwaunash wussin Jehovah? sunnummatta woh nukketeahogkou ann8tantam8 yeu ának wutohtimóin?
E.5.29 Shall I not visit for these things? saith the LORD: shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation as this?

α.5.30 Monchanatamwéyeu8k kah úhquejishánumukquok ne ussen yeu ut ohkeit.
E.5.30 A wonderful and horrible thing is committed in the land;

α.5.31 Quoshodtumwaenuog pann8wae quoshodtumwog, kah sephausuenuog nánawunnuwáog nag nashpe, kah missinninnùog womontamuneau ne n$niyeuut: kah toh woh kutussemw8 ut wohkukquoshik.
E.5.31 The prophets prophesy falsely, and the priests bear rule by their means; and my people love to have it so: and what will ye do in the end thereof?

α.6.1 WOi kenaau wunneechanoh Benjamin, moek k8seemunneaut wuch nashaue Jerusalem, kah puhpequohto8k monopuhpeg ut Tekoa: kah ponam8k kuhkinneasue n8teau ut Beth-haccerem, newutche machuk nogquodt wutch nanummiyeu kah mishe paguanuonk.
E.6.1 O ye children of Benjamin, gather yourselves to flee out of the midst of Jerusalem, and blow the trumpet in Tekoa, and set up a sign of fire in Bethhaccerem: for evil appeareth out of the north, and great destruction.

α.6.2 Nutogquéheop wutta[u]noh Zion tapeneunkqussit kah wanegit mittumwossis.
E.6.2 I have likened the daughter of Zion to a comely and delicate woman.

α.6.3 Nanaushepsaenùh weeche uf$flocksumóuh pish uppeyonóuh: pish nag ayeuuhkonittue 8wéenikomukquonóuh: nag pish nishnoh pasuk tanadtupp8og ut wutayeuonganit.
E.6.3 The shepherds with their flocks shall come unto her; they shall pitch their tents against her round about; they shall feed every one in his place.

α.6.4 Ayeuuhkonittue quagwoshwunum[ó]k matómpog: omohkek, kah kuhkuhquehtuh puhshaquadt: missi nutonkapunnaonganun, newutche kesukod paumushóm8, newutche wunnonkquae onkauóhteau sepagkém8.
E.6.4 Prepare ye war against her; arise, and let us go up at noon. Woe unto us! for the day goeth away, for the shadows of the evening are stretched out.

α.6.5 Omohkek, neepoushádtuh, kah pagwatauuttuh ummishikkomukquash.
E.6.5 Arise, and let us go by night, and let us destroy her palaces.

α.6.6 Newutche yeu wussinah Lord ayeuteanit, kouéhtham8k mehtugquash, kah ayeuuhkonittue pogkétinómukquae wadchukok Jerusalem, yeu keitotan woh nadtauahtómuk: noh mamusse sunukkuhchahh8waonk wunnashomut ohteau.
E.6.6 For thus hath the LORD of hosts said, Hew ye down trees, and cast a mount against Jerusalem: this is the city to be visited; she is wholly oppression in the midst of her.

α.6.7 Neane tohkekom sohham8teunk wunnippem, neweyane sohwhôkon ummatcheseonk, chekeusseonk kah mukk8kinnuwáonk nish n8tamunaṣh ut wuhhogkat: neuantamóonk kah n8chumwuttahwhuttuongaṣh nagwutteohtaaṣh anaquabeh.
E.6.7 As a fountain casteth out her waters, so she casteth out her wickedness: violence and spoil is heard in her; before me continually is grief and wounds.

α.6.8 Kuhk8tomaúununach, woi Jerusalem, ishkont nukketeahogkou kenukkonuk, ishkont kuttauwushinnewahesh, ohke ne matta wadohkeémuk.
E.6.8 Be thou instructed, O Jerusalem, lest my soul depart from thee; lest I make thee desolate, a land not inhabited.

α.6.9 Yeu wussin Jehovah ayeuuhteaunit, nag piṣh pannuppe mukkupushquaog Israelle sekqshoncheg, onatuh weenomwussippog: ogque ompontinuṣh kenutcheg en man8taut noh máwuneadt weenominneaṣh.
E.6.9 Thus saith the LORD of hosts, They shall throughly glean the remnant of Israel as a vine: turn back thine hand as a grapegatherer into the baskets.

α.6.10 Howan woh k6on8nog, kah âmómog, onk woh n8tamwog? kusseh, wehtauogk8 matta quoshqussausin8, kah n8nanumóog kuhkeitamun: kusseh, wuttinn8waonk Jehovah ogquontamwog ashpunâmut: matta wuttapeneam8uneau.
E.6.10 To whom shall I speak, and give warning, that they may hear? behold, their ear is uncircumcised, and they cannot hearken: behold, the word of the LORD is unto them a reproach; they have no delight in it.

α.6.11 Newaj numwabetunkqueh ummusquantam8onk Jehovah: nussauunum kogkôunumunát: nussokanumauóneau mukkiog poquadchit, kah ummoeu mukkinneongan8out wuskenuog, newutche wessukkiin weeche mittamwussoh piṣh neemunau, kutchise weeche noh mahtauntog.
E.6.11 Therefore I am full of the fury of the LORD; I am weary with holding in: I will pour it out upon the children abroad, and upon the assembly of young men together: for even the husband with the wife shall be taken, the aged with him that is full of days.

α.6.12 Kah wekuóash pish quinnuppem8ash en onkatoganit, kah weeche wutohtekonoash kah ummittamwuss8oh moeu: newutche nussummagunum nunnutcheg ut wadohkitcheg ohkeit wussin Jehovah.
E.6.12 And their houses shall be turned unto others, with their fields and wives together: for I will stretch out my hand upon the inhabitants of the land, saith the LORD.

α.6.13 Newutche wutch peississit pajeh noh masugkenuk, nishnoh pasuk n8suhkom hohchewontamóonk: kah wutch quoshodtumwaenúut, pajeh sephausuenúut, nishnoh pasuk pann8wae ussu.
E.6.13 For from the least of them even unto the greatest of them every one is given to covetousness; and from the prophet even unto the priest every one dealeth falsely.

α.6.14 Meeshane neetskehteóog wonk woskeheaongan8 wuttaun8uh nummissinninnúmog, n8waog, Wunohteagk, wunohteagk, matta wunohteaonganin8g.
E.6.14 They have healed also the hurt of the daughter of my people slightly, saying, Peace, peace; when there is no peace.

α.6.15 Sun nag akodchuog ussehettit unkqueneunkquok? matchaog, matta akodchuog, kah onteauog pen8quoshun, newaj pish penusháhettit kenugke nag panushoncheg, uttoh adt natauwáheog, pish kepshaog wussin Jehovah.
E.6.15 Were they ashamed when they had committed abomination? nay, they were not at all ashamed, neither could they blush: therefore they shall fall among them that fall: at the time that I visit them they shall be cast down, saith the LORD.

α.6.16 Yeu wussin Jehovah, neepo8k maikontu, káh naum8k kah nat8tomwehteag kah nukkone mayash, uttiyeu wunneguk may, kah ne pomushagk, kah pish kenampteomw8 keteahogkoune anwosin8onk: qut nag n8waog matta ne nuppomushaunan.
E.6.16 Thus saith the LORD, Stand ye in the ways, and see, and ask for the old paths, where is the good way, and walk therein, and ye shall find rest for your souls. But they said, We will not walk therein.

α.6.17 Kah wonk nupponaskqhukqueogig, n8wahettit, kuhkeitam8k monopehpegane wadtauatonqussuonk: qut nag n8waog matta nukkeiketam8unan.
E.6.17 Also I set watchmen over you, saying, Hearken to the sound of the trumpet. But they said, We will not hearken.

α.6.18 Newutche n8tam8k kenaau wutohtimoneash kah wahteau8k woi mukkineonk, uttoh ánag ut kenugke nagoh.
E.6.18 Therefore hear, ye nations, and know, O congregation, what is among them.

α.6.19 N8tash woi ohke, kusseh nuppaudtoh machuk yeu ut ayeuonganit, wuttenantamog meechummuongash, newutche matta kuhkeitam8og nukkutt8wongash, asuh nuttinnaumatuonk, qut uppogketamuneau.
E.6.19 Hear, O earth: behold, I will bring evil upon this people, even the fruit of their thoughts, because they have not hearkened unto my words, nor to my law, but rejected it.

α.6.20 Teag wutch weetemungquok peyogque wutch Sheba? kah weekemungquoke weekinaskq, wutch n8adtut wutohtimoneat kutchikohtae mag8onganoash matta tapeneunkquottinn8ash, kah kussephausuongan8oash matta weetemungquottin8ash ut nuhhogkat.
E.6.20 To what purpose cometh there to me incense from Sheba, and the sweet cane from a far country? your burnt offerings are not acceptable, nor your sacrifices sweet unto me.

α.6.21 Newaj yeu n8wadt Jehovah, kusseh, nupponam togkussittassunoonk ut anaquabhettit yeug missinninnuog, kah wut8shineunk kah wunnaumoninneunk pish moae uppenushadtamuneau: weetatteamunganin kah weetompoh pish paguanog.
E.6.21 Therefore thus saith the LORD, Behold, I will lay stumblingblocks before this people, and the fathers and the sons together shall fall upon them; the neighbour and his friend shall perish.

α.6.22 Yeu wussin Jehovah kusseh missinninnuog 8mwog nanumohkit, kah missi wutohtimoin pish tahshinumun sussippoe ohkeit.
E.6.22 Thus saith the LORD, Behold, a people cometh from the north country, and a great nation shall be raised from the sides of the earth.

α.6.23 Nag pish kogkonaog ohtompeh kah qunuhtug: nag onkapunohteaenu8og, kah wanne ummonaneteaonganeog: wuttauatonkqussuonk ogque mishotn8wau mehtahhannit, kah nayeumukquog horsesoh: ogque wunappuog ayeuuhkonukquean, woi wuttaunoh Zion.
E.6.23 They shall lay hold on bow and spear; they are cruel, and have no mercy; their voice roareth like the sea; and they ride upon horses, set in array as men for war against thee, O daughter of Zion.

α.6.24 N8tamumunnomup woweenodtumoonk, nunnutcheganunonash nano n8chumwiyeuash, kah mishonkquómom8onk nuttohqunukumun kah ogque onkquommomm8onk muttamwossis kodtauweekheont.
E.6.24 We have heard the fame thereof: our hands wax feeble: anguish hath taken hold of us, and pain, as of a woman in travail.

α.6.25 Sohham8teòk en ohteahkonit, kah pomusháhte[ó]k may$ut, newutche wuttogkodteg matwau, kah wabesuonk waéenu.
E.6.25 Go not forth into the field, nor walk by the way; for the sword of the enemy and fear is on every side.

α.6.26 Woi wuttaunoh nummissinninnumog puttukquobpissuwontamók man8tiônak, kah pummuquáish pukqukontu: ogquohpâusish mauwemat kenukquttegheon, ahche wesogkone maumuttam8onk, newutche matchehuwaénin teanuk pish kenuhkuhkongqun.
E.6.26 O daughter of my people, gird thee with sackcloth, and wallow thyself in ashes: make thee mourning, as for an only son, most bitter lamentation: for the spoiler shall suddenly come upon us.

α.6.27 Kutogque ponush qunuhquikomukqut, kah wonkônous ut kenugke nummissinninnumut; onk woh k8wahteoh, kah kukqutchteoh ummayeu.
E.6.27 I have set thee for a tower and a fortress among my people, that thou mayest know and try their way.

α.6.28 Nag wame onkquanittamwe ontsogquehtamog, kehkomuwae pomusháog: neg wompohshog kah misséhchuog, neg wame anuskuwanùog.
E.6.28 They are all grievous revolters, walking with slanders: they are brass and iron; they are all corrupters.

α.6.29 Popotowegaṣh chikohtaash, mahmuttattag mohtutteau ut n8taut: sôbossumwaen tahn8ch sâbohsôsu, newutche matchet8wog matta amaunóog.
E.6.29 The bellows are burned, the lead is consumed of the fire; the founder melteth in vain: for the wicked are not plucked away.

α.6.30 Nishke silver wosketompaog piṣh wuttehenóneau, newutche Lord uppogkenuh.
E.6.30 Reprobate silver shall men call them, because the LORD hath rejected them.

α.7.1 WUttinn8waonk ne paômukqut Jeremiah wutch Jehovahut, n8wau,
E.7.1 The word that came to Jeremiah from the LORD, saying,

α.7.2 Neepaush ussquontamut wekit Jehovah, kah naut yeu wahteauwahuash kutt8wonk, kah n8waṣh, n8tam8k wuttinn8waonk Jehovah, wame kenaau Judaéog, neg petutteacheg yeush usquontamaṣh, wowussumónat Jehovah.
E.7.2 Stand in the gate of the LORD's house, and proclaim there this word, and say, Hear the word of the LORD, all ye of Judah, that enter in at these gates to worship the LORD.

α.7.3 Yeu wussin Jehovah ut ayeuteaunit, um-Manitt8moh Israel, onchteo8k kummayeuoaṣh, kah kutusseonganuoaṣh, kah yeu k8to[n]kéhinuneau ayeuonk.
E.7.3 Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel, Amend your ways and your doings, and I will cause you to dwell in this place.

α.7.4 Pabahtantam8hteók pann8wae kutt8wongaṣh, n8w[a]og, wut-templeum Jehovah, wut-templum Jehovah, wut-templum Jehovah yeush.
E.7.4 Trust ye not in lying words, saying, The temple of the LORD, The temple of the LORD, The temple of the LORD, are these.

α.7.5 Newutche papannuppe oncheteaôg kum$mayeuóaṣh, kah kutusseongan8óaṣh; papannuppe usseog wussittumóonk nashauwe wosketomp, kah weetatteamunguh.
E.7.5 For if ye throughly amend your ways and your doings; if ye throughly execute judgment between a man and his neighbour;

α.7.6 Matta sunukkutchahôóg pen8wot, touwies, kah sekousq, kah matta seaham8óg mat woskehuwáe musqueheonk yeu ut ayeuonganit, kah matta asuhkauôog onkatogig manittoog, wutch k8woskhetteaongan8.
E.7.6 If ye oppress not the stranger, the fatherless, and the widow, and shed not innocent blood in this place, neither walk after other gods to your hurt:

α.7.7 Neit yeu k8tohk[e]hinuneau ayeuonk, ut ohkeit ne anumauogkup k8sh8oog micheme kah micheme.
E.7.7 Then will I cause you to dwell in this place, in the land that I gave to your fathers, for ever and ever.

α.7.8 Kusseh kuppab[a]htantamumw8 pann8wae kutt8wongash, nish matta woh wadchiyeumukish.
E.7.8 Behold, ye trust in lying words, that cannot profit.

α.7.9 Sun kukkomm8tomw8, kenushteomw8, kah kummamussimw8, kah kuppann8wae chadchekeyeuomw8, kah kutchikossumauómw8 weetemungquok Baal, kah kutásuhkauomw8 onkatogig manitt8og, neg matta woheogig.
E.7.9 Will ye steal, murder, and commit adultery, and swear falsely, and burn incense unto Baal, and walk after other gods whom ye know not;

α.7.10 Kah sun kuppeyomw8, kah keneepomw8 anaqu[a]beh yeu ut wetuómut, ne as8weetamuk wutche n8wesuonk, kah kussimw8, nuppohquoahwhunnitteamun ussenat wame yeush nishkeneunkquokiṣh?
E.7.10 And come and stand before me in this house, which is called by my name, and say, We are delivered to do all these abominations?

α.7.11 Yeu weetu ne as8wetamuk wutche n8wesuonk, sun ne 8wekineau mukk8kinnuwaenuog ut anaquabeog? kusseh, nen nunnaumun wussin Jehovah.
E.7.11 Is this house, which is called by my name, become a den of robbers in your eyes? Behold, even I have seen it, saith the LORD.

α.7.12 Qut yeuyeu unk nutáyeuonganit ne ohtagkup Shiloh, uttoh negonne ponamomp n8wesuonk, kah naum8k uttoh ánteau wutche ummatcheseongan8 nummissinninnumog Israel.
E.7.12 But go ye now unto my place which was in Shiloh, where I set my name at the first, and see what I did to it for the wickedness of my people Israel.

α.7.13 Kah yeuyeu newutche k8wame yeush ussenáoaṣh anakausuongaṣh, wussin Jehovah, kah kukken8numwop, nompoáeu omohkéon, kah kódt8kôon, qut matta ken8tamómw8, kah k8wehkomunumwop, qut matta kenamp8hamomw8:
E.7.13 And now, because ye have done all these works, saith the LORD, and I spake unto you, rising up early and speaking, but ye heard not; and I called you, but ye answered not;

α.7.14 Newaj unnehteau yeu weetu, ne as8wetamuk wutche n8wesuonk, ne pabuhtantamóg, kah ayeuonk ne anumauogkup kenaau kah k8sh8óog, ne ánteauomp Shiloh.
E.7.14 Therefore will I do unto this house, which is called by my name, wherein ye trust, and unto the place which I gave to you and to your fathers, as I have done to Shiloh.

α.7.15 Kah kussohwhôkôunumw8 wutch anaquabeh, neane sohwohteaomp wame kematt8oóg, mamusse Ephraime wuskannem.
E.7.15 And I will cast you out of my sight, as I have cast out all your brethren, even the whole seed of Ephraim.

α.7.16 Newutche peantamwanshúhkon yeug missinninnuog, kah ahque tahshinumwansh mauonk asuh peantamóonk, kah ahque nag ken8tamwansh en nuhhogkat, newutche matta ken8tauun8.
E.7.16 Therefore pray not thou for this people, neither lift up cry nor prayer for them, neither make intercession to me: for I will not hear thee.

α.7.17 Sun matta kenaum8 toh ussehettit ut Judae keitotanehtu: & ut Jerusaleme taumaogquehtu?
E.7.17 Seest thou not what they do in the cities of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem?

α.7.18 Mukkiesog mukkinnumwog wuttuhqunaṣh, kah wut8shineunk m[o]utt[à]numwog, kah mittamwussissog tuttuhpunumwog ayimauwónat petukqunegaṣh wutche keichissonkusq kesukqut, kah sokenumauónat wuttattamoe mag8ongaṣh ut onkatoge manitt8h, woh numm8m8squehikqunnaóut.
E.7.18 The children gather wood, and the fathers kindle the fire, and the women knead their dough, to make cakes to the queen of heaven, and to pour out drink offerings unto other gods, that they may provoke me to anger.

α.7.19 Sun nag numm8m8squehikquog, wussin Jehovah? sunnummatta m8m8squeheauóog wuhhogkauh, chepshonat ut nehenwonche wuskesuk8óut.
E.7.19 Do they provoke me to anger? saith the LORD: do they not provoke themselves to the confusion of their own faces?

α.7.20 Newaj yeu n8wadt Lord Jehovah, kusseh, nummusquantam8onk kah nummishe musquantam8onk pish sokanumun yeu ut ayeuonganit, ut wosketompaut, kah ut puppinashimwut, kah ut ohteuhkóne mehtugqut, kah ut ohkee meechummuonganit, kah pish chikohteau, kah matta pish ontham8un.
E.7.20 Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, mine anger and my fury shall be poured out upon this place, upon man, and upon beast, and upon the trees of the field, and upon the fruit of the ground; and it shall burn, and shall not be quenched.

α.7.21 Yeu wussin Jehovah ayeuteaunit um-Manitt8moh Israel, ponam8k kutchikohtae mag8ongan8oash, en kussephausuongan8out, kah meech8k weyaus.
E.7.21 Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel; Put your burnt offerings unto your sacrifices, and eat flesh.

α.7.22 Newutche matta nukken8nomp k8sh8woog, kah matta nutann8noog ne kesukok pas8og wutch ohkit Egypt, papaume chikohtae mag8ongash, asuh sephausuongaṣh.
E.7.22 For I spake not unto your fathers, nor commanded them in the day that I brought them out of the land of Egypt, concerning burnt offerings or sacrifices:

α.7.23 Qut yeu nutann8nonah, nussip, n8swehtam8k n8wadtauatonkqussuonk, kah nen piṣh kum-Manitt8mw8, kah kenaau piṣh nummissinninnúmog, kah pomushagk wame mayut ne ánunn8nunóg, onk woh k8niyimw8.
E.7.23 But this thing commanded I them, saying, Obey my voice, and I will be your God, and ye shall be my people: and walk ye in all the ways that I have commanded you, that it may be well unto you.

α.7.24 Qut nag matta n8tam8og, kah matta ahchúsittam8og, qut pomusháadtamwog ut matche metahh8wae kogáhquttuonganit, kah pittuanum8onganit, kah nag as[ô]ushaog, kah matta kutchittohshau8og.
E.7.24 But they hearkened not, nor inclined their ear, but walked in the counsels and in the imagination of their evil heart, and went backward, and not forward.

α.7.25 Nadteuh ne kesukok k8sh8wóog sohhamwehettit wutch ohkit Egypt, nô pajeh yeu kesukok, n8wame ann8nomp en kuhhogkaut quoshodtumwae nuttinninnúmog, asekesukokiṣh, nompoáeu omohkeonish, kah ann8nogish.
E.7.25 Since the day that your fathers came forth out of the land of Egypt unto this day I have even sent unto you all my servants the prophets, daily rising up early and sending them:

α.7.26 Qut onch matta nukkeihketunk8og, asuh nutahch[ú]wusṣittonk8og, ut nag menehkehteôog wusṣittuppukan8, ánue ne matchesúmaog 8sh8oh.
E.7.26 Yet they hearkened not unto me, nor inclined their ear, but hardened their neck: they did worse than their fathers.

α.7.27 Newutche wame yeush kutt8wongash pish kuttinnonáoash, qut nag matta ken8tunk8og, pish wonk k8weehkomôog, qut matta kenamp8hamunk8og.
E.7.27 Therefore thou shalt speak all these words unto them; but they will not hearken to thee: thou shalt also call unto them; but they will not answer thee.

α.7.28 Qut pish kuttinóog, yeu wutohtimoin matta n8swetam8gig 8wadtauatonkqussuonk Jehovah um-Manitt8m8uh, kah matta attumunum8 sasamatuhwhuttuonk: wanamuhkutéyeuuk nehtauun, kah tummesumun wutch wutt8n8wóut.
E.7.28 But thou shalt say unto them, This is a nation that obeyeth not the voice of the LORD their God, nor receiveth correction: truth is perished, and is cut off from their mouth.

α.7.29 M8sumush woi Jerusalem, kah pogketash[.] kah maumatash ut qunuhqueu ayeuonganéhtu[;] newutche Jehovah uppogketamun, kah nukkodtum ne m8squantog pometuonk.
E.7.29 Cut off thine hair, O Jerusalem, and cast it away, and take up a lamentation on high places; for the LORD hath rejected and forsaken the generation of his wrath.

α.7.30 Newutche wunneechanoh Judah matcheseoh ut anaquabeh, wussin Jehovah; nag ponumwog wunnishkeneunkquodt8m8ash, wetuómut ne [à]hettamuk wutch n8wesuonk, nishketeauunat.
E.7.30 For the children of Judah have done evil in my sight, saith the LORD: they have set their abominations in the house which is called by my name, to pollute it.

α.7.31 Kah nag ayimwog qunuhqui ayeuongash ut Tophet, ne ohtag wut8n8ohkôiyeumut wunnaumonuh Hinnom, chikoswónat wunnaumonáuh kah wuttaun8uh n8taut, ne matta anann8nog, asuh peyaumun8 nuttahhut.
E.7.31 And they have built the high places of Tophet, which is in the valley of the son of Hinnom, to burn their sons and their daughters in the fire; which I commanded them not, neither came it into my heart.

α.7.32 Newutche kusseh, kesukodtash peyaum8, wussin Lord, matta pish wonk hettam8unat Tophet, asuh wut8n8uhkoiyeum wunnaumonuh Hinnom, qut sheteae 8nóuhkôi, newutche nag pish posekinóog ut Tophet, nô pajeh mat momishkán8g.
E.7.32 Therefore, behold, the days come, saith the LORD, that it shall no more be called Tophet, nor the valley of the son of Hinnom, but the valley of slaughter: for they shall bury in Tophet, till there be no place.

α.7.33 Kah wuhhogkauh yeug missinninnúog piṣh ne ummechuongan8 kesukque puppinsháog, kah wutche ohkee puppinashimwog, kah matta pish howan wutáma8hkauoh.
E.7.33 And the carcases of this people shall be meat for the fowls of the heaven, and for the beasts of the earth; and none shall fray them away.

α.7.34 Neit nutchéqunapéhteoh wutch Judae keitotanaṣh, kah Jerusaleme taumáogquehtu, weekontamwe wadtauaonkqussuonk, wussentomwaen 8wadtauatonkqussuonk, kah weetauwadteáen 8wadtauatonkqussuonk: newutche ohke piṣh tauwushin.
E.7.34 Then will I cause to cease from the cities of Judah, and from the streets of Jerusalem, the voice of mirth, and the voice of gladness, the voice of the bridegroom, and the voice of the bride: for the land shall be desolate.

α.8.1 NA ahquompag, wussin Jehovah, nag pish sohh8wuttauog wuskonash Judae ketass8tamwog kah wuskonoash wussontimom8oh, kah wuskon8ash sephausuenuog, kah wuskon8aṣh quoshodtumwaenuog, kah wuskon8aṣh wadohkitcheg JErusalem, wutch 8weenohkéenóut.
E.8.1 At that time, saith the LORD, they shall bring out the bones of the kings of Judah, and the bones of his princes, and the bones of the priests, and the bones of the prophets, and the bones of the inhabitants of Jerusalem, out of their graves:

α.8.2 Kah nag pish wussephamunáoaṣh anaquoshik nep[á]uz, kah nanepaoushadt, kah wame kesukque kenauwameonk neh womonáhetticheh, kah neh wadtinninneumuhkauwáhetticheh, kah neh asuhkauáhetticheh, kah neh natinneawáhettiche, kah neh wâsumáhetticheh: niṣh matta piṣh mukkinum8unaṣh, asuh posekinum8unaṣh, niṣh piṣh annohkeyeu8aṣh ut wosket ohkit.
E.8.2 And they shall spread them before the sun, and the moon, and all the host of heaven, whom they have loved, and whom they have served, and after whom they have walked, and whom they have sought, and whom they have worshipped: they shall not be gathered, nor be buried; they shall be for dung upon the face of the earth.

α.8.3 Kah nupp8onk piṣh pepenauau ánue onk ne pomantamóonk, nashpe neg wame seqshoncheg yeu ut matcheteatashiyeuonganit, neg ashqushoncheg ut wame ayeuonganehtu uttoh ann8kauog, wussin Jehovah ayeuteaunit.
E.8.3 And death shall be chosen rather than life by all the residue of them that remain of this evil family, which remain in all the places whither I have driven them, saith the LORD of hosts.

α.8.4 Nano piṣh kuttinnóog, yeu wussin Jehovah, sun nag woh penushaog, kah matta omohkéog? sun woh amaeu, kah matta qushkeu?
E.8.4 Moreover thou shalt say unto them, Thus saith the LORD; Shall they fall, and not arise? shall he turn away, and not return?

α.8.5 Tohwaj yeug Jerusaleme missinninnúog assôep8shettit, nashpe machemohtag assôep8suonk? menuhkenumwog as8kek[ó]dteam8onk, sekeneamwog qushkenat.
E.8.5 Why then is this people of Jerusalem slidden back by a perpetual backsliding? they hold fast deceit, they refuse to return.

α.8.6 Nukkeiketamup, kah n8tamup, qut nag matta sampwe n8wa8wog, wanne howan aiuskoiantam8 ummatcheseonk, anowadt, toh nutussen? nishnoh pasuk en quinnuppu ummayut, neane horse quogqueit en ayeuuhkonat.
E.8.6 I hearkened and heard, but they spake not aright: no man repented him of his wickedness, saying, What have I done? every one turned to his course, as the horse rusheth into the battle.

α.8.7 Nux kesukque Stork wahteau kuhquttume wutútt8cheiyeum, kah wuskuhwhunan, kah ta[nu]ag, kah maméshashques kuhkinneasuog, ne woh utt8che peyahettit: qut nummissinninnḿog matta wahteau8og 8sittum8onk Jehovah.
E.8.7 Yea, the stork in the heaven knoweth her appointed times; and the turtle and the crane and the swallow observe the time of their coming; but my people know not the judgment of the LORD.

α.8.8 Uttoh kittin n8wónean n8waantamumun, kah wuttinnaumatuonk Jehovah n8wetomukqun? kusseh, wunnamuhkut tahn8che wutáyimun, uppennum8uh Scribsog tahn8cheyeu8.
E.8.8 How do ye say, We are wise, and the law of the LORD is with us? Lo, certainly in vain made he it; the pen of the scribes is in vain.

α.8.9 Waantamwog akodchuog, chepshaog kah tohqun[ó]og, kusseh, nag pogketamwog wuttinn8w[á]onk Jehovah, kah teagwe waantamóonk apehtunkqhettit?
E.8.9 The wise men are ashamed, they are dismayed and taken: lo, they have rejected the word of the LORD; and what wisdom is in them?

α.8.10 Newaj mag8 ummittamwuss8uh en onkatoganit, kah wutohteuhkón8ash en nag woh ohtunkeg: newutche nishnoh pasuk wutch peississit pajeh masugkenuk n8swuhkom hohchewontamoonk, wutch quoshodtumwáenuut pajeh sephausuwáenuut, niṣh$noh pasuk pann8wae usseu.
E.8.10 Therefore will I give their wives unto others, and their fields to them that shall inherit them: for every one from the least even unto the greatest is given to covetousness, from the prophet even unto the priest every one dealeth falsely.

α.8.11 Newutche nag meshanne neetsketuog woskeheaongan8 wuttaun8oh nummissinninnúmog, n8waog, wunohteagk wunohteagk, matta wunohteaonganin8g.
E.8.11 For they have healed the hurt of the daughter of my people slightly, saying, Peace, peace; when there is no peace.

α.8.12 Sun nag akodchuog nishkeneunkquok ussehettit? matchag, wanneh mo akodchuog kah matta pen8quosho8og, newaj piṣh penusháhettit kenugke neg panushoncheg, ne adt8che nadtauwáhet piṣh penuhkonog wussin Jehovah.
E.8.12 Were they ashamed when they had committed abomination? nay, they were not at all ashamed, neither could they blush: therefore shall they fall among them that fall: in the time of their visitation they shall be cast down, saith the LORD.

α.8.13 Wunnamuhkut nag piṣh nummahtupanóog wussin Jehovah, matta piṣh weenomininno wenómwussippog, asuh figsash ut figsuhtugqut, kah wunnepog piṣh uhp8teau: kah piṣh áninnumauogish, piṣh uppaumukongqunáoash.
E.8.13 I will surely consume them, saith the LORD: there shall be no grapes on the vine, nor figs on the fig tree, and the leaf shall fade; and the things that I have given them shall pass away from them.

α.8.14 Tohwutch chequnappeog? miyáek, kah petutteadtuh pummenútausue keitotanahtu, kah naut chequnapitteuh, newutche Jehovah num-Manitt8mun, kutchequnaphikqun, kah k8tattamwáhikqun weeswee[e]pog, newutche nummatcheneheomun Jehovah.
E.8.14 Why do we sit still? assemble yourselves, and let us enter into the defenced cities, and let us be silent there: for the LORD our God hath put us to silence, and given us water of gall to drink, because we have sinned against the LORD.

α.8.15 Nukkenompadtamumun wunohteaonk, qut matta wunnegininn8, kah wunnáyeue aquompi kah kusseh wuttamehpunáonk.
E.8.15 We looked for peace, but no good came; and for a time of health, and behold trouble!

α.8.16 Chequttumhettit horsesog mo wuttissittauog Dan: mamusse ohke nunnuksinea[u] wadauatonkqussue nehnehteanit ummenuhkeseumoh, newutche peyaog, k[à]h mahchep8og ohke, kah wame ne noh ohtag, keitotan kah wame neg nag wadohkitcheg.
E.8.16 The snorting of his horses was heard from Dan: the whole land trembled at the sound of the neighing of his strong ones; for they are come, and have devoured the land, and all that is in it; the city, and those that dwell therein.

α.8.17 Newutche kusseh nutann8n ask8kog kah kokatricesog ut kenugke kenaau, neg woh mat monehtauwooncheg, kah neg piṣh kussogkepak8óog, n8wau Lord.
E.8.17 For, behold, I will send serpents, cockatrices, among you, which will not be charmed, and they shall bite you, saith the LORD.

α.8.18 Ayeukonittue tapene[á]uwontamun ohquanumoonk, nuttah nupp8m8 ut nuttinnómiyeumut.
E.8.18 When I would comfort myself against sorrow, my heart is faint in me.

α.8.19 Kusseh 8wadtauatonkqussuongane mauongan8 wuttaun8oh nummissinninnúmog, newutche neg wadohkitcheg nôadtut wutohtimóneat: sunnummatta Jehovah appu Zion? sunnummatta ukkehtass8tamomoh apehtunk8? tohwutch nag m8m8squehettit nashpe wuttinnukontunkanouh, kah nashpe penowe tahn8cheyeugish [j]
E.8.19 Behold the voice of the cry of the daughter of my people because of them that dwell in a far country: Is not the LORD in Zion? is not her king in her? Why have they provoked me to anger with their graven images, and with strange vanities?

α.8.20 Kepenum8onk pámsheau, nepun wohkukquoshin, kah matta n8wadchanitteamun.
E.8.20 The harvest is past, the summer is ended, and we are not saved.

α.8.21 Newutche woskeheaongan8 wuttaun8oh nummissinninnúmog, n8woskhit numm8es: chepshaonk nuttohqunuk.
E.8.21 For the hurt of the daughter of my people am I hurt; I am black; astonishment hath taken hold on me.

α.8.22 Sunn$na$matta balmun8 ut Gilead? sun$na$mat ponaskétuwosuenúun8? tohwaj mat uppomantam8ongan8 wuttaun8oh nummissinninnúmog, mat keteohtaómun.
E.8.22 Is there no balm in Gilead; is there no physician there? why then is not the health of the daughter of my people recovered?

α.9.1 WOi napehnont nuppuhkuk nippeyeu88, kah nissuppegwe tohkekommú8k nuskesukquash: onk woh nummau kesukodae kah nukkonae, wutche nashoncheg wuttaun8oh nummissinninnúmog.
E.9.1 Oh that my head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night for the slain of the daughter of my people!

α.9.2 Napehnont ohtau ut touohkomuk, pomushaenuog ukkoueongan8, onk woh nunnukon nummissinninnúmog, & woh nutámaéhtauóog: newutche nag wame mamussuwaenuog, ummóeongan8 wanass8muwácheg.
E.9.2 Oh that I had in the wilderness a lodging place of wayfaring men; that I might leave my people, and go from them! for they be all adulterers, an assembly of treacherous men.

α.9.3 Kah nag ogque wutunkkinnumw8weenanú8 ohtompe, pann8wonat: qut nag matta wutt8wehtamóog wutch wánamuhkutéyeuuk ut ohkeit: newutche ohhontseog w[u]tch machuk en machukut, kah matta n8wáhik8og wussin Jehovah.
E.9.3 And they bend their tongues like their bow for lies: but they are not valiant for the truth upon the earth; for they proceed from evil to evil, and they know not me, saith the LORD.

α.9.4 Nunnukqussek wutch nishnoh wosketomp weetatteamungoh, kah pabuhtánumúhteok howae weemattin: newutche nishnoh 8weemattin 8wománumoh, kah nishnoh weetatteamunganin, kekómuwae pomusheau.
E.9.4 Take ye heed every one of his neighbour, and trust ye not in any brother: for every brother will utterly supplant, and every neighbour will walk with slanders.

α.9.5 Kah nag as8kekomáog nishnoh weetatteamungan8oh, kah matta eyeu wunnamuhkutéyeuuk, kuhk8t[u]mwontamwog weenannú pann8wonat, kah sauwunnaog wuhhogkauh matchesenat.
E.9.5 And they will deceive every one his neighbour, and will not speak the truth: they have taught their tongue to speak lies, and weary themselves to commit iniquity.

α.9.6 K8tohtuonk ohteau nôeu as8kekodteam8onk, nashpe as8ke[k]odteam8onk sekeneamwog n8wahikqunnaóont wussin Jehovah,
E.9.6 Thine habitation is in the midst of deceit; through deceit they refuse to know me, saith the LORD.

α.9.7 Newájeh yeu n8wadt Lord ayeuteaunit, kusseh, nag nummáhtuppaswóog, kah nukqutchheaog: newutche toh woh nuttinneh wuttaun8oh nummissinninnúmog.
E.9.7 Therefore thus saith the LORD of hosts, Behold, I will melt them, and try them; for how shall I do for the daughter of my people?

α.9.8 Weenan8 onatuh kôuhquodt pámemuk, as8kekodteám8eyeum8: how[a]n wunohteae ken8nau weetatteamungoh ut wutt8nut, qut wuttahhut wutaskwhónuh.
E.9.8 Their tongue is as an arrow shot out; it speaketh deceit: one speaketh peaceably to his neighbour with his mouth, but in heart he layeth his wait.

α.9.9 Sunnummatta woh yeush n8ch natauwahuwáunash, wussin Jehovah? sun matta woh nukketeahogou an8tantàm8 yeu ânag wutohtimóin?
E.9.9 Shall I not visit them for these things? saith the LORD: shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation as this?

α.9.10 Wutche wadchuash nunnemunum mauonk kah maumuttam8onk, kah wutch touohkomukque ayeuonk maumuttam8onk, newutche nag mahchukkissuog, ne waj matta howan nah paumukáuonk, kah woh mo wosketompaog n8tam8og 8wadtauatonkqussuongan8 neetassuog, naneeswe kesukque puppinshasog, kah puppinashimwog, wussem8og kah monchasháog.
E.9.10 For the mountains will I take up a weeping and wailing, and for the habitations of the wilderness a lamentation, because they are burned up, so that none can pass through them; neither can men hear the voice of the cattle; both the fowl of the heavens and the beast are fled; they are gone.

α.9.11 Kah nunnanomwonkquadtoh Jerusalem, kah dragonsog wek8, kah nuttauushitteoh Judae keitotanash, matta wutohkeinat.
E.9.11 And I will make Jerusalem heaps, and a den of dragons; and I will make the cities of Judah desolate, without an inhabitant.

α.9.12 Howan noh waantog yeu woh wohtog, kah howan noh wutt8n Jehovah kôn8nukqut, onk woh 8wahteauwáhuwon tohwaj ohke mahchum8g; kah ogque mahtutteau touohkomuk, matta howan ukqushkodteáunat?
E.9.12 Who is the wise man, that may understand this? and who is he to whom the mouth of the LORD hath spoken, that he may declare it, for what the land perisheth and is burned up like a wilderness, that none passeth through?

α.9.13 Kah Jehovah n8wau, newutche ohquanumaog nuttinnaum[á]tuonk, ne ponamon anaquabhettit, kah matta n8sweetamóog n8wadtauatonkqussuonk, kah matta ne pomusháuneau.
E.9.13 And the LORD saith, Because they have forsaken my law which I set before them, and have not obeyed my voice, neither walked therein;

α.9.14 Qut nag asuhkomwog nehenwonche metahh8wae uppehtuánum8ongan8; kah Baalim, ne 8sh8oh kuhk8tomungqhetteup.
E.9.14 But have walked after the imagination of their own heart, and after Baalim, which their fathers taught them:

α.9.15 Newutche yeu wussin Jehovah ayeuteaunit um-Manitt8moh Israel, kusseh, nag nussohkom8unoog, yeug missinninnúog wormw8d, kah n8tattamweheoog weeswe.
E.9.15 Therefore thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel; Behold, I will feed them, even this people, with wormwood, and give them water of gall to drink.

α.9.16 Nusseahwhóog wonk kenugke pen8wotheáut, nag asuh 8sh8oh matta waheáhettegeh: kah nutas[ù]hkaue n8sukqunôog togkodteg, nô pajeh nummohtupp[á]nonaóont.
E.9.16 I will scatter them also among the heathen, whom neither they nor their fathers have known: and I will send a sword after them, till I have consumed them.

α.9.17 Yeu wussin Lord ayéuteaunit, natwontam8k, kah wehkomok maumuttamwe mittamwossissog, onk woh nag peyaog kah wehkom nohtôe maumuttogig, onk woh peyaog.
E.9.17 Thus saith the LORD of hosts, Consider ye, and call for the mourning women, that they may come; and send for cunning women, that they may come:

α.9.18 Kah kenupshahettich, kah maumuttamwanshikqutteuh, onk woh kuss8ksuppégwoshómun, kah woh sohwutchúan nippe wutch kuskesukqunónut.
E.9.18 And let them make haste, and take up a wailing for us, that our eyes may run down with tears, and our eyelids gush out with waters.

α.9.19 Newutche wuttauatonkqussue maumuttam8onk wutch n8tamun Zion, uttoh kittin matchehetteanan? nummishe chepshómun, newutche nu[n]nukkodtumumun ohke, newuthe nutayeuonganunonash nuppogkenukumun.
E.9.19 For a voice of wailing is heard out of Zion, How are we spoiled! we are greatly confounded, because we have forsaken the land, because our dwellings have cast us out.

α.9.20 Qut onch n8tam8k wuttinn8waonk Lord, woi kenaau mittamwossissog, kah kuhtauog88ash attumunumhettich wutt8ne wuttinn8waonk, kah kuhk8tamok kuttaun8wóog maumuttamun, kah nishnoh pasuk weetatteamungoh, maumuttam8onk.
E.9.20 Yet hear the word of the LORD, O ye women, and let your ear receive the word of his mouth, and teach your daughters wailing, and every one her neighbour lamentation.

α.9.21 Newutche nupp8onk pajeh kuhkúhqueu nukkenogkunnégunó[u]t, kah petutteom8 nummishekomukqunónut, tummehtahwhonát mukkiog wutch poquadchit, kah wuskenúog toumáogquehtu.
E.9.21 For death is come up into our windows, and is entered into our palaces, to cut off the children from without, and the young men from the streets.

α.9.22 Ket8kash, yeu wussin Lord, nupp8e wuhhogkáuh wosketompaog piṣh ogque penushaog an[n]óhkeit m8sohteuhkónit, kah ogque wunnukquttinutchánit kepenumwain, kah matta pish howan ummukkinum8unash.
E.9.22 Speak, Thus saith the LORD, Even the carcases of men shall fall as dung upon the open field, and as the handful after the harvestman, and none shall gather them.

α.9.23 Yeu wussin Lord, waantamwaen ahque woweenoaj ut 8waantam8onganit, kah menuhkesuen, ahque woweenóaj ut ummenuhkesuonganit, weenauwetuen woweenoáhkitch ut 8weenauaweetuonganit.
E.9.23 Thus saith the LORD, Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, neither let the mighty man glory in his might, let not the rich man glory in his riches:

α.9.24 Qut noh waeenoadt, yeu$ut waeenoaj, noh n8wohwohtunk, kah n8wahik, nen Jehovah[ú]8, asee womoausuonk, wussittumoonk kah sampweusseonk ut ohkeit, newutche yeush nuttapeneaumunash wussin Jehovah.
E.9.24 But let him that glorieth glory in this, that he understandeth and knoweth me, that I am the LORD which exercise lovingkindness, judgment, and righteousness, in the earth: for in these things I delight, saith the LORD.

α.9.25 Kusseh, kesukodtash peyom8ásh, n8wau Jehovah, nussasámatahwhônaóont wame neg quosqusaúsitcheg, kenugke matta quosqussausegig.
E.9.25 Behold, the days come, saith the LORD, that I will punish all them which are circumcised with the uncircumcised;

α.9.26 Egypt, kah Judah, kah Edom, kah wunneechanoh Ammon, [h]ah Moab, kah wame neg aongkoue apitcheg, neg ayitcheg touohkomuk: newutche wame yeush wutohtimoneaṣh matta quosqushôsin8aṣh, kah wame wek Israel matta quosqushausuwutteahou8og.
E.9.26 Egypt, and Judah, and Edom, and the children of Ammon, and Moab, and all that are in the utmost corners, that dwell in the wilderness: for all these nations are uncircumcised, and all the house of Israel are uncircumcised in the heart.

α.10.1 NOOtam8k kutt8onk ne Jehovah ánukqueog, woi wek Israel.
E.10.1 Hear ye the word which the LORD speaketh unto you, O house of Israel:

α.10.2 Yeu wussin Jehovah, nehtuhtam8hteogk ummayou penuohteaog: kah chepshontam8hteogk kesukque kuhkinneasuongaṣh, newutche pen8wohteáog niṣh wutchepshontamunnáoaṣh.
E.10.2 Thus saith the LORD, Learn not the way of the heathen, and be not dismayed at the signs of heaven; for the heathen are dismayed at them.

α.10.3 Newutche wuttinniyeuongan8oaṣh tahn8cheyeu8aṣh: newutche pasuk tummehtam mehtug wutch touohkomuk, (wunnutchegane anakausuonk anakausuwaen) nashpe togkunk.
E.10.3 For the customs of the people are vain: for one cutteth a tree out of the forest, the work of the hands of the workman, with the axe.

α.10.4 Nag wunnohh8suog nashpe silver kah gold, kah ummenuhketunaoaṣh nashpe kenunkwhongaṣh, kah hammersaṣh woh mo ontohtáun8ut.
E.10.4 They deck it with silver and with gold; they fasten it with nails and with hammers, that it move not.

α.10.5 Ogque samp8kompauog palmuhtugqut, qut matta ket8kau8og: neg woh kenunóog, newutche matta pomushauóog: qushûhteógk, newutche mo woskéhuwówog, asuh woh mo 8nénehuóog
E.10.5 They are upright as the palm tree, but speak not: they must needs be borne, because they cannot go. Be not afraid of them; for they cannot do evil, neither also is it in them to do good.

α.10.6 Newutche matta howan ku[ttin]unkou woi Jehovah, kummissugken, kah k8wesuonk mishe menuhki.
E.10.6 Forasmuch as there is none like unto thee, O LORD; thou art great, and thy name is great in might.

α.10.7 Howan woh mat quoshuk8an woi wutohtimóune ketass8t? newutche wutchayeum8 kuhhogkat: newutche ut kenugke wame wutohtimóune waantamwog, kah ut wame wutass8tam8ongan8out, wanne howan kuttinnunk8.
E.10.7 Who would not fear thee, O King of nations? for to thee doth it appertain: forasmuch as among all the wise men of the nations, and in all their kingdoms, there is none like unto thee.

α.10.8 Qut papannuppe puppinashumóog kah as8tuog: nunneukontunk tahn8cheeyeu kuhk8tomwehteaonk.
E.10.8 But they are altogether brutish and foolish: the stock is a doctrine of vanities.

α.10.9 Sepagenumwe silvere kodchuhkiyeuaṣh wutaaunaṣh Tarshish, kah gold wutch Uphaz, wutanakausuonk anakausuwaen kah sabasumwaenin wunnutcheg: 8nôagk kah purple wuthogk8un8oaṣh, niṣh wame wutanakausuongan8 nehtoe anausuenúog,
E.10.9 Silver spread into plates is brought from Tarshish, and gold from Uphaz, the work of the workman, and of the hands of the founder: blue and purple is their clothing: they are all the work of cunning men.

α.10.10 Qut Jehovah wunnamuhkutée Manitt88, noh pomantamwae God, kah machemapit ketass8t[:] musquantog, ohke piṣh nunnksheau, kah wutohtimoneaṣh matta piṣh tapenumóog appuwontamun ummishe musquantam8onk.
E.10.10 But the LORD is the true God, he is the living God, and an everlasting king: at his wrath the earth shall tremble, and the nations shall not be able to abide his indignation.

α.10.11 Yeu woh nag kuttinoneau, manittoog neg matta kesteo8gig kesukquaṣh kah ohke, neg piṣh pagwanuog wutche ohkeit, kah wutch agwe yeush kesukquaṣh.
E.10.11 Thus shall ye say unto them, The gods that have not made the heavens and the earth, even they shall perish from the earth, and from under these heavens.

α.10.12 Noh nashpe ayikup ohke ummenuhkesuonk, noh menuhketeau muttaok mashpe 8waantam8onk, kah sepágenumup kesukquaṣh nashpe 8waantam8onk.
E.10.12 He hath made the earth by his power, he hath established the world by his wisdom, and hath stretched out the heavens by his discretion.

α.10.13 Máhshant8adt, muttáununkquodt nippeaṣh ut kesukqut, k[á]h waabeteau óuwan ushpem8ut, wutch weekqshik ohke: ukkutshamwunéhteau nashpe sokanon, kah sohh8wunau waban8h wutche wunnompak8une komukqut.
E.10.13 When he uttereth his voice, there is a multitude of waters in the heavens, and he causeth the vapours to ascend from the ends of the earth; he maketh lightnings with rain, and bringeth forth the wind out of his treasures.

α.10.14 Nishnog wosketomp puppinashim88 ut 8wahteauonganit: nishnoh sôbassumwaénin chepshau nashpe nukkeukontunk: newutche wussabassumwe nunneukontunkoh pann8waeyeu8, kah matta wunnashaonganéoh.
E.10.14 Every man is brutish in his knowledge: every founder is confounded by the graven image: for his molten image is falsehood, and there is no breath in them.

α.10.15 Nag tahn8cheyeu8og, kah panneusseae anakausuongaṣh, nadtauwahit pish matcheheóog.
E.10.15 They are vanity, and the work of errors: in the time of their visitation they shall perish.

α.10.16 Wutchippiyeum Jakob matta nah tatuppéin8: newutche noh kakenauwehteunk wame teanteoqussiniṣh, kah Israel wutohtauongane souobpunk, Jehovah ayeuteanit ne 8wesuonk.
E.10.16 The portion of Jacob is not like them: for he is the former of all things; and Israel is the rod of his inheritance: The LORD of hosts is his name.

α.10.17 Miy[á]numók maumachiaṣh wutch ohkeit, woi wadohkéan wonkon8sinit.
E.10.17 Gather up thy wares out of the land, O inhabitant of the fortress.

α.10.18 Newutche yéu wussin Jehovah, kusseh, nuss8wompagunuh pasukqut wadohkitcheg ohkeit, k[á]h nukquequenauánumwahheóog, onk woh ne wuttinne nemehtinneau.
E.10.18 For thus saith the LORD, Behold, I will sling out the inhabitants of the land at this once, and will distress them, that they may find it so.

α.10.19 Missi nutonkapunáonk wutche n8woskkitteáonk, nunn8chumwetáhwhutteaonk uhqueneunkquodt, qut nussip, wunnamuhkut yeu onkquanumóonk, kah m8che mos nummuk8ammattamun.
E.10.19 Woe is me for my hurt! my wound is grievous; but I said, Truly this is a grief, and I must bear it.

α.10.20 Neek matchehteauun, kah nuppémuneóhtanaṣh wame poskisháaṣh: nummukkiesumog nussohwehtunkquog, kah nag matta appeog, kah matta wonk howan nussépagunumunk8 nek, kah n8nohtunkoh nutunkwheganuh.
E.10.20 My tabernacle is spoiled, and all my cords are broken: my children are gone forth of me, and they are not: there is none to stretch forth my tent any more, and to set up my curtains.

α.10.21 Newutche Pastorsog puppinashimweyeu8og, kah natinnewho8og Jehovah: ne$waj matta piṣh wunnihettit, kah wame uf-flockum piṣh seáhwhóog.
E.10.21 For the pastors are become brutish, and have not sought the LORD: therefore they shall not prosper, and all their flocks shall be scattered.

α.10.22 Kusseh, aunchem8kae wadtauatonkqussuonk peyom8, kah mishe wogkouéonk wutch nanumohkit, touushinnúwáhtinat Judae keitotanaṣh, kah dragonnekommukquaṣh.
E.10.22 Behold, the noise of the bruit is come, and a great commotion out of the north country, to make the cities of Judah desolate, and a den of dragons.

α.10.23 Woi Lord, n8wahteoh ummay wosketomp matta wunnehenwoncheiyeum: mat ohtano wosketompaut, noh paumushadt, sampwutteauunat wuttaunehtuongash.
E.10.23 O LORD, I know that the way of man is not in himself: it is not in man that walketh to direct his steps.

α.10.24 Woi Jehovah, sasamatahwheh, qut nashpe wussittumóonk, matta ut kummusquanittam8onganit, ishkont mat toh kuttintuppehu.
E.10.24 O LORD, correct me, but with judgment; not in thine anger, lest thou bring me to nothing.

α.10.25 Sokenumau kummusquanitteaonk pen8wohteaut neg matta wahikk8uneg, kah wutteateashiyeuongan8wóut neg matta wehquetum8gig k8wesuonk, newutche mahchipp8og Jakoboh, kah umm8hwhóuh, kah ummahtupanóuh, kah tauushit[t]eauwahtoog wutayeuonk.
E.10.25 Pour out thy fury upon the heathen that know thee not, and upon the families that call not on thy name: for they have eaten up Jacob, and devoured him, and consumed him, and have made his habitation desolate.

α.11.1 WUttinn8waonk ne pauhônukqut Jeremiah wutch Jehovahut, n8wau,
E.11.1 The word that came to Jeremiah from the LORD saying,

α.11.2 N8tam8k yeush wunn8wae kutt8wongash, kah ken8nok Judae wosketompaog, kah wadohkitcheg Jerusalem
E.11.2 Hear ye the words of this covenant, and speak unto the men of Judah, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem;

α.11.3 Kah nag us, yeu wussin Lord Jehovah ut Israel, matánumunach noh matta n8sweetam8g yeush wunn8wae kutt8wongash.
E.11.3 And say thou unto them, Thus saith the LORD God of Israel; Cursed be the man that obeyeth not the words of this covenant,

α.11.4 Nish ann8nokkupash k8sh8wóog, ne kesukok sohh8wunog wutch Egypt, wutch missitchuogke sab[a]ssum8onganit, an8waon, n8swetam8k, n8wadtauatonkqussuonk, kah nish ussek, wame neanann8nunóg: neit pish kenaau nummissinninnúmog, kah nen piṣh kum-Manitt8m8.
E.11.4 Which I commanded your fathers in the day that I brought them forth out of the land of Egypt, from the iron furnace, saying, Obey my voice, and do them, according to all which I command you: so shall ye be my people, and I will be your God:

α.11.5 Onk woh nutussem chadchekeyeuwaonk, ne chadchekéimogkup k8sh8wóog, aninnumauónat ohke ne taumogok sogkodtunk kah hony, ne âunag yeu kesukok: neit nunnamp8hamuk kah nussip, ne n$naj woi Jehovah.
E.11.5 That I may perform the oath which I have sworn unto your fathers, to give them a land flowing with milk and honey, as it is this day. Then answered I, and said, So be it, O LORD.

α.11.6 Neit Lord nuttugkup n8tamwáhuash wame yeush kutt8wongash ut Judae keitotanehtu, kah Jerusaleme taumáogquehtu, n8wash, n8tam8k yeush wunn8wae kutt8wongash kah nish ussek.
E.11.6 Then the LORD said unto me, Proclaim all these words in the cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem, saying, Hear ye the words of this covenant, and do them.

α.11.7 Newutche nummenuhke chekeimomp k8showóog, ne kesukok sohh8wunog wutch Egypt, pajeh yeu kesukok, n$nompoae omohkeon, kah chadchekeyeuwaon, an8waon, n8swehtam8k n8wadtauatonkqussuonk.
E.11.7 For I earnestly protested unto your fathers in the day that I brought them up out of the land of Egypt, even unto this day, rising early and protesting, saying, Obey my voice.

α.11.8 Qut nag mat nosweetamóog, kah matta ahch8sittam8og, qut nishnoh pasuk pomushau ummatchetahhae wuttenantam8onganit: newaj nuhkunumauog wame yeu wunn8wae kutt8wongash, ne ánan8nog ussenat: qut nag matta wutussenáoash.
E.11.8 Yet they obeyed not, nor inclined their ear, but walked every one in the imagination of their evil heart: therefore I will bring upon them all the words of this covenant, which I commanded them to do: but they did them not.

α.11.9 Kah Lord nuttinnuk, nushehteáuss8waonk namehteauun ut kenugke Judae wosketompaog: kah kenugke wadohkitcheg Jerusalem.
E.11.9 And the LORD said unto me, A conspiracy is found among the men of Judah, and among the inhabitants of Jerusalem.

α.11.10 Nag qushkéog en ummatcheseongan8wòut negonne 8sh8uh, neg sekeneogig n8tamunat nuttinn8waongash: kah asuhkauáog onkatogek manitt8h, wowussumonat: Israelle wetu, kah Judae wetu nag pohquenumwog n8n8waonk, ne ayimauogkup 8sh8uh.
E.11.10 They are turned back to the iniquities of their forefathers, which refused to hear my words; and they went after other gods to serve them: the house of Israel and the house of Judah have broken my covenant which I made with their fathers.

α.11.11 Newaj yeu wussin Lord, kusseh, nunnuhkinnumauóog machuk, ne matta pish tapenumohetteg pohquohhamunat, kah tôhkonogque pish nummauunnitteunkqunneau, matta pish nunn8tau8og.
E.11.11 Therefore thus saith the LORD, Behold, I will bring evil upon them, which they shall not be able to escape; and though they shall cry unto me, I will not hearken unto them.

α.11.12 Neit Judae keitotanash kah wadohkitcheg Jerusalem pish moncheog, kah mauunnitteauâog manitt8oh neh anumauáhetticheh weetemungquok, qut nag matta pish papaquanne 8wadchanuk8oh, wuttaméhpun[à]hettit.
E.11.12 Then shall the cities of Judah and inhabitants of Jerusalem go, and cry unto the gods unto whom they offer incense: but they shall not save them at all in the time of their trouble.

α.11.13 Newutche ne âdtahshik kukkeitotanash ne kum-manitt8mog, woi Judah, kah ne âdtahshik Jerusaleme toumaogquash k8nahtómw8 altarash en ne akodchuwéyeu8k, altarsash ne adt chikkohsumuk weetemungquok en Baal.
E.11.13 For according to the number of thy cities were thy gods, O Judah; and according to the number of the streets of Jerusalem have ye set up altars to that shameful thing, even altars to burn incense unto Baal.

α.11.14 Newutche peantamwanshuhkon yeug missinninnuog, kah tahshinnumwanshuhkon mauonk asuh peantamoonk: newutche matta pish nunn8tauoog maunnitt[t]eaihettit wutch wuttamehpunaonk.
E.11.14 Therefore pray not thou for this people, neither lift up a cry or prayer for them: for I will not hear them in the time that they cry unto me for their trouble.

α.11.15 Noh womonog, teag wutch appit neekit, mahche manishquaâsit m8náoh? kah wunneetupanatamwe weyaus kuppaumuhkunk: matcheseanish, kummiskouantam.
E.11.15 What hath my beloved to do in mine house, seeing she hath wrought lewdness with many, and the holy flesh is passed from thee? when thou doest evil, then thou rejoicest.

α.11.16 Lord kutussowenuk askuh[u]kquame olivuhtug, wunnegen, kah wunnummeechummu: nashpe mishe wogkouee mishont8waonk wutchikkossumun, kah wuttuhqunash pohqshaash.
E.11.16 The LORD called thy name, A green olive tree, fair, and of goodly fruit: with the noise of a great tumult he hath kindled fire upon it, and the branches of it are broken.

α.11.17 Newutche Jehovah ayeuteaunit, noh ahteuhkonukquean, ayeuuhkonittue kukken8tamunk machuk wutch ummatchitt8m Israelle weetu, kah Judae weetut, ne ayeuuhkonittue aseaunshehettit wuhhogkauh, numm8m8sqhikqunnaoont, aninnumauahetticheh weetemungquok Baaloh.
E.11.17 For the LORD of hosts, that planted thee, hath pronounced evil against thee, for the evil of the house of Israel and of the house of Judah, which they have done against themselves to provoke me to anger in offering incense unto Baal.

α.11.18 Kah Jehovah n8wahteauwahikqun, kah n8wahteauun; neit kenaitussip wutusseonganóoash.
E.11.18 And the LORD hath given me knowledge of it, and I know it: then thou shewedst me their doings.

α.11.19 Qut nuttatuppeyeuup Lamb, asuh ox, noh pas8ut nushonat, kah matta n8wahteau8h ayeuuhkonittue natwontamunkquog tashipinanittuongash, n8wahettit, nehtauudtuh mehtug nashpe ummeechummuonk, kah tummehtáhwhontuh wutch wutohtuout pomontogig, onk woh 8wesuonk matta wonk mequontam8un.
E.11.19 But I was like a lamb or an ox that is brought to the slaughter; and I knew not that they had devised devices against me, saying, Let us destroy the tree with the fruit thereof, and let us cut him off from the land of the living, that his name may be no more remembered.

α.11.20 Qut woi Jehovah ayeuteaunit, ken sampweusseáe wussittuman, ken quajheadt mutt8[u]nussog, kah metah: naumwáhe nag kutann8tauwaongan8, newutche k8wahteauwáhesh nuppissaumatuonk.
E.11.20 But, O LORD of hosts, that judgest righteously, that triest the reins and the heart, let me see thy vengeance on them: for unto thee have I revealed my cause.

α.11.21 Newaj yeu n8wadt Jehovah papaume Anathothe wosketompaog, neg áchuwehteunkig kuppomantamóonk, n8wahettit, quoshodtuhkon ut 8wesuonganit Lord, onk woh mo kenupp8 nashpe nunnutcheganun.
E.11.21 Therefore thus saith the LORD of the men of Anathoth, that seek thy life, saying, Prophesy not in the name of the LORD, that thou die not by our hand:

α.11.22 Newutche yeu wussin Jehovah ayeuteaunit, kusseh, nag nussasamatahwhóog: wuskennuog piṣh nupwog nashpe togkodteganit, wunnaumonáoh kah wuttaun8oh pish nupwoh nashpe mahshagquodt:
E.11.22 Therefore thus saith the LORD of hosts, Behold, I will punish them: the young men shall die by the sword; their sons and their daughters shall die by famine:

α.11.23 Kah matta piṣh ushqushau8og, newutche nunnuhkinnumau machuk ut Anathothe wosketompaog, nadtauwáheáe ukkodtum8m8.
E.11.23 And there shall be no remnant of them: for I will bring evil upon the men of Anathoth, even the year of their visitation.

α.12.1 KUssampweusseaénu, woi Lord, keket8kauunon, qut kéket8kauwunnittei papaume k8sittum8ongaṣh: tohwaj ummay matchetou wunayeum8uk? tohwaj wame nag wanaihettit ahche wanassúm8wáe ussécheg?
E.12.1 Righteous art thou, O LORD, when I plead with thee: yet let me talk with thee of thy judgments: Wherefore doth the way of the wicked prosper?  wherefore are all they happy that deal very treacherously?

α.12.2 Nag kutohtukónunk, nux, nag 8wadchabuk8og: nag neetuog, nux meechummu8og: ken kuppas8cheyeu8 wutt8n8wóut, kah kinnau8sukom wutt8unuss8uh.
E.12.2 Thou hast planted them, yea, they have taken root: they grow, yea, they bring forth fruit: thou art near in their mouth, and far from their reins.

α.12.3 Qut ken woi Jehovah, k8waheh, kenáip, kah kukqutchteóp nuttah en kuhhogkáiyeu: ogque sohwhun sheepsut wutche nashaongan8, kah quagquashweáh wutche paguwanittue kesukod.
E.12.3 But thou, O LORD, knowest me: thou hast seen me, and tried mine heart toward thee: pull them out like sheep for the slaughter, and prepare them for the day of slaughter.

α.12.4 Toh utt8che piṣh ohke mau8m8, kah wame ohteuhkonée herbsaṣh ohp8taaṣh, wutche ummatcheseongan8 neg na wadohkitcheg? puppinashimwog mahtsúog, kah psukesuk, newutche nag n8waog matta piṣh naum8 n8wohkukquóiyeumun.
E.12.4 How long shall the land mourn, and the herbs of every field wither, for the wickedness of them that dwell therein? the beasts are consumed, and the birds; because they said, He shall not see our last end.

α.12.5 Weechepohtómussoh mohtissita[h]shoncheg, kah nag sauunukquéan, neit toh woh kittin nunnôohkônon horses? kah wunohteáe ohkeit, ne pabuhtantamun, sauwunukquean, neit uttoh woh kittinheoh tômogkok ut Jordan?
E.12.5 If thou hast run with the footmen, and they have wearied thee, then how canst thou contend with horses? and if in the land of peace, wherein thou trustedst, they wearied thee, then how wilt thou do in the swelling of Jordan?

α.12.6 Newutche kemattog, kah k8sh wek, wutass8muwae kittinhukquog; nux, wehkomáog monanutcheh kutásuhkunkqunat: wunnamptauúhkon, tôhkonogque k8wówunónukumukqunat. 
E.12.6 For even thy brethren, and the house of thy father, even they have dealt treacherously with thee; yea, they have called a multitude after thee: believe them not, though they speak fair words unto thee.

α.12.7 Nunnukkodtum nek: nunnukkodtum nutohtóonk: neh nuttah womononcheh, noh nummagun wunu[n]tchegan8wout ummatwomoh.
E.12.7 I have forsaken mine house, I have left mine heritage; I have given the dearly beloved of my soul into the hand of her enemies.

α.12.8 Nutohtóonk tatuppeyeu8 ut nuhhogkat qunnonou$ut, nutayeuuhkonittue mishont8anumunk newaj sekeneam.
E.12.8 Mine heritage is unto me as a lion in the forest; it crieth out against me: therefore have I hated it.

α.12.9 Nutohtóonk tatuppeyeu8 ut nuhhogkat chohchohkésue psuksesut, waéene psuksesog wutayeuhkonóuh: peyunk, miyaek kenaau wame ohteakône puppinashimwog nónche mahchep8k.
E.12.9 Mine heritage is unto me as a speckled bird, the birds round about are against her; come ye, assemble all the beasts of the field, come to devour.

α.12.10 Monaog pastorsog pagwadtóog n8wenominneohteuk, nag tahtaskuhkomwog nutchippiyeum agwe wusseetowóut: n8ne chippáiyeum wuttauushine touohkomukquhkóneau.
E.12.10 Many pastors have destroyed my vineyard, they have trodden my portion under foot, they have made my pleasant portion a desolate wilderness.

α.12.11 Wuttauushitteauuneau, kah tâuushik nummauunnitteunkqun, mamusse ohke tauushitteáuun, newutche matta howan upponam8un wuttahhut.
E.12.11 They have made it desolate, and being desolate it mourneth unto me; the whole land is made desolate, because no man layeth it to heart.

α.12.12 Matchehteauwaenúog nuhkuhkomwog wame qunuhqui ayeuongaṣh papashpe touohkomukqut: newutche wuttogkodteg Jehovah piṣh pagwohteom8, wutch weekqshik ohke, onk ya$en aongkoue: wanne weyaus piṣh wunohteómun8.
E.12.12 The spoilers are come upon all high places through the wilderness: for the sword of the LORD shall devour from the one end of the land even to the other end of the land: no flesh shall have peace.

α.12.13 Ohkehteopanneg wheatash qut nag pish kepenumwog asinnekoussoh: ponaog wuhhogkauh onkquommamwunneat, matta wutchienat, kah nag pish akodchuwontamwog k8chiyeuonkan8oash newutche wutunkque musquanitteaonk J[é]hovah.
E.12.13 They have sown wheat, but shall reap thorns: they have put themselves to pain, but shall not profit: and they shall be ashamed of your revenues because of the fierce anger of the LORD.

α.12.14 Yeu wutayeuuhkonittue unnon Jehovah wamé nummatchetowé weetatteamungoh, neg masinukeg oht[ó]onk ne ohtauaheog nummissinn[n]inneumoh Israel, kusseh nag, nukkodtinoog wutch wutohkeout, kah nukkodtinum week Judah wutch nag kenugke.
E.12.14 Thus saith the LORD against all mine evil neighbours, that touch the inheritance which I have caused my people Israel to inherit; Behold, I will pluck them out of their land, and pluck out the house of Judah from among them.

α.12.15 Kah pish n$nih, mahche kodtinog, pish nukqushkem kah pish nukkitteamonteanumoog, kah wonk nuppas8 nish$noh wosktomp ut wutohtoônganit, kah nish$noh pasuk ut wutohkeit.
E.12.15 And it shall come to pass, after that I have plucked them out I will return, and have compassion on them, and will bring them again, every man to his heritage, and every man to his land.

α.12.16 Kah pish n$nih nag menuhke kodnetuhtauwehettit ummayeuoash nummissinninnumog, chadchekeyeuonat nashpe n8wesuonk (Jehovah pomantam, neane kuhk8tomauwahettit nummissinninnumoh chadchekeyeuonat nashpe Baal) neit pish weekitteaog ut nasháuwe nummissinninnumut.
E.12.16 And it shall come to pass, if they will diligently learn the ways of my people, to swear by my name, The LORD liveth; as they taught my people to swear by Baal; then shall they be built in the midst of my people.

α.12.17 Qut matta nosweetamohetteg, pish nuppapukquané kodtinnumun kah pagu[á]tauun ne wutohtimoin, wussin Jehovah.
E.12.17 But if they will not obey, I will utterly pluck up and destroy that nation, saith the LORD.

α.13.1 YEu nuttugqun Jehovah, monchish, nanashweetash womponákinne puttukquobpus, kah ponsh kussegkonóhtugqut, kah ponam8hkon nippeit,
E.13.1 Thus saith the LORD unto me, Go and get thee a linen girdle, and put it upon thy loins, and put it not in water.

α.13.2 Neit nukquagquashwe[h]tamup puttugquobpus neaunag wuttinn8waonk Jehovah, kah nupponamu[n]ah nusségonohtugqut.
E.13.2 So I got a girdle according to the word of the LORD, and put it on my loins.

α.13.3 Kah wuttinnowaonk Jehovah nahohtôeu nuppeyaónuk, n8wop,
E.13.3 And the word of the LORD came unto me the second time, saying,

α.13.4 Nemunush puttugquobpus ne quagquoshwehtamop, ne ohtag kussegonohtogqut, kah neepaush, âush Euphrates, na$ut adtahtaush ut qussukquane wónogqut.
E.13.4 Take the girdle that thou hast got, which is upon thy loins, and arise, go to Euphrates, and hide it there in a hole of the rock.

α.13.5 Neit nummonchip, kah nutadtahtauun ut kishke Euphrates, neanann8sit Jehovah.
E.13.5 So I went, and hid it by Euphrates, as the LORD commanded me.

α.13.6 Kah nnihyeup mahche m8chetikqunogkok, Lord nuttinuk, neepaush, àush Euphrates, kah na wuttinuh puttukquobpus, ne an8nop na$ut adtahtauunat[.]
E.13.6 And it came to pass after many days, that the LORD said unto me, Arise, go to Euphrates, and take the girdle from thence, which I commanded thee to hide there.

α.13.7 Neit nuttomp Euphrates, ka[g] nukkuthamun, kah n8tinum puttukquobpus ne adt adtahtauomp, kah kusseh, puttukquobpus anit, matta toh unnompâmunkquodtinn8.
E.13.7 Then I went to Euphrates, and digged, and took the girdle from the place where I had hid it: and, behold, the girdle was marred, it was profitable for nothing.

α.13.8 Neit wuttinn8wáonk Jehovah nuppeyaonuk, n8wau,
E.13.8 Then the word of the LORD came unto me, saying,

α.13.9 Yeu wussin Jehovah, yeu nuttinne matchehteauun uppehtuanumóonk Judah, kah ummishe pehtuanumóonk Jerusalem.
E.13.9 Thus saith the LORD, After this manner will I mar the pride of Judah, and the great pride of Jerusalem.

α.13.10 Yeug matcheetoe missinninnúog neg sekeneogig n8tamunat nuttinn8waongash, neg paumushácheg ut matche metahh8wae unnantam8onganit, kah ásuhkauóncheg onkatogeh manitt8h, nag wowussumonat, kah peantamauónat, nag pish tatuppeyeu8og yeu puttugquoppissinit, ne matta toh ánompâmukquodtin8g.
E.13.10 This evil people, which refuse to hear my words, which walk in the imagination of their heart, and walk after other gods, to serve them, and to worship them, shall even be as this girdle, which is good for nothing.

α.13.11 Newutche neane puttukquobpus ogquám8k wussegonóhtugqut wosketomp, ne nuttinne ogquamwehteauun nuhhogkat mamusse Israelle wek, kah mamusse Judae wek, wussin Jehovah, onk woh nag n8missinneumúneunk, kah wutch wesuonk, kah wutche waeenodtuonk, kah wutche sohsumóonk, qut nag matta n8tam8og.
E.13.11 For as the girdle cleaveth to the loins of a man, so have I caused to cleave unto me the whole house of Israel and the whole house of Judah, saith the LORD; that they might be unto me for a people, and for a name, and for a praise, and for a glory: but they would not hear.

α.13.12 Newutche pish unnádt yeu kutt8onk, yeu wussin Lord um$Manitt8moh Israel, nish$noh wisq pish numwohtauun wine, kah nag pish kuttugquog, sunnummatta nuppapannuppe wahteomun, nishnoh wisq piṣh numw[â]panau wine?
E.13.12 Therefore thou shalt speak unto them this word; Thus saith the LORD God of Israel, Every bottle shall be filled with wine: and they shall say unto thee, Do we not certainly know that every bottle shall be filled with wine?

α.13.13 Neit piṣh nag kuttinóog, yeu wussin Jehovah, kusseh, pish nunnumwohtauóog wame wadohkitcheg yeu ohkeit, kehtass8tamwog neg apitcheg ut wutappuonganit David, kah sephausuenuog, kah quoshódtumwaénuog, kah wame wadohkitcheg Jerusalem, nashpe kogkeissippam8onk.
E.13.13 Then shalt thou say unto them, Thus saith the LORD, Behold, I will fill all the inhabitants of this land, even the kings that sit upon David's throne, and the priests, and the prophets, and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, with drunkenness.

α.13.14 Kah nuppápashkuhkónunk, wut8shimóog, kah wunnaumonáuh moeu wussin Jehovah, matta nukkitteamonteanumoh, qut nag nuppaguanóog.
E.13.14 And I will dash them one against another, even the fathers and the sons together, saith the LORD: I will not pity, nor spare, nor have mercy, but destroy them.

α.13.15 N8tam8k kah kuhkeitam8k, pittuanumúhteok, newutche Jehovah wussin.
E.13.15 Hear ye, and give ear; be not proud: for the LORD hath spoken.

α.13.16 Sohsum8wáheuk Jehovah kum-Manitt8m8, asquam papohkina[n]teagkup, kah asquam kusseet8ash ta[g]shinheug pohkenae wadchuuhkontu, kah nadtauwompadtamóg wequai, ukquinnuppinnumun en nupp8onk, wutonkauontomut, ukkúhpogke po[h]kináhko[n]
E.13.16 Give glory to the LORD your God, before he cause darkness, and before your feet stumble upon the dark mountains, and, while ye look for light, he turn it into the shadow of death, and make it gross darkness.

α.13.17 Qut matta n8tam8og, nukketeahogkou pish keme mau wutche kuppehtuánum8ongan8, kah nuskesukquaṣh piṣh mauée mau8m8aṣh, kah penutchuanash nussippegwash, newutche uf-flockum Jehovah missinae monchadtauun.
E.13.17 But if ye will not hear it, my soul shall weep in secret places for your pride; and mine eye shall weep sore, and run down with tears, because the LORD's flock is carried away captive.

α.13.18 Us ketass8t, kah sonksquaut, hohpaheuk kuhhogkaoog, nummatappek, newutche k8puhkuhk88onk pish n8keem8, kutchetuhquabee sohsumoonk.
E.13.18 Say unto the king and to the queen, Humble yourselves, sit down: for your principalities shall come down, even the crown of your glory.

α.13.19 Sowaniyeue keitotanash pish kuppohhosuash kah mattá pish howan 8woshwunnum8unash, Judah pish missinnae monchanau, neg wame pish mamusse missinohko[n]unk.
E.13.19 The cities of the south shall be shut up, and none shall open them: Judah shall be carried away captive all of it, it shall be wholly carried away captive.

α.13.20 Táhshinum8k kuskesuk8oash, kah nok neg wagig nanumiyeu, uttiyeu flock ne ut anumauunumuk, ne wanégik flock?
E.13.20 Lift up your eyes, and behold them that come from the north: where is the flock that was given thee, thy beautiful flock?

α.13.21 Toh pish kussim sasamatahhukquean, (newutché nag kukkuhk8tomauoog ummummugquompainneaout k8puhkuhqunneat) sunnummatta pish onkquanum8onk kutogque tohqunnumunat mittamwossis neechadt?
E.13.21 What wilt thou say when he shall punish thee? for thou hast taught them to be captains, and as chief over thee: shall not sorrows take thee, as a woman in travail?

α.13.22 Kah n8waan ut kuttahhut, tohwutch yeush nuhkuhkiit, wutché mohsag kummatcheseonk kussissippoe hogk8onk waahsheau, kah kogquanash pôhshkohtaash.
E.13.22 And if thou say in thine heart, Wherefore come these things upon me?  For the greatness of thine iniquity are thy skirts discovered, and thy heels made bare.

α.13.23 M8adthogk8nas sun woh 8wompheuh wuttuhquab, asuh Leópard wutchohchohkesuongash? neit kenaau wonk woh k8nhukquneau, nag wutteae matcheseog.
E.13.23 Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the leopard his spots? then may ye also do good, that are accustomed to do evil.

α.13.24 Newaj ogquesewahhog sequékepenum8onganit, ne pamshunk nashpe touohkomukque waban.
E.13.24 Therefore will I scatter them as the stubble that passeth away by the wind of the wilderness.

α.13.25 Yeu kuttittanohkitteaonk, kukquthum8e chippiyeum nashpe neen, wussin Lord, newutche k8wannanumeh, kuppabuhtantam pann8waonk.
E.13.25 This is thy lot, the portion of thy measures from me, saith the LORD; because thou hast forgotten me, and trusted in falsehood.

α.13.26 Newaj naumwahuwi kussissippoe hogk8 ut woskeche kesukqut, onk woh kúkkosuonk nogquodt.
E.13.26 Therefore will I discover thy skirts upon thy face, that thy shame may appear.

α.13.27 Nunnaumup kummamussuongash, kah kukkogkeinw8dsquaongash, kah kenishkeneungque mánisquaôsuongash, kah kutuhquneunkquodt8mash, ut ohteuhkonue wádchuuhkontu: missi kutonkapunaónk woi Jerusalem, sun mátta pish kuppahkhetteoh? uttoh adt8che woh nnag?
E.13.27 I have seen thine adulteries, and thy neighings, the lewdness of thy whoredom, and thine abominations on the hills in the fields. Woe unto thee, O Jerusalem! wilt thou not be made clean? when shall it once be?

α.14.1 WUttinn8waonk Jehovah, ne pauhônukqut Jéremiah papaume mahshagquodt.
E.14.1 The word of the LORD that came to Jeremiah concerning the dearth.

α.14.2 Judah mau, kah 8squontamash mahchim8, m8esuog pajeh ohkeit, kah ummauonk Jerusalem kuhkuhquem8.
E.14.2 Judah mourneth, and the gates thereof languish; they are black unto the ground; and the cry of Jerusalem is gone up.

α.14.3 Kah ukkehtauwom8uh ann8naog uppeissesum8uh en nippekontu, nag peyaog pasahtheganehtu, kah mat namehteauoog nippe, nag qushkeog mahchayeue wishquadt nag akodchuog, kah chepshaog, kah puttogquequohh8og.
E.14.3 And their nobles have sent their little ones to the waters: they came to the pits, and found no water; they returned with their vessels empty; they were ashamed and confounded, and covered their heads.

α.14.4 Néwutche ohke passohteaem8, newutche matta sokanonunn8 óhkeit, anaskhamwaenuog akodchuog, nag onkhumwog uppuhkuk88ash.
E.14.4 Because the ground is chapt, for there was no rain in the earth, the plowmen were ashamed, they covered their heads.

α.14.5 Nux, quenegq wonk neechau ut ohteuhkonit, kah wunnukkonuh, newutche matta moskehtuun8.
E.14.5 Yea, the hind also calved in the field, and forsook it, because there was no grass.

α.14.6 Kah touohkomukque assesog neneepattag qunuhqui ayeuonganéhtu, nag assonómáog waban onatuh dragonsog: wuskesuk88ash nupp8m8aṣh newutche matta moskehtuun8
E.14.6 And the wild asses did stand in the high places, they snuffed up the wind like dragons; their eyes did fail, because there was no grass.

α.14.7 Woi Jehovah, tôhkonogque nummatcheseonganunonaṣh n8wauwaónukqunnanonaṣh, ne ussish wutche k8wesuonk: newutche nutassôéhpósuonganunonaṣh monataṣh, kummatchenéhennumun.
E.14.7 O LORD, though our iniquities testify against us, do thou it for thy name's sake: for our backslidings are many; we have sinned against thee.

α.14.8 Woi ken wutannoósuonk Israel, 8wadchanuwaénumoh wuttamehpunadt: tohwutch ya[n]éewéan penuwohteaut ut ohkeit, kah onatuh pomushaénin, noh quánupit nóquttukqunóhteat?
E.14.8 O the hope of Israel, the saviour thereof in time of trouble, why shouldest thou be as a stranger in the land, and as a wayfaring man that turneth aside to tarry for a night?

α.14.9 Tohwutch woh yanéeuwéan noh chepshont, onatuh menuhkesuen noh matta woh pohquohham8k? qut onch woi ken Jehovah nunnashómunonat kutap, kah nutuss8wénitteamun k8wesuonk, ahque nukóhsinan.
E.14.9 Why shouldest thou be as a man astonied, as a mighty man that cannot save? yet thou, O LORD, art in the midst of us, and we are called by thy name; leave us not.

α.14.10 Yeu wuttinnon Jehovah, yeúh missinninnúh, yeuh wuttinne womantamuneau nanwiyin, matta quihtittam8og wusseet8oàsh, newaj Jehovah matta tapeneáwonk, yeuyeu mehquontam nag ummatcheseongan8oaṣh, kah natawóhtou ummatcheseonganooaṣh.
E.14.10 Thus saith the LORD unto this people, Thus have they loved to wander, they have not refrained their feet, therefore the LORD doth not accept them; he will now remember their iniquity, and visit their sins.

α.14.11 Neit Jehovah nuttinuk, peantamwanshúhkon yeug missinninnuog, wutche 8niyeuongan8.
E.14.11 Then said the LORD unto me, Pray not for this people for their good.

α.14.12 Mat meetséhetteg matta nunn8tam8 ummauongan8, kah maghettit chikohtae mag8ongash kah mag8onk, matta nuttapeneauóog: qut nag nuppaguanóog nashpe togkodteg, kah nashpe mashagquod, kah nashpe pagwanúonk.
E.14.12 When they fast, I will not hear their cry; and when they offer burnt offering and an oblation, I will not accept them: but I will consume them by the sword, and by the famine, and by the pestilence.

α.14.13 Neit nussip, woi Lord Jehovah, kusseh, quoshodtumwaenuog wuttinóuh, matta pish kenaum8m8 togkodteg, kah matta pish kummishagqunneów8, qut kuttinnumauunumw8 wunnamuhkutée wunohteáonk, yeu ut ayeuonganit.
E.14.13 Then said I, Ah, Lord GOD! behold, the prophets say unto them, Ye shall not see the sword, neither shall ye have famine; but I will give you assured peace in this place.

α.14.14 Neit J[e]hovah nuttinuk, quoshodtumwaenuog pann8wae quoshodtumwog ut n8wesuonganit, matta nag nutann8nóog, kah matta nutann8konóog, kah matta nukken8noog; nag nukquoshae missohhamun8óog pann8wae monomansuonk kah mosinunkquodt, kah monteagwuninn8g, kah wuttahh8wae as8kekodteam8ongan8.
E.14.14 Then the LORD said unto me, The prophets prophesy lies in my name: I sent them not, neither have I commanded them, neither spake unto them: they prophesy unto you a false vision and divination, and a thing of nought, and the deceit of their heart.

α.14.15 Newutche yeu wussin Jehovah papaume quoshodtumwaenúog neg quoshodtukeg ut n8wesuonganit, kah matta nutann8nóog, onch nag n8waog, togkodteg kah mahshagquodt matta pish yeu o[h]tano ohkeit, nashpe togkodteg kah mahshagquodt yeug quoshodtumwaenuog piṣh paguan8og.
E.14.15 Therefore thus saith the LORD concerning the prophets that prophesy in my name, and I sent them not, yet they say, Sword and famine shall not be in this land; By sword and famine shall those prophets be consumed.

α.14.16 Kah missinninnúog neh kohk8tomauwáhetticheh, nag piṣh sohw[e]ôkonunk ut Jerusaleme toumaogquehtu newutche mahshagquodt, kah togkodteg, kah matt piṣh howan uppósekinuh, asuh um̃ittamwuss8oh, asuh wunnaumonáuh, asuh wuttaun8oh, newutche nussókanónukk[ó]ntam ummatcheseongan8oaṣh.
E.14.16 And the people to whom they prophesy shall be cast out in the streets of Jerusalem because of the famine and the sword; and they shall have none to bury them, them, their wives, nor their sons, nor their daughters: for I will pour their wickedness upon them.

α.14.17 Newutche yeu kutt8onk piṣh kuttinnóneau, nuskesukquaṣh nuhkonáe kah kesukodtae pomitchuaj nussippegwash, kah matta tahshéyeuitch: newutche peenompáe wuttaun8oh nummissinninnúmog, pokshanáog nashpe mishe pokshaonk, kah nashpe ahche unkqunneunkquodte togkodtuonk.
E.14.17 Therefore thou shalt say this word unto them; Let mine eyes run down with tears night and day, and let them not cease: for the virgin daughter of my people is broken with a great breach, with a very grievous blow.

α.14.18 Sohhaman en ohteuhkonit, neit kusseh, náhshitcheg nashpe togkodteg; petutteaon otan, neit kusseh, neg mahchinacheg nashpe mahshagquodt: nux naneeswe quoshodtumwaen, kah sephausuwaen quinnuppuhkomwog ohkeit ne matta wahteauhetteg.
E.14.18 If I go forth into the field, then behold the slain with the sword!  and if I enter into the city, then behold them that are sick with famine!  yea, both the prophet and the priest go about into a land that they know not.

α.14.19 Sun ken papaquanne kuppogken Judah? sun kukketeahogkou uhquontam Zion? tohwutch togkomeog, kah matta n8neetskehuwaenúm8mun? natauwompadtamumun wunohteaonk, kah matta wunnegeninno, kah neetskehettue ahquompi, kah kusseh wuttaméhpunáonk.
E.14.19 Hast thou utterly rejected Judah? hath thy soul lothed Zion? why hast thou smitten us, and there is no healing for us? we looked for peace, and there is no good; and for the time of healing, and behold trouble!

α.14.20 Nussamp8womun, woi Jehovah, nummatcheseonganun, kah ummatcheseongan8 n8shunónog, newutche kummatchenéhenumun.
E.14.20 We acknowledge, O LORD, our wickedness, and the iniquity of our fathers: for we have sinned against thee.

α.14.21 Ahque unkquanuminnean wutche k8wesuonk mishanontogkon kussohsumoe appuonk, mehquontaṣh: ahque pohquenumaiinnean k8n8waonganun.
E.14.21 Do not abhor us, for thy name's sake, do not disgrace the throne of thy glory: remember, break not thy covenant with us.

α.14.22 Sun howae kenugke tahwunn8cheyeum8 Gentilsog, noh woh sokanonukôsit? asuh sun woh kesukquash sokanónitteam8ash? sunnummatta ken, noh woi Lord num-manitt8mun? ne waj pahtussuónunog, newutche wame yeush ken kesteauunash.
E.14.22 Are there any among the vanities of the Gentiles that can cause rain? or can the heavens give showers? art not thou he, O LORD our God?  therefore we will wait upon thee: for thou hast made all these things.

α.15.1 NEit Lord nuttinuk, tohkônogque Moses kah Samuel wunneepauun anaquabeh, onch nuttah matta ómun8 nogque en yeug missinninnuog: nag sohwhôteash wutch anaquabeh, kah sohhamwéhettich.
E.15.1 Then said the LORD unto me, Though Moses and Samuel stood before me, yet my mind could not be toward this people: cast them out of my sight, and let them go forth.

α.15.2 Kah piṣh n$nih, nag unnukquean, uttoh nuttin sohhamunán? neit piṣh nag kuttinóog, yeu wussin Lord, neg wadchiitcheg nushittuonganit, en nuppunát: kah neg wadchiitcheg togkodteganit, en togkodteganit, kah neg wadchiitcheg mahshagquodtut en mahshagqu[ó]dtut, kah neg wadchiitcheg missinnáiinneat, en missinnáinneat.
E.15.2 And it shall come to pass, if they say unto thee, Whither shall we go forth? then thou shalt tell them, Thus saith the LORD; Such as are for death, to death; and such as are for the sword, to the sword; and such as are for the famine, to the famine; and such as are for the captivity, to the captivity.

α.15.3 Kah nukkuhquttumauóog yauwechippaiyeuash, wussin Lord, togkodteg nushittinneat kah anumwog nehnekikôsineàt, kah kesukque puppinashasog, kah ohkee puppinashimwog en mahchipwunneat kah pagwohkonat.
E.15.3 And I will appoint over them four kinds, saith the LORD: the sword to slay, and the dogs to tear, and the fowls of the heaven, and the beasts of the earth, to devour and destroy.

α.15.4 Kah ontappehéoog, en wame ohkée as8tam8onganit, newutche Manasseh wunnaumonuh Hezechiah Judae ketass8t, wutche ne ásip ut Jerusalem.
E.15.4 And I will cause them to be removed into all kingdoms of the earth, because of Manasseh the son of Hezekiah king of Judah, for that which he did in Jerusalem.

α.15.5 Newutche howan woh kódtumonteanumukquean woi Jerusalem? kah howan woh kummauunnitteauwánshik, asuh howan woh páhchadt 8wahteauunat tôh aniyean.
E.15.5 For who shall have pity upon thee, O Jerusalem? or who shall bemoan thee? or who shall go aside to ask how thou doest?

α.15.6 Kutohquanumeh wussin Lord, kutassóushám: ne$waj summagunum nuhpit ayeuuhkonittue ken, kah kenushish, nussauunum aiuskoianatamunat.
E.15.6 Thou hast forsaken me, saith the LORD, thou art gone backward: therefore will I stretch out my hand against thee, and destroy thee; I am weary with repenting.

α.15.7 Nag nuppáuanomóog nashpe pauunóntunk, ut ohkee squontaméhtu: nummukk8kinóog wunneechan8oh, nuppagwan nummissinninnúmog, newutche matta qushkéog wutch ummayeuóut.
E.15.7 And I will fan them with a fan in the gates of the land; I will bereave them of children, I will destroy my people since they return not from their ways.

α.15.8 Wussekousquóm8uh nano m8naoh en nuhhogkat onk ne ketahhanne nagunt: nunnuhkinnumauóog, ayeuuhkonittue wutókasin, wuskenuog, pohshuhqu[á]e mukk8kinnuaenúog: nukkenuppe quentamwaheon, kah wabesuonganú88k ut keitotanat.
E.15.8 Their widows are increased to me above the sand of the seas: I have brought upon them against the mother of the young men a spoiler at noonday: I have caused him to fall upon it suddenly, and terrors upon the city.

α.15.9 Noh nesausuk tahsuoh neechadt mahchimm8, nupp8, wunnuppauzs8moh wayaoh ash kesuk88k: mahche akodchu kah chepshau, kah nag ashqshoncheg nupponoog togkodteganit, anquabhettit ummatwom8oh, wussin Jehovah.
E.15.9 She that hath borne seven languisheth: she hath given up the ghost; her sun is gone down while it was yet day: she hath been ashamed and confounded: and the residue of them will I deliver to the sword before their enemies, saith the LORD.

α.15.10 Missi nutonkapunaonk, woi nokas, newutche keneekitteah penuanittue wosketomp, kah mekonteaenin ut mamusse ohkeit: matt[t]a nunnanamohkouehhuwoh ontsompadtamoonk, asah matta howan ontsompadtam8e nagoh kouhuk8, qut onch nish$noh pasuk nummatanumwe unnukquog.
E.15.10 Woe is me, my mother, that thou hast borne me a man of strife and a man of contention to the whole earth! I have neither lent on usury, nor men have lent to me on usury; yet every one of them doth curse me.

α.15.11 Lord n8wop wunnamuhkut pish k8nenanumukqutteauunun matwau matche ahquompak, kah wuttamehpunae ahquompag.
E.15.11 The LORD said, Verily it shall be well with thy remnant; verily I will cause the enemy to entreat thee well in the time of evil and in the time of affliction.

α.15.12 Sun pish missehchuog poksheau nanumiyeue missehchuog, kah menuhkequog?
E.15.12 Shall iron break the northern iron and the steel?

α.15.13 Kuttinneetuonk kah kenompakouunash, matta tahnoadtue nummag ut mukk8kinnuonganit, wutche wame kummatcheseongan8oash, en wame kussissippoiyeumut.
E.15.13 Thy substance and thy treasures will I give to the spoil without price, and that for all thy sins, even in all thy borders.

α.15.14 Kah kuppannupwushahush nashpe kummatwomog en ohkeit ne mo wahteauouan: newutche n8teau nashquneau ut nummusquanittam8onganit, ne pish chogohsukqueog.
E.15.14 And I will make thee to pass with thine enemies into a land which thou knowest not: for a fire is kindled in mine anger, which shall burn upon you.

α.15.15 Woi Jehovah k8wahteoh, mehquanumeh, kah natauwaheh, kah ann8tauwa[n]sheh waskhikqueoneg, amanehkon nashpe kussepepahtoonk: wahteaush, wutche ken nutchequnehtam auskontuonk.
E.15.15 O LORD, thou knowest: remember me, and visit me, and revenge me of my persecutors; take me not away in thy longsuffering: know that for thy sake I have suffered rebuke.

α.15.16 Kukutt8wongash namehteauunash, kah nash nummeech[in]apash, kah kukkutt8onk kah nummoskouantamwahik n8weekontamwutteah[a]hik: newutche nuttissowes k8wesuonk, woi Jehovah um-Manitt8m8uh ayeuhteaog.
E.15.16 Thy words were found, and I did eat them; and thy word was unto me the joy and rejoicing of mine heart: for I am called by thy name, O LORD God of hosts.

α.15.17 Matta nutappeup ummoeongan8ont momontohsuenuog: kah matta n8weekontam8p: nunnussappip newutche kenutcheg: newutche kenumwohtoh jishontamoonk.
E.15.17 I sat not in the assembly of the mockers, nor rejoiced; I sat alone because of thy hand: for thou hast filled me with indignation.

α.15.18 Tohwutch nagwutteohtag nutonkquomom8onk? kah nunn8chumweteawutteaonk matta neetskehteauouun sekeneam8m8 neetkehteauunat? sun pish pannuppe kutogquanumeh pann8waenuut, ut nunohtae nippeut.
E.15.18 Why is my pain perpetual, and my wound incurable, which refuseth to be healed? wilt thou be altogether unto me as a liar, and as waters that fail?

α.15.19 Newutche yeu n8wau Jehovah, qushkean, neit pish wonk kuppas8ush, kah pish keneepau anaquabeh kah amaunuman mahshoadtitcheg wutch kenugke nishkeneunkqussitcheg, pish kuttatuppeyeu nutt8nut: nag qushkehettich en kuhhogkaiyeu, qut n[á] en qushkehkon.
E.15.19 Therefore thus saith the LORD, If thou return, then will I bring thee again, and thou shalt stand before me: and if thou take forth the precious from the vile, thou shalt be as my mouth: let them return unto thee; but return not thou unto them.

α.15.20 Kah kutayeuush pummenutohsue brasse wonkonous en yeug missinninnuog, kah nag pish kutayeuuhkonukquog, qut nag pish matta kussohkunk8og: newutche nen k8weetomsh k8wadchanukqunat, kah kuppohquohwhunukqunat, wussin Jehovah.
E.15.20 And I will make thee unto this people a fenced brasen wall: and they shall fight against thee, but they shall not prevail against thee: for I am with thee to save thee and to deliver thee, saith the LORD.

α.15.21 Kah kuppohquohwhunush wutch wunnutcheganit matcheetou, kah kummanouwhush wutch wunnutcheganit unkqueneunkqussit.
E.15.21 And I will deliver thee out of the hand of the wicked, and I will redeem thee out of the hand of the terrible.

α.16.1 WOnk wuttinn8waonk Jehovah nuppeyaonuk n8wau,
E.16.1 The word of the LORD came also unto me, saying,

α.16.2 Matta pish k8mittamwussissu, kah matta pish k8naumoniyeu asuh k8tauniyeu, yeu ut ayeuonganit.
E.16.2 Thou shalt not take thee a wife, neither shalt thou have sons or daughters in this place.

α.16.3 Newutche yeu wussin Jehovah, papaume wunnaumoniinneunk, kah papaume wuttauneunk neg nekitcheg yeu ut ayeuonganit kah papaume okas8oh neh neekhukqhetticheh, kah papaume wut8shineunk waneechânukkônukquehetticheh yeu ut ohkeit.
E.16.3 For thus saith the LORD concerning the sons and concerning the daughters that are born in this place, and concerning their mothers that bare them, and concerning their fathers that begat them in this land;

α.16.4 Nag pish onkquommom8e nupwog, nag matta pish mauemóog, asuh matta pish posekinóog: qut nag pish tatuppeyeu8og anóhke ut woskeche ohkeit, kah nag pish mahchim8og nashpe togkodteg, kah nashpe mahshagquodt, kah wuhhogkauh ummeetsuongan8 kesukque puppinshaog, kah ohkée puppinashimwog.
E.16.4 They shall die of grievous deaths; they shall not be lamented; neither shall they be buried; but they shall be as dung upon the face of the earth: and they shall be consumed by the sword, and by famine; and their carcases shall be meat for the fowls of heaven, and for the beasts of the earth.

α.16.5 Newutche yeu wussin Jehovah, petutteúhkon mauongane wetu[ô]mut, kah ahque aush ut maumuttamunat asuh mohkon: newutche nutamaunum n8nohteaonk wutch yeug missinninnuog, wussin Jehovah, womoausuonk kah monaneteaongash.
E.16.5 For thus saith the LORD, Enter not into the house of mourning, neither go to lament nor bemoan them: for I have taken away my peace from this people, saith the LORD, even lovingkindness and mercies.

α.16.6 Naneeswe matikkenukeg kah papeissiṣsitcheg pish nupwog yeu ut ohkeit: matta pish posekinóog, kah wosketompaog matta pish ummauemouh, kah matta pish neekswóunáuh wuhhogkuh, asuh mukukkontupauóog.
E.16.6 Both the great and the small shall die in this land: they shall not be buried, neither shall men lament for them, nor cut themselves, nor make themselves bald for them:

α.16.7 Asuh matta pish wosketompaog nehneekinauoog maumuttamunat, taphe[ò]nat wuhhogkauh: asuh pish mat wosketompaog 8tattamwaheouh taphettue wuttattamwaitche wutche wut8shin, kah wutohkasin.
E.16.7 Neither shall men tear themselves for them in mourning, to comfort them for the dead; neither shall men give them the cup of consolation to drink for their father or for their mother.

α.16.8 Wonk matta pish kuppetutteoh mishadtupp8e-kommukqut, nag weetappemónat, meetsinat asuh wuttattamunat.
E.16.8 Thou shalt not also go into the house of feasting, to sit with them to eat and to drink.

α.16.9 Newutche yeu wussin Jehovah ayeuteaunit um-Manitt8moh Israel, kusseh, n8wohkukquoshitteóh, yeu wutch ayeuonganit ut anaquabeóg kah pomantamóg, pôáe wodtauatonkquossuonk, weekontamwe wadtauatonkqussuonk, 8wadtauatonkqussuonk wessentamwaénin, kah 8wadtauatonkqussuonk weetauwadteaénin.
E.16.9 For thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel; Behold, I will cause to cease out of this place in your eyes, and in your days, the voice of mirth, and the voice of gladness, the voice of the bridegroom, and the voice of the bride.

α.16.10 Kah piṣh nnih wahteauwaheadt yeug missinninnuog wame yeush kutt8wongash, kah nag unnukquean, tohwaj Jehovah kutt8hkontog wame yeu mohsag machuk ayeuuhkone nenawun? kah teagwas nummatcheseonganun, asuh teagwas nummatcheseonganun, asuh teagwas nuppanneseonganun, ne ayeuhkonittue unnéhheungkut Jehovah num-Manitt8mun?
E.16.10 And it shall come to pass, when thou shalt shew this people all these words, and they shall say unto thee, Wherefore hath the LORD pronounced all this great evil against us? or what is our iniquity? or what is our sin that we have committed against the LORD our God?

α.16.11 Neit nag piṣh kuttinnóog, newutche k8sh8oog nutohquanumuk, wussin Jehovah, kah asuhkauaog onkatogeh manitt8h, kah wuttinneumuhkauóuh, kah wowussumouh, kah nutohquanumukquog, kah matta nanawehheauóog nuttinnaumatuonk.
E.16.11 Then shalt thou say unto them, Because your fathers have forsaken me, saith the LORD, and have walked after other gods, and have served them, and have worshipped them, and have forsaken me, and have not kept my law;

α.16.12 Kah nag anue matcheseúmaog k8sh8uh (newutche kusseh kutasuhkomumw8 nishnoh pasuk ummatchitteaháe unnántam8onk, onk woh nag mat nukkuhkeitonk8og)
E.16.12 And ye have done worse than your fathers; for, behold, ye walk every one after the imagination of his evil heart, that they may not hearken unto me:

α.16.13 Newaj sohwòhkónunóg yeu wutch ohkeit, en ohkeit ne mo wahteau8óg, asuh k8sh8óog: kah na piṣh kuttit wowussumóneau penowe manitt8og kesukodae kah nukkonae, kah na kuttit matta kitteamonteanumunn[n]eau.
E.16.13 Therefore will I cast you out of this land into a land that ye know not, neither ye nor your fathers; and there shall ye serve other gods day and night; where I will not shew you favour.

α.16.14 Newutche kusseh, kesukodtash peyaum8ash wussin Lord, matta piṣh wonk unn8wáun, Lord pomantam noh sohh8wunomp wunnaumonuh Israel wutch Egypt.
E.16.14 Therefore, behold, the days come, saith the LORD, that it shall no more be said, The LORD liveth, that brought up the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt;

α.16.15 Qut Lord pomantam noh sohh8wunomp wunnaumonuh Israel wutch nanumohkeit, kah wame ohketu uttoh an8hkauomp: kah piṣh wonk nuppas8óog wutohtuóut ne anumauogkup 8sh8oh.
E.16.15 But, The LORD liveth, that brought up the children of Israel from the land of the north, and from all the lands whither he had driven them: and I will bring them again into their land that I gave unto their fathers.

α.16.16 Kusseh, nutann8n monacheg n8tamágwaénúog, wussin Jehovah, kah nag piṣh nah wunn8tamagquonóuh, kah nahohtoeu piṣh nutann8n monacheg adchaenúog, kah nag piṣh wutadchanóuh wutch nishnoh wadchu, kah wutch nishnoh wadchuém: kah wutch hassunónogqut.
E.16.16 Behold, I will send for many fishers, saith the LORD, and they shall fish them; and after will I send for many hunters, and they shall hunt them from every mountain, and from every hill, and out of the holes of the rocks.

α.16.17 Newutche nuskesukquash ohtaash wame ummayeuóut: niṣh matta adtahtâunóash wutch kuskesukqut: kah umm[at]ch[e]seongan8 matta adtahtôsin8 wutch nuskesukqut.
E.16.17 For mine eyes are upon all their ways: they are not hid from my face, neither is their iniquity hid from mine eyes.

α.16.18 Kah negonne nutonkquadtantam ummatcheseonganoash, kah uppanneseongash papsku, newutche nishketeóog nutohke: n[à]g numwohtoog nutohtóonk nashpe nupp8e muhhogkunk jishanumukquokish kah unkqueneunkquokish.
E.16.18 And first I will recompense their iniquity and their sin double; because they have defiled my land, they have filled mine inheritance with the carcases of their detestable and abominable things.

α.16.19 Woi Jehovah nummenuhkesuonk kah n8wonkônous, kah nutushpho[u]áonk wuttaméhpunae kesukodtut, Gentilsog piṣh kuppeyaonuk wutch weehqshik ohke, kah piṣh n8waog, wunnamuhkut n8shunónog nompappéhtamwog pann8waongash, tahn8cheyeu8k, kah niṣh matta wadchiyeumukish.
E.16.19 O LORD, my strength, and my fortress, and my refuge in the day of affliction, the Gentiles shall come unto thee from the ends of the earth, and shall say, Surely our fathers have inherited lies, vanity, and things wherein there is no profit.

α.16.20 Sun woh wosketomp ummanitt8muhkauau wuhhogkuh, kah nag matta manitto8og?
E.16.20 Shall a man make gods unto himself, and they are no gods?

α.16.21 Newutche kusseh, pasukqut piṣh n8wahteauwaheoog: n8wahteauwahéoog nunnutcheg, nummenuhkesuonk, kah piṣh wahteauog nuttissowis Jehovah.
E.16.21 Therefore, behold, I will this once cause them to know, I will cause them to know mine hand and my might; and they shall know that my name is The LORD.

α.17.1 UMmatcheseonk Judah wussukwhósu nashpe moóshogque pen: kah nashpe wuhk8nuk diamond: ne kogóhksimun ut wuttahh8wae tableut, kah ut kutaltarume askonit.
E.17.1 The sin of Judah is written with a pen of iron, and with the point of a diamond: it is graven upon the table of their heart, and upon the horns of your altars;

α.17.2 Wunneechan8uh mehquantamunit wutaltarumooash kah ukkuppiyeum8oash kishke ashkunkquamut ut wadchuut.
E.17.2 Whilst their children remember their altars and their groves by the green trees upon the high hills.

α.17.3 Woi n8wadcheum ut ohteuhkonit, nummag wáme kittinneetuonk kah wame kenompakouunash mukk8kenittinneat, kah kukqunuhqui ayeuongash wutch matcheseonk pannuppe wame kussussippôiyeumut.
E.17.3 O my mountain in the field, I will give thy substance and all thy treasures to the spoil, and thy high places for sin, throughout all thy borders.

α.17.4 Kah ken pish matta kutappu ut kutohtoonganit ne anumauunomp, kah k8tinninneumuhkausuáhush ut kummatwomut, en ohkeit ne mo wahteáuoan: newutche kenashqunanum n8teau ut nummusquanittam8onganit, ne pish micheme chikohtag.
E.17.4 And thou, even thyself, shalt discontinue from thine heritage that I gave thee; and I will cause thee to serve thine enemies in the land which thou knowest not: for ye have kindled a fire in mine anger, which shall burn for ever.

α.17.5 Yeu wussin Jehovah, matanumunach noh pabahtanumont wosketompuh, kah wahpittenteadt weyaus, kah noh wuttah amaehtauont Jehovah.
E.17.5 Thus saith the LORD; Cursed be the man that trusteth in man, and maketh flesh his arm, and whose heart departeth from the LORD.

α.17.6 Newutche pish tatuppeyeu8 kunkohteadtag touohkomukqut, kah matta pish naum8 peyom88k wanegik, qut noh pish wutohtuontam kunkohteadtaeu ayeuongash ut touohkomukqut, ut salte ohkeit, kah matta wutohkein.
E.17.6 For he shall be like the heath in the desert, and shall not see when good cometh; but shall inhabit the parched places in the wilderness, in a salt land and not inhabited.

α.17.7 Wunnanumau wosketomp noh pabuhtanttanumont Jehovah, kah noh annaonont Jehovah.
E.17.7 Blessed is the man that trusteth in the LORD, and whose hope the LORD is.

α.17.8 Newutche noh pish tatuppeyeu8 mehtug ohketeamuk ut kishke nippeit, kah noh sepagodchabukkaem8uk ut kishke sepuut kah matta pish naum8, kussittau peyom8uk, qut 8neepog pish ashkoshqui, kah matta pish wuttamhik8 kunkohteadtae kodtum8, kah matta pish wohkukquoshininn8 tanneganit meechum.
E.17.8 For he shall be as a tree planted by the waters, and that spreadeth out her roots by the river, and shall not see when heat cometh, but her leaf shall be green; and shall not be careful in the year of drought, neither shall cease from yielding fruit.

α.17.9 Metah anue as8kekodteam8wontam onk wame teanteaguasinish kah unkqueneunkummatcheetou, howan woh 8wahteauun.
E.17.9 The heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked: who can know it?

α.17.10 Nen Jehovah natinneuhkontam metah, nukqutcheh mutt8unussog, aninnumauonat nish$noh wosketomp neaunak ummayash, kah neaunak wutusseongane meechummuonk.
E.17.10 I the LORD search the heart, I try the reins, even to give every man according to his ways, and according to the fruit of his doings.

α.17.11 Onatuh pahpahkis ahtenásuk kah matta pwohkhôyeog: netatuppe noh weenauwekit qut matta sampwe, pish wunnukkodtumunash ut nashauwe ukkesukodtumut, kah ut 8wohkukquóiyeumut pish mattammagweyeu8.
E.17.11 As the partridge sitteth on eggs, and hatcheth them not; so he that getteth riches, and not by right, shall leave them in the midst of his days, and at his end shall be a fool.

α.17.12 Sohsumoe qunùhqueu appuonk wutch waj kutchissik ne nus-Sanctuarie ayeuonk.
E.17.12 A glorious high throne from the beginning is the place of our sanctuary.

α.17.13 Woi Jehovah, wutannoósuonguh Israel, wame neg ohquanumukqueáneg pish akodchuog, kah nag pahchaôsitcheg pish wusukwhosuog ut ohkeit, newutche nag nukkonáog Jehovah, noh tohkekommue pomantamwae nippe.
E.17.13 O LORD, the hope of Israel, all that forsake thee shall be ashamed, and they that depart from me shall be written in the earth, because they have forsaken the LORD, the fountain of living waters.

α.17.14 Neetskeheh woi Jehovah, kah pish nunneetskes: wadchaneh kah pish n8wadchanit: newutche ken waeenomog.
E.17.14 Heal me, O LORD, and I shall be healed; save me, and I shall be saved: for thou art my praise.

α.17.15 Kusseh, nag nuttugquog, uttiyeu wuttinn8waonk Lord? yeuyeu peyóm8utch.
E.17.15 Behold, they say unto me, Where is the word of the LORD? let it come now.

α.17.16 Qut nen, matta nukken8natu Pastoreuuneat kutasukauununat, kah matta nukkodtantam8 unkqunneunkquodte kesukod, k8wahteóh: ne sohham8m8uk wutch nussisset8nut, ne sampwiyeup ut anaquabean.
E.17.16 As for me, I have not hastened from being a pastor to follow thee: neither have I desired the woeful day; thou knowest: that which came out of my lips was right before thee.

α.17.17 OOwabesuonganehkon en kuhhogkat, ken nutannoósuonk ut matche kesukodtut.
E.17.17 Be not a terror unto me: thou art my hope in the day of evil.

α.17.18 Nag chepshahettich neg kodwoskehúkqueaneg, qut nen ahque chepshónti: nag quequénauánumwéhettich, qut nen ahque queuénauánumwuttei: núhkinumau matchik kesuk, kah nag pagwas nashpe papsku pagwanuonk,
E.17.18 Let them be confounded that persecute me, but let not me be confounded: let them be dismayed, but let not me be dismayed: bring upon them the day of evil, and destroy them with double destruction.

α.17.19 Jehovah yeu nuttugqun, monchish kah neepaush 8squontam8out wunneechan8oh missinninnuog, uttoh adt Judae ketass8tamwog petutteahettit, kah ne waj sohhamwehettit, kah ut wame Jerusaleme squontamehtu.
E.17.19 Thus said the LORD unto me; Go and stand in the gate of the children of the people, whereby the kings of Judah come in, and by the which they go out, and in all the gates of Jerusalem;

α.17.20 Kah nag us, n8tam8k wuttinn8waonk Jehovah, kenaau Judae ketass8tamwog, kah wame Judah, kah wame wadohkitcheg Jerusalem, neg petutteacheg yeu ut squontaméhtu.
E.17.20 And say unto them, Hear ye the word of the LORD, ye kings of Judah, and all Judah, and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, that enter in by these gates:

α.17.21 Yeu wussin Lord, nunnukqussek kuhhogkaóog, kah weasséhteogk sabboth$dayeu: asuh petukkodta8hteok ut Jerusalemeh squontamut.
E.17.21 Thus saith the LORD; Take heed to yourselves, and bear no burden on the sabbath day, nor bring it in by the gates of Jerusalem;

α.17.22 Asuh sohh8wuttóhteók weanun wutch kekuóut sabboth$dayeu. Asuh toh usséhteok, qut wunneetupanátamwáhteó8k sabboth$day neánann8nogkup k8shuóog.
E.17.22 Neither carry forth a burden out of your houses on the sabbath day, neither do ye any work, but hallow ye the sabbath day, as I commanded your fathers.

α.17.23 Qut nag matta wunosweetam8uneau, ásuh mat ahchusittamoog, qut nag chetauwussittippukoñaeog, onk woh mo n8tam8og asuh matta attumunum8og kuhk8tomoadtuonk.
E.17.23 But they obeyed not, neither inclined their ear, but made their neck stiff, that they might not hear, nor receive instruction.

α.17.24 Kah pish n$nih, menuhke kuhkeitieog wussin Jehovah, matta petukkodtau8unat weanun yeu ut kutotanae squontamut Sabbothdayeu, qut wunneetupanatamwahteo8k Sabboth$day, mat na$ut anakauseuinat.
E.17.24 And it shall come to pass, if ye diligently hearken unto me, saith the LORD, to bring in no burden through the gates of this city on the sabbath day, but hallow the sabbath day, to do no work therein;

α.17.25 Neit pish kehtass8tamwog, kah sontimoog petutteaog ut yeu otanae squontamtu appinneat wutappuonganit David, nayeumukquehettit chariotsash kah horsesog, nag wussontimom8uk Judae wosketompaog kah wadohkitcheg Jerusalem, kah yeu kutotan pish michemohteau.
E.17.25 Then shall there enter into the gates of this city kings and princes sitting upon the throne of David, riding in chariots and on horses, they, and their princes, the men of Judah, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem: and this city shall remain for ever.

α.17.26 Kah nag pish 8mwog Judae keiotanehtu, kah wutch ayeuonganehtu ut kishke Jerusalem, kah wutch Benjamine ohkeit, kah wutch mukoshquttaut, kah wutch wadchuuhkontu, kah wutch sowaniyeu, paudtauehettit chikohtae mag8ongash, kah sephausuongash, kah meetsue sephausuongash, kah incense kah padtauwehettit woweenodtumwe sephausuongash en wekit Jehovah.
E.17.26 And they shall come from the cities of Judah, and from the places about Jerusalem, and from the land of Benjamin, and from the plain, and from the mountains, and from the south, bringing burnt offerings, and sacrifices, and meat offerings, and incense, and bringing sacrifices of praise, unto the house of the LORD.

α.17.27 Qut matta kukkéhtieog, wunn[é]etupanatamwahtinneat Sabbath$day, kah matta nayeutam8unat weanun, petutteahettit ut Jerusalemme squontamut Sabbathdayeu: neit pish nunnashqussum n8teau na$ut squontamash, kah pish mahchikkossum8m8 Jerusalemme mishikkomukquash, kah matta pish onthamm8un.
E.17.27 But if ye will not hearken unto me to hallow the sabbath day, and not to bear a burden, even entering in at the gates of Jerusalem on the sabbath day; then will I kindle a fire in the gates thereof, and it shall devour the palaces of Jerusalem, and it shall not be quenched.

α.18.1 WUttinn8waonk ne pauhonukqut Jeremiah wutch Lordut, n8wau.
E.18.1 The word which came to Jeremiah from the LORD, saying,

α.18.2 Neepaush kah w8msish en ohkuhkitteaen weékit kah na nuttit n8tamwahuwon nukkutt8wongash.
E.18.2 Arise, and go down to the potter's house, and there I will cause thee to hear my words.

α.18.3 Neit n8womsip en ohkuhketeaen wekit, kah kusseh, wuttittannehteauun wheelut.
E.18.3 Then I went down to the potter's house, and, behold, he wrought a work on the wheels.

α.18.4 Kah wisq ne kezteunk wutch man8nskut, ne matchehteausu ut wunnutcheganit ohkuhqutteaenin: neit wonk ayim penowe wisq: uttoh an 8nontug ohukuhqutteaenin.
E.18.4 And the vessel that he made of clay was marred in the hand of the potter: so he made it again another vessel, as seemed good to the potter to make it.

α.18.5 Neit wuttinn8wao[u]k Jehovah nuppeyaonuk, n8wau.
E.18.5 Then the word of the LORD came to me, saying,

α.18.6 Woi Israelle week, sun woh mat kuttinhenn8mw8 neane yeuoh ohkuhketeanin wussin Lord, kusseh, neane man8nsk appit ut wunnutcheganit ohkuhketeaenin, ne kuttatuppe appinneau nunnutcheganit, woi Israelle wek.
E.18.6 O house of Israel, cannot I do with you as this potter? saith the LORD. Behold, as the clay is in the potter's hand, so are ye in mine hand, O house of Israel.

α.18.7 Na utt8che unn8waon papaume wutohtimoin, kah papaume tahs8tamoonk, pohqunumunat, kah n8kenumunat, kah paguatauunat.
E.18.7 At what instant I shall speak concerning a nation, and concerning a kingdom, to pluck up, and to pull down, and to destroy it;

α.18.8 Tohneit ne wutohtimoin, ne ayeuuhkonittue kón8tam, quinnuppehettit wutch ummatchet8m8out, pish nutaiuskoiantam ne machuk ayeuuhkonittue ananumog.
E.18.8 If that nation, against whom I have pronounced, turn from their evil, I will repent of the evil that I thought to do unto them.

α.18.9 Kah uttoh adt8cheyeu8g ne an8wi papaume wutohtimoin, kah papaume tahs8tamoonk, ayimunat, kah ohteuhkonat.
E.18.9 And at what instant I shall speak concerning a nation, and concerning a kingdom, to build and to plant it;

α.18.10 Matchesehettit ut anaquabeh, matta n8swehtam8hetteg n8wadtauatonkqussuonk, neit pish nutaiuskoiantam ne wanegik ne anogkup k8niyeuhhennumw8.
E.18.10 If it do evil in my sight, that it obey not my voice, then I will repent of the good, wherewith I said I would benefit them.

α.18.11 Newutche yeuyeu ehhoh, ken8s Judae wosketompaog, kah wadohkitcheg Jerusalem n8wash, yeu wussin Jehovah kusseh, kutayeuuhkonittue ayimauunumw8 machuk, kah kutayeuuhkonittue natwontamauonumw8 natwontamoonk: qushkek yeuyeu nish$noh pasuk wutch ummatche mayit, kah wunnehteo8k kummayeuoash.
E.18.11 Now therefore go to, speak to the men of Judah, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, saying, Thus saith the LORD; Behold, I frame evil against you, and devise a device against you: return ye now every one from his evil way, and make your ways and your doings good.

α.18.12 Kah nag n8waog, matta annoósuonganun8: qut nutásukomumun nehenwonche natwontam8onganunonash, kah nish$noh pasuk nenawun nutussemun ummatche metahh8wae unnantam8onk.
E.18.12 And they said, There is no hope: but we will walk after our own devices, and we will every one do the imagination of his evil heart.

α.18.13 Newutche yeu wussin Lord, nat8tamok yeuyeu kenugke penuwohteaog, howan noh n8tog ne ônagish Israelle penomp ussen ne onkquanumukquok.
E.18.13 Therefore thus saith the LORD; Ask ye now among the heathen, who hath heard such things: the virgin of Israel hath done a very horrible thing.

α.18.14 Sun woh wosketomp nukkonau Lebanone k8noh, ne wóm8uk ohteahkone qussukquanit? asuh kussitchuáne sonkuppogash ne wam8uk pen8e ayeuonganit sun woh nukkodtumunash?
E.18.14 Will a man leave the snow of Lebanon which cometh from the rock of the field? or shall the cold flowing waters that come from another place be forsaken?

α.18.15 Newutche nummissinninúmog n8wanánumuk, nag chikohsumwog weetemungquok en tahn8cheyeu8uk, kah nah wuttogkussittahssumóuh ut ummayeuóut, wutch nukkóne mayut, pomushónat mayit nish mo wunnegenunogish.
E.18.15 Because my people hath forgotten me, they have burned incense to vanity, and they have caused them to stumble in their ways from the ancient paths, to walk in paths, in a way not cast up;

α.18.16 Touwishinnuwóhtineat wutohkeyeu, kah michemohtae nuttohhentupantam8onk: nish$noh pasuk noh na paumshadt pish chepshau, kah nunnukkuhquoshau.
E.18.16 To make their land desolate, and a perpetual hissing; every one that passeth thereby shall be astonished, and wag his head.

α.18.17 Nag nusseahwhóog onatuh nashpe wutchepwash ut anaquabit matwau: nunnahtinoog muppusk, qut matta muskesuk, wutonkapunáe kesukodtum8óut.
E.18.17 I will scatter them as with an east wind before the enemy; I will shew them the back, and not the face, in the day of their calamity.

α.18.18 Neit nag n8waog, peyunk, ayeuuhkonittue natwontamauóntuh natwontam8ongash Jeremiah; newutche naumatuonk matta pish wannehheau wutch sephausuenuut,  asuh kogáhquttuonk, wutch waantamwenuut, kah wuttinn8waonk wutch quoshodtumwaenuut: peyunk, togkommontuh meena[n], kah ahque tohhentupontammuttuh teagwe ukkutt8wonk.
E.18.18 Then said they, Come and let us devise devices against Jeremiah; for the law shall not perish from the priest, nor counsel from the wise, nor the word from the prophet. Come, and let us smite him with the tongue, and let us not give heed to any of his words.

α.18.19 Kuhkeihtah woi Jehovah, kah n8tash 8wadtauato[u]kqussuongan8 neg mekonukqueaneg.
E.18.19 Give heed to me, O LORD, and hearken to the voice of them that contend with me.

α.18.20 Sun woh machuk onkquttantamun wanegik? newutche nag pasáhthamwog wutch nukketeahogkou: mehquontash nunneepop ut anaquabe[a]n, nag wunnee n8wanshánaoont, kah quinnuppenumunat kummusquantam8onk nag wutch.
E.18.20 Shall evil be recompensed for good? for they have digged a pit for my soul. Remember that I stood before thee to speak good for them, and to turn away thy wrath from them.

α.18.21 Newutche p8nin wunneechan8oh ne mohshagquodtut, kah sohkenash 8sqheongan8 nashpe chekeushae togkodteg, kah ummittumwuss8oh amaunumauunach wunneechan8oh, kah sekousquainitch, kah 8wosketompóm8uh nushinach, kah wuskenúm8uh nushunaj mattompagwe togkodteg.
E.18.21 Therefore deliver up their children to the famine, and pour out their blood by the force of the sword; and let their wives be bereaved of their children, and be widows; and let their men be put to death; let their young men be slain by the sword in battle.

α.18.22 Mauonk n8tamunach wutch week8woont, tiadche nuhkinnumauadt m8chequshaoh, newutche nag pahsohthamwog nuttohqunukqunnaoont, kah adtahshaog appehanoh wutche nusseetash.
E.18.22 Let a cry be heard from their houses, when thou shalt bring a troop suddenly upon them: for they have digged a pit to take me, and hid snares for my feet.

α.18.23 Qut woi Jehovah, k8wahteoh wame ukkogahquetuongan8 ayeuuhkonittue nen, nunnushikqunnaoont, ahque ahquontamau ummatcheseongan8, kah jishkhogkon, uppanneseonk wutch anaquabean, qut kepuhkonunaj ut anaquabean, unneh musquantaman.
E.18.23 Yet, LORD, thou knowest all their counsel against me to slay me: forgive not their iniquity, neither blot out their sin from thy sight, but let them be overthrown before thee; deal thus with them in the time of thine anger.

α.19.1 YEu wussin Jehovah, monchish neemunush ahkuhqutteaenin wutohkee wisq, kah neemun kutchisog wutch missinninnuut kah kutchisog wutch sephausuenuut.
E.19.1 Thus saith the LORD, Go and get a potter's earthen bottle, and take of the ancients of the people, and of the ancients of the priests;

α.19.2 Kah en sohhom8k wut8nuhkoiyeumut wunnaumonuh Hinnon, ne ohtag ahhut petutteamuk chepwiyeue squontamut, kah naut wahteauwahuush kutt8wongash, nish pish anonish.
E.19.2 And go forth unto the valley of the son of Hinnom, which is by the entry of the east gate, and proclaim there the words that I shall tell thee,

α.19.3 Kah n8wash, n8tam8k wuttinn8waonk Jehovah woi Judae ketass8tamwog, kah wadohkitcheg Jerusalem, yeu wussin Jehvoah ayeuteaunit um-Manitt8moh Israel kusseh, ne nuppaudtauun yeuut ayeuonganit, ne howan n8tog wuhtauogash pish nupp8m8ash.
E.19.3 And say, Hear ye the word of the LORD, O kings of Judah, and inhabitants of Jerusalem; Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel; Behold, I will bring evil upon this place, the which whosoever heareth, his ears shall tingle.

α.19.4 Newutche nag nunnukkonukquog, kah penuwohteatoog yeu ayeuonk kah ne wuttit chikohsumauoneau weetemungquok penowe Manitto, neh matta nagumau asuh 8sh8oh, waheahettegeh, asuh Judae ketass8tamwog, kah wohtoog yeuut ayeuonganit mat woskehuwae wusqueheunk
E.19.4 Because they have forsaken me, and have estranged this place, and have burned incense in it unto other gods, whom neither they nor their fathers have known, nor the kings of Judah, and have filled this place with the blood of innocents;

α.19.5 Nag wonk ayimauwaog qunuhqui ayeuongash Baal, chikkoswonat wunnaumonaoh nashpe n8tau wutche chikohtae mag8ongash en Baalut, ne matta anunn8team8 asuh ân8wau, asuh matta anantam8.
E.19.5 They have built also the high places of Baal, to burn their sons with fire for burnt offerings unto Baal, which I commanded not, nor spake it, neither came it into my mind:

α.19.6 Newutche kusseh, kesukodtash peyaum8, n8wau Jehovah, yeu ayeuonk matta pish wonk hettam8un Tophet, asuh wut8nouhkoiyeum wunnaumonuh Hinnon, qut nushehteae 8nouhkoi.
E.19.6 Therefore, behold, the days come, saith the LORD, that this place shall no more be called Tophet, nor The valley of the son of Hinnom, but The valley of slaughter.

α.19.7 Kah tahnunn8cheahtauun ukkogahquttuonk Judah kah Jerusalem yeu ut ayeuonganit, kah nuppenushah[h]eoog anaquabenit ummatwom8uh, kah nashpe wunnutchegan8wout neg kodnushehteacheg, kah nupp8e wuhhogkauh nummeechumuhkauona[oh] kesukque puppinshasog, kah ohkee puppinashimwog.
E.19.7 And I will make void the counsel of Judah and Jerusalem in this place; and I will cause them to fall by the sword before their enemies, and by the hands of them that seek their lives: and their carcases will I give to be meat for the fowls of the heaven, and for the beasts of the earth.

α.19.8 K[a]h nuttauwushitteauun yeu otan, kah [n]ummeshonantamwahtea[n]un, nish$noh pasuk noh na paumshadt pish chepshau, kah ummeshanontamun, newutche wame unninneaongash naut.
E.19.8 And I will make this city desolate, and an hissing; every one that passeth thereby shall be astonished and hiss because of all the plagues thereof.

α.19.9 Kah nummeechuwaheaog 8weyaus8 wunnaumonauh, kah 8weyaus8 wuttaun8oh kah nag pish meechwog nish$noh pasuk 8weyausum8 weetompuh, weenuhkomuk nannakompananuttimuk, uttohad ummatwom8uh, kah neg kodnushoncheg pish wunnanakompananouh.
E.19.9 And I will cause them to eat the flesh of their sons and the flesh of their daughters, and they shall eat every one the flesh of his friend in the siege and straitness, wherewith their enemies, and they that seek their lives, shall straiten them.

α.19.10 Neit pish kuppohquetahham wisq ut anaquabhettit weechogqueaneg.
E.19.10 Then shalt thou break the bottle in the sight of the men that go with thee,

α.19.11 Neit pish nag kuttinoog, yeu wussin Jehovah ayeuuhteaunit, ne nuttinne pohquenumun yeug missinninnuog, kah yeu keitotan, onatuh howan pohkshadtunk ohkuhquehteaen wisq, ne [w]atta woh wonk nompe wunnehteauomuk, kah nag pish upposekinouh, ut Tophet, Nô pajeh mat wuttape posekinausinneaoónt.
E.19.11 And shalt say unto them, Thus saith the LORD of hosts; Even so will I break this people and this city, as one breaketh a potter's vessel, that cannot be made whole again: and they shall bury them in Tophet, till there be no place to bury.

α.19.12 Yeu nuttinteauun yeu ayeuonk wussin Jehovah, kah en nag na wadohkitcheg kah nutogquehteoh wutotaneau Tophetut.
E.19.12 Thus will I do unto this place, saith the LORD, and to the inhabitants thereof, and even make this city as Tophet:

α.19.13 Kah Jerusálemme wetuomash kah Judae tahs8tamwog wekuoash pish ogque nishketeauunash Tophet: newutche wame wekuoash uttoh ut woskeche chikohsumauwahettit weetemungquok en wame kesukque kenauwameonk & sokanumauwaog wuttattamoe mag8ongash penowe Manitt8ut.
E.19.13 And the houses of Jerusalem, and the houses of the kings of Judah, shall be defiled as the place of Tophet, because of all the houses upon whose roofs they have burned incense unto all the host of heaven, and have poured out drink offerings unto other gods.

α.19.14 Neit Jeremiah 8m Tophet, uttoh Jehovah anan8nomp quoshodtamunat, kah neepau ut chippinnutongane wekit Jéhovah kah unnau wame missinninnuh.
E.19.14 Then came Jeremiah from Tophet, whither the LORD had sent him to prophesy; and he stood in the court of the LORD's house; and said to all the people,

α.19.15 Yeu wussin Jehovah ayeuteaunit, um[-]manitt8moh Israel kusseh, nunnuhkinnumau yeu keitotan kah ut wame wutotanamesash machuk ne ayeuuhkonittue ane kn8tam, newutche menehketeauog wussittippukan8oash, onk woh mo, n8tam8og nuttinn8waongash.
E.19.15 Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel; Behold, I will bring upon this city and upon all her towns all the evil that I have pronounced against it, because they have hardened their necks, that they might not hear my words.

α.20.1 NEit Pashur wunnaumonuh Immer sephausuen noh kehche nanawunnuaenin wonk ut wekit Jehovah n8tam quoshodtuk Jeremiah yeush.
E.20.1 Now Pashur the son of Immer the priest, who was also chief governor in the house of the LORD, heard that Jeremiah prophesied these things.

α.20.2 Neit Pashur togkomau Jerémiahoh quoshodtumwaenuh, kah upponuh stocksut ne ohtag ut Benjaminne qunuhqui squontamut, ne kishkohtag wekit Jehovah.
E.20.2 Then Pashur smote Jeremiah the prophet, and put him in the stocks that were in the high gate of Benjamin, which was by the house of the LORD.

α.20.3 Kah nnih na wonk kesukok Pashur sohh8wunau Jeremiahoh wutch stocksut, neit Jeremiah wuttinuh Lord matta kuttehenuk8h Pashur qut Magoz$missabib.
E.20.3 And it came to pass on the morrow, that Pashur brought forth Jeremiah out of the stocks. Then said Jeremiah unto him, The LORD hath not called thy name Pashur, but Magormissabib.

α.20.4 Newutche yeu wussin Lord, kusseh, kutayimaush chepshaonk en kuhhogkat, kah en wame ketompaut, kah nag pish penushadtamwog nashpe wuttogkodtegan8 ummatwom8uh, kah kuskesukquash pish wunnaumun, kah nummag wame Judah en wunnutcheganit Babilone ketass8t, kah noh pish kummissinohkone monchanuk en Babilon, & noh pish wunnushoh nashpe togkodteg.
E.20.4 For thus saith the LORD, Behold, I will make thee a terror to thyself, and to all thy friends: and they shall fall by the sword of their enemies, and thine eyes shall behold it: and I will give all Judah into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he shall carry them captive into Babylon, and shall slay them with the sword.

α.20.5 Nano, nummag wame ummenuhkesuonk yeu keitotan, kah wame wutanakausuonganooash kah wame ummishoade maumachiyeumash, kah wame wunnompak8un8oash Judae ketass8tamwog, nummagunash wunnutchegan8wout ummatwom8uh, neg pish mak8kinoncheg, kah pish neemunoog, kah uss8unoog Babilon.
E.20.5 Moreover I will deliver all the strength of this city, and all the labours thereof, and all the precious things thereof, and all the treasures of the kings of Judah will I give into the hand of their enemies, which shall spoil them, and take them, and carry them to Babylon.

α.20.6 Kah k[é]n Pashur, kah wame neg apitcheg kékit, pish missinno8og, kah ken pish kuppeam Babilon, kah na pish kuttit nuppun kah na pish kuttit posekinnitteam, ken kah wame ketompaog, neg pann8wae quoshodtumauadtcheg.
E.20.6 And thou, Pashur, and all that dwell in thine house shall go into captivity: and thou shalt come to Babylon, and there thou shalt die, and shalt be buried there, thou, and all thy friends, to whom thou hast prophesied lies.

α.20.7 Woi Jehovah, kuppuhch8uneh, kah nuppuhch8unit, ken kutanue menuhkusumeh, kah kussohkos: asekésukokish nutahanehtont, nish$noh pasuk nutoontohkonuk.
E.20.7 O LORD, thou hast deceived me, and I was deceived; thou art stronger than I, and hast prevailed: I am in derision daily, every one mocketh me.

α.20.8 Newutchen nádteuh kôdt8an, nummishont8wop, nummishont8wop, chekeeu usseonk kah mukk8kinnuwaonk newutche wuttinn8waonk Jehovah nutushpunanittean, kah asekesukokish nutahanehtont.
E.20.8 For since I spake, I cried out, I cried violence and spoil; because the word of the LORD was made a reproach unto me, and a derision, daily.

α.20.9 Neit nussip, matta wonk nummissohwhôh, asuh wonk nussu ut 8wésuonganit: qut wuttinn8waonk ut nuttahhut, tatuppeyeu8 nashqunáe n8taut, kuppuhhôsu ut nuskon$ut, kah nussauunumup kehchithon, kah matta nukkehchittohhou.
E.20.9 Then I said, I will not make mention of him, nor speak any more in his name. But his word was in mine heart as a burning fire shut up in my bones, and I was weary with forbearing, and I could not stay.

α.20.10 Newutche n8tamup nukkehkomukqunat monaog, wabesuonk waeenu, unnehtunkquodt, n8waog, kah nuttinnehtonkqunn8hteamun: wame neetompaog askuhhamwog nukk8qunukshaonk, n8waog, pagwodche woh ôsumau, kah woh kussohkauóun, kah woh kutann8tauóun.
E.20.10 For I heard the defaming of many, fear on every side. Report, say they, and we will report it. All my familiars watched for my halting, saying, Peradventure he will be enticed, and we shall prevail against him, and we shall take our revenge on him.

α.20.11 Qut Jehovah n8weetomuk, onatuh mohsheunkqueneunkqussit: newaj piṣh waskhukqueoneg togkussittassunéhettit, kah nag piṣh matta sohkohseog, nag piṣh mishe akodchuog, newutche nag matta piṣh wunniyéog, nag ummicheme chepshaongan8 matta piṣh wunántam8un.
E.20.11 But the LORD is with me as a mighty terrible one: therefore my persecutors shall stumble, and they shall not prevail: they shall be greatly ashamed; for they shall not prosper: their everlasting confusion shall never be forgotten.

α.20.12 Qut, woi Jehovah ayeuteaunit, ken quajheadt sampweusseaénin kah kenaau mutt8unussog kah metah, naumutti kutann8tôsuonk nag ut: newutche en kuh[k]ogkat n8wohshinum nuppissau$matuonk.
E.20.12 But, O LORD of hosts, that triest the righteous, and seest the reins and the heart, let me see thy vengeance on them: for unto thee have I opened my cause.

α.20.13 Ket8humok Jehovah, waeenomók Jehovah, newutche pohquohwhunau ukketeahogkôunoh matcheku, wutch wunnutcheganit matcheseaen.
E.20.13 Sing unto the LORD, praise ye the LORD: for he hath delivered the soul of the poor from the hand of evildoers.

α.20.14 Matanumwe uttamunach ne kesukod adt neekeomp: ahque wunanittamunach ne kesukok n8hkas neechanukquéan
E.20.14 Cursed be the day wherein I was born: let not the day wherein my mother bare me be blessed.

α.20.15 Mat[á]numwe ununach noh wosketomp, noh paudtaunchem8óno[n]t n8shoh, n8wadt, mukkutchouks keneekitteont, ahche wekontamwahikqun.
E.20.15 Cursed be the man who brought tidings to my father, saying, A man child is born unto thee; making him very glad.

α.20.16 Kah noh wosketomp tatuppeyeu8itch keitotanaṣh nish Jehovah kepuhteajiṣh, kah matta aiuskoianatam8: kah n8taj mauonk nompoáeu, kah mishont8waonk puhshequadt.
E.20.16 And let that man be as the cities which the LORD overthrew, and repented not: and let him hear the cry in the morning, and the shouting at noontide;

α.20.17 Newutche matta nunnushhuk8 wutch ôontomukqut, asuh woh nokas n8weenohkeinneat, kah wutôontomuk woh nagwutteae n8wompikquoeuwónukqunat.
E.20.17 Because he slew me not from the womb; or that my mother might have been my grave, and her womb to be always great with me.

α.20.18 Tohwutch sohhamos wutch ôontomukqut, naumunat anakausuonk kah unkquanumóonk, onk woh nukkesukodtum akodchue pámsheau?
E.20.18 Wherefore came I forth out of the womb to see labour and sorrow, that my days should be consumed with shame?

α.21.1 WUttinn8waonk ne pauhónukqut Jeremiah wutch Jehovahut, Zedekiah ketass8t ann8nont Pashur wunnaumonuh Melchiah, kah Zephaniah wunnaumonuh Maaseiah sephausuen, n8waog,
E.21.1 The word which came unto Jeremiah from the LORD, when king Zedekiah sent unto him Pashur the son of Melchiah, and Zephaniah the son of Maaseiah the priest, saying,

α.21.2 K8wehquetumoush nat8tamwontamaiinneam Jehovah (newutche Nebuchadnezzar Babylone ketass8t nummatompagúhkonukquog) tohneit Jehovah unnehikquéog neaunak wame ummonchanatamwe anakausuongaṣh, onk woh nutamaehtunkqun
E.21.2 Enquire, I pray thee, of the LORD for us; for Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon maketh war against us; if so be that the LORD will deal with us according to all his wondrous works, that he may go up from us.

α.21.3 Neit Jeremiah nah wuttinuh, yeu piṣh kuttinnoneau Zedekiah.
E.21.3 Then said Jeremiah unto them, Thus shall ye say to Zedekiah:

α.21.4 Yeu wussin Jehovah um-Manitt8moh Israel, Nukqushkinum kenauwameongaṣh ohtágiṣh ut kenutchegan8wóut, niṣh nashpe ayeuuhkónog Babylone ketass8t, kah Caldeansog, neg wéenuhkongqueógig ut poquadchit pummeneutunkanit, kah nummukkinóog ut noeu yeu keitotanat.
E.21.4 Thus saith the LORD God of Israel; Behold, I will turn back the weapons of war that are in your hands, wherewith ye fight against the king of Babylon, and against the Chaldeans, which besiege you without the walls, and I will assemble them into the midst of this city.

α.21.5 Kah nen wonk kutayeuúhkonumw8, nashpe summagunnumwe menutcheg, kah nashpe menuhki muhpit, musquantamwe kah chenauausue, kah mishe musquantamwe.
E.21.5 And I myself will fight against you with an outstretched hand and with a strong arm, even in anger, and in fury, and in great wrath.

α.21.6 Kah nuttogkom neg apitcheg yeu keitotanat, naneswe wosketomp & pupinashim: nag piṣh nupwog nashpe mishe anninneaonk
E.21.6 And I will smite the inhabitants of this city, both man and beast: they shall die of a great pestilence.

α.21.7 Kah ompetag wussin Jehovah nummag Zedechiah Judae ketass8t, kah wuttinneumoh, kah missinninnuog, kah neg sekqshoncheg yeu otanat wutch enninneaonganit, wutch togkodteganit, kah wutch mashagquodtut, ut wunnutcheganit Nebuchadnezzar Babylone ketass8t, kah ut wunnutchegan8óut ummatwom8uh, kah ut wunnutchegan8óut neg kodnushoncheg, kah nah piṣh wuttogkomuh en kenag togkodteg matta piṣh owóhquánumuh, asuh ukkitteamonteanumoh, asuh monánumoh.
E.21.7 And afterward, saith the LORD, I will deliver Zedekiah king of Judah, and his servants, and the people, and such as are left in this city from the pestilence, from the sword, and from the famine, into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, and into the hand of their enemies, and into the hand of those that seek their life: and he shall smite them with the edge of the sword; he shall not spare them, neither have pity, nor have mercy.

α.21.8 Kah piṣh kuttin yeug missinninnúog, yeu wussin Jehovah, kusseh, nupponam anaquabeog, pomantamóe may, kah nupp8e may.
E.21.8 And unto this people thou shalt say, Thus saith the LORD; Behold, I set before you the way of life, and the way of death.

α.21.9 Noh apit yue keitotanat, piṣh nashpe nupp8 togkodteganit, kah nashpe mahshagquodt, kah nashpe enninneaonk: qut noh sohhog kah agẃehtauont Caldeansoh, neg wéenuhkongqueógig, noh piṣh pomantam, kah uppomantamoonk pish ne tohqunuk.
E.21.9 He that abideth in this city shall die by the sword, and by the famine, and by the pestilence: but he that goeth out, and falleth to the Chaldeans that besiege you, he shall live, and his life shall be unto him for a prey.

α.21.10 Newutche ayeuuhkonittue ponam nuskesuk yeu otan wutche machuk, kah matta wutch wanegik, wussin Jehovah; kah piṣh aninnumauon en wunnutcheganit Babylone ketass8t, kah noh piṣh wutchikohsumun ut n8taut.
E.21.10 For I have set my face against this city for evil, and not for good, saith the LORD: it shall be given into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he shall burn it with fire.

α.21.11 Kah papaume wek Judae ketass8t, n8wash, n8tam8k wuttinn8waonk.
E.21.11 And touching the house of the king of Judah, say, Hear ye the word of the LORD;

α.21.12 Woi David wek, yeu wussin Lord, ussek wussittumóonk nompoáeu, kah pohquohwuttók noh mogk8kinit wutch wunnutcheganit noh magk8kinuadt, ishkont nummusquantam8onk ogque sohham8m8 n8taut, kah chikohteau, ne$waj howan woh mo ontham8k: newutche kummatche usseongan8oaṣh.
E.21.12 O house of David, thus saith the LORD; Execute judgment in the morning, and deliver him that is spoiled out of the hand of the oppressor, lest my fury go out like fire, and burn that none can quench it, because of the evil of your doings.

α.21.13 Kusseh, kutayeuuhkonṣh woi wadohkean 8nouhkôiyeuut, kah mukoshquttae qussukquanit, wussin Lrod, neg 8n8wacheg, howan woh ayeuuhkonukquean? asuh howan woh petutteadt nutáyeuonganunónut?
E.21.13 Behold, I am against thee, O inhabitant of the valley, and rock of the plain, saith the LORD; which say, Who shall come down against us? or who shall enter into our habitations?

α.21.14 Qut kussasamatahwhunumw8, neánummeechumik kutusseongan8aṣh, wussin Jehovah: kah nunnashqunanum n8teau, ut wuttouohkomukkouóut, kah piṣh mahchekussum8m8 wame teanteáqussiniṣh, ut waéenu.
E.21.14 But I will punish you according to the fruit of your doings, saith the LORD: and I will kindle a fire in the forest thereof, and it shall devour all things round about it.

α.22.1 YEu wussin Jehovah, womsish en Judae ketass8t wekit, kah naut n8wash yeu kutt8wonk,
E.22.1 Thus saith the LORD; Go down to the house of the king of Judah, and speak there this word,

α.22.2 Kah n8wash, N8tash wuttinn8waonk Jehovah, woi Judae ketass8t, ken ápean wutappuonganit David, ken kah kuttinneumog, kah kummissinninnúmog neg petutteacheg yeuh squontamehtu.
E.22.2 And say, Hear the word of the LORD, O king of Judah, that sittest upon the throne of David, thou, and thy servants, and thy people that enter in by these gates:

α.22.3 Yeu wussin Jehovah, ussek wussittumóonk, kah sampweusseonk, kah pohquohwhus noh mak8kinit wutch wunnutcheganit magk8kinnúadt, kah matchenehuwáhte[ò]gk, chekéenéheúhteógk pen8wot, touwiés, asuh sekousq, asuh soksquohthádteok mat woskehuwae musqueheonk yeu ut ayeuonganit.
E.22.3 Thus saith the LORD; Execute ye judgment and righteousness, and deliver the spoiled out of the hand of the oppressor: and do no wrong, do no violence to the stranger, the fatherless, nor the widow, neither shed innocent blood in this place.

α.22.4 Newutche yeu wunnamu[h]kut usseóg, neit piṣh petukkon[e]au yeu ut squontamut, ketass8tamwog, appinneat wutappuonganit David, nayeumukqunat chariotsaṣh, kah horsesog, nagum kah wuttinneumoh, kah ummissinninnumoh.
E.22.4 For if ye do this thing indeed, then shall there enter in by the gates of this house kings sitting upon the throne of David, riding in chariots and on horses, he, and his servants, and his people.

α.22.5 Qut mata yeuṣh n8tam8og kut8wongaṣh, nutchadchekeyeuwam nashpe nen, wussin Jehovah, yeu weetu piṣh touushitteauun.
E.22.5 But if ye will not hear these words, I swear by myself, saith the LORD, that this house shall become a desolation.

α.22.6 Newutche yeu Lord wuttittamun Judae ketass8t weekit, ken Gilead, ut nuhhogkat, kah uppuhkuk Lebanon, qut wunnamuhkut kuttouohkomukqúhkonuṣh, kah keitotanaṣh niṣh matta wadohteumukiṣh.
E.22.6 For thus saith the LORD unto the king's house of Judah; Thou art Gilead unto me, and the head of Lebanon: yet surely I will make thee a wilderness, and cities which are not inhabited.

α.22.7 Kah kutayeuuhkonittue qu[a]gwoshwéhtamouṣh pagwohteaenuog, nisnoh pasuk ahtou wutauwohteaonk, kah nag piṣh tummehtahwhôog k8ne Cedarsum8uh, kah wuttinnuhkonáuh n8taut.
E.22.7 And I will prepare destroyers against thee, every one with his weapons: and they shall cut down thy choice cedars, and cast them into the fire.

α.22.8 Kah monataṣh wutohtimoneaṣh piṣh paumuhkomwog yeu keitotan, kah nag piṣh unnaog nishnoh pasuk weetatteamungoh, tohwaj Jehovah yeu unnehteunk yeu missi keitotan?
E.22.8 And many nations shall pass by this city, and they shall say every man to his neighbour, Wherefore hath the LORD done thus unto this great city?

α.22.9 Kah nag piṣh namp8hamwog, newutche nukkodtumwog 8n8waonk Jehovah um-Manitt8m8uh, & wowussumáog onkatogeh manitt8oh, kah wuttinneumuhkauóuh.
E.22.9 Then they shall answer, Because they have forsaken the covenant of the LORD their God, and worshipped other gods, and served them.

α.22.10 Mauemúhteogk napukeg, asuh maumuttamóunúhteógk; qut mishe mauunnitteaunsheuk noh moncheit, newutche matta piṣh wonk qushkeu, asuh naum8 ne adt neekit ohke
E.22.10 Weep ye not for the dead, neither bemoan him: but weep sore for him that goeth away: for he shall return no more, nor see his native country.

α.22.11 Newutche yeu wussin Lord papaume Shallum wunnaumonuh Josiah Judae ketass8t, noh nompe nanawunnuómont Josiahoh 8shoh, noh sohhog yeu wutch ayeuonganit, matta na piṣh wonk en qushku.
E.22.11 For thus saith the LORD touching Shallum the son of Josiah king of Judah, which reigned instead of Josiah his father, which went forth out of this place; He shall not return thither any more:

α.22.12 Qut piṣh na wuttit nuppunin uttoh adt missinohteahettit, kah matta piṣh wonk naum8 yeu ohke.
E.22.12 But he shall die in the place whither they have led him captive, and shall see this land no more.

α.22.13 Missi wutonkapunaonk noh ayig weetu nashpe mat sampweusseonk, kah 8chambersaṣh nashpe wo[ô]nkagk, noh attumunuk weetatteamunguh wutanakausuonk, kah matta onkquatauonk, kah matta wutôadtúhkauoh wutanakausuonk.
E.22.13 Woe unto him that buildeth his house by unrighteousness, and his chambers by wrong; that useth his neighbour's service without wages, and giveth him not for his work;

α.22.14 Noh an8wadt nutayim mishe kehchikkomuk, kah mogke kishke chambersaṣh, kah wunnussum kenogkenegash, kah appuhquau chikkupoh, kah musquadtsôsu.
E.22.14 That saith, I will build me a wide house and large chambers, and cutteth him out windows; and it is cieled with cedar, and painted with vermilion.

α.22.15 Sun woh kenanawunnuam newutche kutabpuhquomp chikkuppog? sunnummatta k8sh meetseis kah wuttattam8us, kah usseis wussittumóonk, kah sampweusseonk, neit 8niyeuwontamun?
E.22.15 Shalt thou reign, because thou closest thyself in cedar? did not thy father eat and drink, and do judgment and justice, and then it was well with him?

α.22.16 Wussittum uppissaumatonk matcheku, kah quenauhikquit, neit 8niyeuhikqun; sunnummatta yeu n8wahetteaonk wussin Jehovah.
E.22.16 He judged the cause of the poor and needy; then it was well with him: was not this to know me? saith the LORD.

α.22.17 Qut kuskesukquaṣh kah kuttah webe wutch hahchewontamóonk, kah soksquadthamunat mat woskehuwae musqueheonk, kah sunukqutchahwhuttuonk, kah chekée ussenat.
E.22.17 But thine eyes and thine heart are not but for thy covetousness, and for to shed innocent blood, and for oppression, and for violence, to do it.

α.22.18 Newutche yeu wussin Jehovah papaume Jehojakim wunnaumonuh Josiah Judae ketass8t, matta piṣh ummauemóuh, woi neemat, woi neetompas: matta piṣh ummauém8uh n8wahettit, woi lord, woi wussohsumóonk.
E.22.18 Therefore thus saith the LORD concerning Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah; They shall not lament for him, saying, Ah my brother! or, Ah sister! they shall not lament for him, saying, Ah lord! or, Ah his glory!

α.22.19 Piṣh posekinau ne posekinit asse, pamontonchimáhettit, kah sohwohteahettit en áongkoue Jerusaleme squontamehtu.
E.22.19 He shall be buried with the burial of an ass, drawn and cast forth beyond the gates of Jerusalem.

α.22.20 Kuhkuhquiṣh Lebanon, maush, kah mishont8aṣh ut Bashan, kah maush ut ôsukonganit; newutche wame womonadtcheg paguanóog.
E.22.20 Go up to Lebanon, and cry; and lift up thy voice in Bashan, and cry from the passages: for all thy lovers are destroyed.

α.22.21 Kukkinnonup wanniyéan, qut kussip, matta nunn8tam, yeu kuttinniyeuonk wutch k8skenuunneat, matta ken8swetam8unat n8wadtau[a]tonkqussuonk.
E.22.21 I spake unto thee in thy prosperity; but thou saidst, I will not hear. This hath been thy manner from thy youth, that thou obeyedst not my voice.

α.22.22 Waban piṣh mahchipp8 wame Pastorsoh, kah womonacheg piṣh missinoóog, wunnamuhkut piṣh neit kutakoj, kah piṣh kutchepsham wutch wame kummatcheseongaṣh.
E.22.22 The wind shall eat up all thy pastors, and thy lovers shall go into captivity: surely then shalt thou be ashamed and confounded for all thy wickedness.

α.22.23 Woi ken wadohkean Lebanon, wâdsháhteáan ut chikkupuhtukqut, uttoh piṣh kuttin wunneetupanatamwéin onkquommom8ongaṣh yeanâhkukkongquean, wutonkquommom8ongaṣh mittamwossis neechadt.
E.22.23 O inhabitant of Lebanon, that makest thy nest in the cedars, how gracious shalt thou be when pangs come upon thee, the pain as of a woman in travail!

α.22.24 Pomantamon wussin Jehovah, Coniah wunnaumonuh Jehojakim Judae ketass8t tôhkonogque nompak8unnú8 ut nuttinohkôunit, onch na k8ch kodtinunun.
E.22.24 As I live, saith the LORD, though Coniah the son of Jehoiakim king of Judah were the signet upon my right hand, yet would I pluck thee thence;

α.22.25 Kah kuttinnumaush ut wunnutchegan8w[ô]ut neg kodnushikqueaneg, kah en wunnutchegan8wout neg wuskesuk8 quohtaman, ut wunnutcheganit Nebuchadnezzar Babilone ketass8t, kah ut wunnutchegan8wout Caldeansog.
E.22.25 And I will give thee into the hand of them that seek thy life, and into the hand of them whose face thou fearest, even into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, and into the hand of the Chaldeans.

α.22.26 Kah kussohwhokonsh, kah kokas noh nekhikquean, ut onkatogke ohkeit ne mo adt nekean kah na pish kuttit nuppun.
E.22.26 And I will cast thee out, and thy mother that bare thee, into another country, where ye were not born; and there shall ye die.

α.22.27 Qut ohkeit na kodtantamwehettit en qushkenat na matta pish wuttin qushkeineau.
E.22.27 But to the land whereunto they desire to return, thither shall they not return.

α.22.28 Sun yeuoh wosketomp Coniah sekeneauou pokshae nunnukontunkoh: sun noh wishquiyeu ne adt mat wekontam8onganun8g? tohwutch nag sohwohteaog, nagum kah 8skannemunneoh, kah pogketamwog en ohkeit ne matta wahteauhétteg[?]
E.22.28 Is this man Coniah a despised broken idol? is he a vessel wherein is no pleasure? wherefore are they cast out, he and his seed, and are cast into a land which they know not?

α.22.29 Woi ohke, ohke, ohke[,] n8tash wuttinn8waonk Jehovah.
E.22.29 O earth, earth, earth, hear the word of the LORD.

α.22.30 Yeu wussin Lord, wussukhamok yeuoh wosketomp, matta wunnechaneg wosketomp noh matta woh waniegk ut ukkesukkodtumut: newutche matta wosketomp 8m8oh 8skannemunit pish wunniyeoh: appinneat wutappuonganit David, kah nano nanawunnuadt ut Judah.
E.22.30 Thus saith the LORD, Write ye this man childless, a man that shall not prosper in his days: for no man of his seed shall prosper, sitting upon the throne of David, and ruling any more in Judah.

α.23.1 MIssi wutonkapunnaongan8 Pastorsog, neg pagwohteacheg kah seahwhoncheg wuttittanadtupp8ongan8 nusshepsumog wussin Jehovah.
E.23.1 Woe be unto the pastors that destroy and scatter the sheep of my pasture! saith the LORD.

α.23.2 Newutche yeu wussin Lord um-Manitt8m8uh Israel, ayeuuhkonittue Pastorsog neg assamoncheg nummissinninnumoh kusseahwhomw8 nufflockum, kah kutama8hkauoog, kah matta nag kenatauwaheoog, kusseh natauwahettue kupponamauonumw8 kummatche usseongan8oash wussin Jehovah.
E.23.2 Therefore thus saith the LORD God of Israel against the pastors that feed my people; Ye have scattered my flock, and driven them away, and have not visited them: behold, I will visit upon you the evil of your doings, saith the LORD.

α.23.3 Kah nummukkin sekqshoncheg ut nuf[-]flockumut wutchwame wutohtimoinash uttoh ann8hkauog, kah wonk nuppas8oog, ut wutchippinneutunkan8out, kah nag pish mishimmeechummuog, kah nano monaog.
E.23.3 And I will gather the remnant of my flock out of all countries whither I have driven them, and will bring them again to their folds; and they shall be fruitful and increase.

α.23.4 Kah nuttahshinnumauoog nanashipsaenuog, neg pish sohkom8unoncheg, kah nag matta pish wonk wabeseog asuh chepshau8og, asuh matta pish waneteau8og pasuk8 wussin Jehovah.
E.23.4 And I will set up shepherds over them which shall feed them: and they shall fear no more, nor be dismayed, neither shall they be lacking, saith the LORD.

α.23.5 Kusseh, kesukodtásh peyaum8ash wussin Lord, nutomohkinumau David sampweusseae wuttuhk, kah ketass8t pish nanawunnuau, kah pish wunayeu, kah pish usseu wussittumoonk kah sampweusseonk ut ohkeit.
E.23.5 Behold, the days come, saith the LORD, that I will raise unto David a righteous Branch, and a King shall reign and prosper, and shall execute judgment and justice in the earth.

α.23.6 Ut ukkesukodtumut Judah pish wadchanau, kah Israel pish wunayeu, kah yeu 8wesuonk ne pish ahen[l]t: JEHOVAH NUSSAMPWE USSEONGANIIN.
E.23.6 In his days Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely: and this is his name whereby he shall be called, THE LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS.

α.23.7 Newutche kusseh, kesukodtash peyaum8ash wussin Jehovah, nag matta pish wonk unn8wo8og, Lord pomantam noh sohh8wunomp Israélloh wutch ohkit Egypt.
E.23.7 Therefore, behold, the days come, saith the LORD, that they shall no more say, The LORD liveth, which brought up the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt;

α.23.8 Qut Lord pômantam, noh sohh8wunomp kah sagkompagunomp 8skannem Israelle week, wutch nanumohkeit, kah wutch wame wutohtimoneat uttoh ann8hkauog, kah nag pish ayeu[ô]g nehenwonché wutohkeyeuout.
E.23.8 But, The LORD liveth, which brought up and which led the seed of the house of Israel out of the north country, and from all countries whither I had driven them; and they shall dwell in their own land.

α.23.9 Nuttah ut nuttinnomiyeumut pokshau newutche quoshodtumwaenuog, wame nuskonash nunnukshaash: nuttatuppeyeu kogkeussippamwaenuut (kah neaneyeu wosketomp aneukongquit wine) newutche Jehovah, kah wutche 8neetupa[n]atamwe unn8waongash.
E.23.9 Mine heart within me is broken because of the prophets; all my bones shake; I am like a drunken man, and like a man whom wine hath overcome, because of the LORD, and because of the words of his holiness.

α.23.10 Newutche ohke wunnumwapeneau mamussuénuog, newutche nashpe chadchekeyeuwaonk, ohke mau8m8, wunneayeuongash ut touohkomuk nunohtaash, kah wuttinniyeuongan8 matchit, kah wutchekeusseongan8 matta sampwan8.
E.23.10 For the land is full of adulterers; for because of swearing the land mourneth; the pleasant places of the wilderness are dried up, and their course is evil, and their force is not right.

α.23.11 Newutche naneeswe quoshodtumwaen kah sephausuwaen nishkeneungqussuog, nux, ut nekit namehteauun ummatcheseonk wussin Jehovah.
E.23.11 For both prophet and priest are profane; yea, in my house have I found their wickedness, saith the LORD.

α.23.12 Newutche pish ummayou tatuppeyeu8 ut wuhhogkaout t8neque mayash ut pohkenahtu: nag pish kutchittoushaog, kah na$ut penushaog: newutche pish nuppaudtauoog machut natauwahae kodtum8m8 wussin Jehovah.
E.23.12 Wherefore their way shall be unto them as slippery ways in the darkness: they shall be driven on, and fall therein: for I will bring evil upon them, even the year of their visitation, saith the LORD.

α.23.13 Kah nunnaum wutass8tuongan8 quoshodtumwaenuog ut Samaria: nag quoshodtamwog ut Baal, kah panneseaheaog Israelloh nummissinninnumoh.
E.23.13 And I have seen folly in the prophets of Samaria; they prophesied in Baal, and caused my people Israel to err.

α.23.14 Kah wonk nunnaum nishkeneunkquok ut Jerusaleme quoshodtumawenuut, mamussuog, pomushaog pann8wonganit, menehketeauog wonk wunnutchegan8oaṣh matchesecheg, onk matta howan woh qushku wutch ummatcheseonganit: nag wame tatuppeyeuog ut nuhhogkat Sodom, kah wadohkitcheg naut tatuppeyeu8og Gomorrah.
E.23.14 I have seen also in the prophets of Jerusalem an horrible thing: they commit adultery, and walk in lies: they strengthen also the hands of evildoers, that none doth return from his wickedness; they are all of them unto me as Sodom, and the inhabitants thereof as Gomorrah.

α.23.15 Newutche yeu wussin Jehovah ayeuteaunit papaume quoshodtumwaenuog, kusseh, nussohkom8un[ó]og wormw8d, kah 8tattamwaheóuh weesweeu nippe: newutche wutch Jerusaleme quoshodumwaenúog, eiantukeiyeuonk sohham8m8 en wame wutohtimóineat.
E.23.15 Therefore thus saith the LORD of hosts concerning the prophets; Behold, I will feed them with wormwood, and make them drink the water of gall: for from the prophets of Jerusalem is profaneness gone forth into all the land.

α.23.16 Yeu wussin Jehovah ayeuteaunit, n8tam8hteók ukkutt8ongan8oaṣh quoshodtumwaenuog, neg missohhamunkqueógig; nag tohken8cheáhik8oog: nag n8waog monomansuonk wutch nehenwonche wuttahh8wóut, kah matta wuch wutt8nut Jehovah.
E.23.16 Thus saith the LORD of hosts, Hearken not unto the words of the prophets that prophesy unto you: they make you vain: they speak a vision of their own heart, and not out of the mouth of the LORD.

α.23.17 Nag ash wuttinóuh neh sekeneunkqueaneh: Jehovah n8wau, piṣh k8nohteamw8, kah unnáog nishnoh pasuk8, noh ásuhkog nehenwonche wuttahh8wae unnantam8onk; wanne machuk piṣh kenuhkuhkongk8mw8.
E.23.17 They say still unto them that despise me, The LORD hath said, Ye shall have peace; and they say unto every one that walketh after the imagination of his own heart, No evil shall come upon you.

α.23.18 Newutche howan neepauwit ukkogúhqutteam8onganit Jehovah, kah wahteunk, kah n8tog wuttinn8waonk? howan kahkinneasit ukkutt8wonk n8tog?
E.23.18 For who hath stood in the counsel of the LORD, and hath perceived and heard his word? who hath marked his word, and heard it?

α.23.19 Kusseh, Jehovah uppemsquohhumoh sohham8m8 ut musquantam8onganit, unkqueneunkque pemsquoh, piṣh unkqueneunkque penushau ut uppuhkukqut matcheetou.
E.23.19 Behold, a whirlwind of the LORD is gone forth in fury, even a grievous whirlwind: it shall fall grievously upon the head of the wicked.

α.23.20 Ummusquantam8onk Jehovah matta piṣh qushkemun8, nô pajeh kestauunat, kah pakodche ussenat wuttahh8wae unnantam8ongaṣh: ut maumachiṣh kesukodtut, piṣh kuppannuppeyeue natwontamuneau.
E.23.20 The anger of the LORD shall not return, until he have executed, and till he have performed the thoughts of his heart: in the latter days ye shall consider it perfectly.

α.23.21 Matta yeug nutann8nóog quoshodtumwaénuog, qut quogqueog: matta nag nukken8náog, qut nag quoshodtumwog.
E.23.21 I have not sent these prophets, yet they ran: I have not spoken to them, yet they prophesied.

α.23.22 Qut neepauwéhettis nukkogáhqutteam8onganit, kah n8tamwáheáhettis nummissinninnúmoh nuttinn8waongaṣh, neit woh nag qushk8panneg wutch ummatchemayyeuóut, kah wutch ummatcheseongan8óut.
E.23.22 But if they had stood in my counsel, and had caused my people to hear my words, then they should have turned them from their evil way, and from the evil of their doings.

α.23.23 Sun nen paswe Manit wussin Jehovah, kah matta nô|adt Manit?
E.23.23 Am I a God at hand, saith the LORD, and not a God afar off?

α.23.24 Sun woh howan adtahshau wuhhogkuh, ut asampamukquodtut, onk woh mo nunnauoh wussin Jehovah? sunnummatta nunnumwohto8h kesuk kah ohke wussin Jehovah?
E.23.24 Can any hide himself in secret places that I shall not see him? saith the LORD. Do not I fill heaven and earth? saith the LORD.

α.23.25 Nunn8tauomp toh quoshodtumwaenuog an8wahetteup, pann8wayeuongash quoshodtumwehettit ut n8wesuonganit, n8wahettit, nuttinnukquom, nuttinnukquom.
E.23.25 I have heard what the prophets said, that prophesy lies in my name, saying, I have dreamed, I have dreamed.

α.23.26 Toh utt8che piṣh yeu ohteau wuttahh8wout quoshodtumwaenuog, neg pann8waongash quoshódtukeg? nux, nag quoshodtumwog wuttahh8wae as8kekodteam8onganooash;
E.23.26 How long shall this be in the heart of the prophets that prophesy lies? yea, they are prophets of the deceit of their own heart;

α.23.27 Nag unnantamwog wanantamwáheonat nummissinninnúmog n8wesuonk, nashpe wuttinnukquomuwonganooash, neg ánoncheg nishno[h] pasuk weetatteamunguh, neane 8sh8uh wananatamohettit n8wesuonk wutche Baal.
E.23.27 Which think to cause my people to forget my name by their dreams which they tell every man to his neighbour, as their fathers have forgotten my name for Baal.

α.23.28 Quoshodtumwaenin noh anukquonk, unn8w[á]j unnukquom8onk, kah noh ohtunk nuttinn8waonk, unn8waj nuttinn8waonk, pabuhtanumwe: teagwas wussadteamunash ut wheatut? wussin Jehovah.
E.23.28 The prophet that hath a dream, let him tell a dream; and he that hath my word, let him speak my word faithfully. What is the chaff to the wheat? saith the LORD.

α.23.29 Sunnummatta nuttinn8waonk tatuppéyeuunn8 n8taut? wussin Jehovah, kah onatuh hammer, ne sogquetahham8m8uk qussuk?
E.23.29 Is not my word like as a fire? saith the LORD; and like a hammer that breaketh the rock in pieces?

α.23.30 Newutche kusseh, nen nutáyeuuhkon quoshodtumwaenuog, wussin Jehovah, neg kôm8tukeg nuttinn8w[á]onk niṣh$noh pasuk wutch weetatteamunganit.
E.23.30 Therefore, behold, I am against the prophets, saith the LORD, that steal my words every one from his neighbour.

α.23.31 Kusseh, nen nutáyeuuhkon quoshodtumwaenuog, wussin Jehovah, neg m8sitteunkeg weenannu8 kah an8wahettit, noh wussin.
E.23.31 Behold, I am against the prophets, saith the LORD, that use their tongues, and say, He saith.

α.23.32 Kusseh, nag nutáyeuuhkonoog quoshae missohhogig pann8wae unnukquom8ongash wussin Lord, kah wussinneau, kah panne usseáheáog nummissinninnúmog nashpe uppann8waongan8oash, kah nashpe wunnonkan8ongan8, qut matta nutann8noog, asuh nuttinann8nóuneau: newaj piṣh mat wunáyeuheahetteg yeuh missinninnúh wussin Jehovah.
E.23.32 Behold, I am against them that prophesy false dreams, saith the LORD, and do tell them, and cause my people to err by their lies, and by their lightness; yet I sent them not, nor commanded them: therefore they shall not profit this people at all, saith the LORD.

α.23.33 Kah yeug missinninnúog, asuh quoshodtumwaen, asuh sephausuwaen, nat8tamungquean, n8wahettit, teagwas 8weéanun Lord? neit nag piṣh kuttinòog, teagwe weanun? nen kutohquanumunumw8 wussin Jehovah,
E.23.33 And when this people, or the prophet, or a priest, shall ask thee, saying, What is the burden of the LORD? thou shalt then say unto them, What burden? I will even forsake you, saith the LORD.

α.23.34 Kah quoshodtumwaen, kah sephausuwaen, kah missinninnumog neg an8wacheg, 8wéanun Jehovah, nussasamatuh noh wosketomp, kah wek.
E.23.34 And as for the prophet, and the priest, and the people, that shall say, The burden of the LORD, I will even punish that man and his house.

α.23.35 Yeu piṣh kuttinnoneau niṣhnoh pasuk weetatteamungoh, kah nishnoh pasuk wematoh, toh unnunnamp8ham Jehovah, kah toh n8wau Jehovah?
E.23.35 Thus shall ye say every one to his neighbour, and every one to his brother, What hath the LORD answered? and, What hath the LORD spoken?

α.23.36 Kah 8weanun Jehovah matta piṣh wonk kummiṣhamm8uneau: newutche niṣh$noh howan ukkutt8wonk ne piṣh 8weanun, newutche k8woonkitteamw8 ukkutt8wongash pomantamwae God; Jehovah ayeuteaunit num$Manitt8mun.
E.23.36 And the burden of the LORD shall ye mention no more: for every man's word shall be his burden; for ye have perverted the words of the living God, of the LORD of hosts our God.

α.23.37 Yeu pish kuttinnon quoshodtumwaenin, toh kuttin namp8hamunk Jehovah, kah Jehovah toh n8wau?
E.23.37 Thus shalt thou say to the prophet, What hath the LORD answered thee? and, What hath the LORD spoken?

α.23.38 Qut newutche kussimw8, 8weanun Jehovah, newaj yeu n8wadt Jehovah, newutche yeu kussinneau kutt8onk, 8weanun Jehovah, kah nunnegont8wop en kuhhogkaout, nussip, matta pish kussimw8 8weanun Jehovah.
E.23.38 But since ye say, The burden of the LORD; therefore thus saith the LORD; Because ye say this word, The burden of the LORD, and I have sent unto you, saying, Ye shall not say, The burden of the LORD;

α.23.39 Newutche kusseh, nen papaquánne k8wananumunumw8, kah kutohquanumunumw8, kah keitotan aninnumauunog, kah k8sh8woog, kah kuppogkenunnumw8 wutch anaquabeh.
E.23.39 Therefore, behold, I, even I, will utterly forget you, and I will forsake you, and the city that I gave you and your fathers, and cast you out of my presence:

α.23.40 Kah kuppaudtauunumw8 machemoht[a]g spu[n]adtuonk, kah machemohtag akodchuonk matta pish wanatam8muk.
E.23.40 And I will bring an everlasting reproach upon you, and a perpetual shame, which shall not be forgotten.

α.24.1 LOrd nukkuhk8tomunkqunuh, kah kusseh, neesunnútogkodtash figsash ponamunash anaquohtag wut-Templum Jehovah, Nebuchadnezar Babilone ketass8t mahche missinohkonittue monchanont Jeconiah wunnaumonuh Jehojakim Judae ketass8t, kah Judae sontimoog, kah weekitteaenuog kah Smithsog wutch Jerusalem, kah uppas8uh Babilon.
E.24.1 The LORD shewed me, and, behold, two baskets of figs were set before the temple of the LORD, after that Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon had carried away captive Jeconiah the son of Jehoiakim king of Judah, and the princes of Judah, with the carpenters and smiths, from Jerusalem, and had brought them to Babylon.

α.24.2 Pasuk Man8t ohteau wunnegenash figsash, ogqueneunkquodtash figsash nish negonne kesa[n]8tagish: kah onkatog Man8t matchetaṣh figsash, niṣh woh mo meech8mukiṣh newutche mamatchittaṣh.
E.24.2 One basket had very good figs, even like the figs that are first ripe: and the other basket had very naughty figs, which could not be eaten, they were so bad.

α.24.3 Neit Jehovah nuttinuk, teagwas kenaum Jeremiah? kah nussip, figsaṣh: wunnegenash figsash, ahche wunnegenaṣh, kah machukiṣh ahche matchitaṣh, niṣh woh mo meech8mukiṣh newutche mamatchitaṣh.
E.24.3 Then said the LORD unto me, What seest thou, Jeremiah? And I said, Figs; the good figs, very good; and the evil, very evil, that cannot be eaten, they are so evil.

α.24.4 Neit wonk wuttinn8waonk Jehovah nuppeyaonuk n8wau,
E.24.4 Again the word of the LORD came unto me, saying,

α.24.5 Yeu wussin Jehovah um-Manitt8moh Israel, ogqueneunkquotaṣh yeuṣh wanegukiṣh figs[a]ṣh, ne nuttinne waheoneau, neg masinohteamukeg wutch Judah, neg ann8t[è]amwéoneg yeu wutch ayeuonganit en wutohtuóut Caldeansoh wutche wanegik.
E.24.5 Thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel; Like these good figs, so will I acknowledge them that are carried away captive of Judah, whom I have sent out of this place into the land of the Chaldeans for their good.

α.24.6 Newutche nag nummonunneauóog wutch wanegik, kah nag wonk nupp8oog yeu ut ohkeit, kah nag n8weekikkonóog, kah matta nunn8kinóog, kah nag nutohteuhkonunk, kah matta nukkodadchabukinóog.
E.24.6 For I will set mine eyes upon them for good, and I will bring them again to this land: and I will build them, and not pull them down; and I will plant them, and not pluck them up.

α.24.7 Kah nag nuttinnumauáog metah n8wahikquna[ó]ut, nen noh Jehovah, kah nag piṣh nummissinninnúmog, kah nag nen um-Manitt8m8uh: newutche nag piṣh quinnuppeog ut nuhhogkat nashpe mamusse wuttahhou.
E.24.7 And I will give them an heart to know me, that I am the LORD: and they shall be my people, and I will be their God: for they shall return unto me with their whole heart.

α.24.8 Kah onatuh matche figsaṣh, niṣh woh mo meech8mukiṣh newutche mamatchitash (wunnamuhkut yeu wussin Jehovah) ne nuttinne aninnumauón Zedechiah Judae ketass8t, kah wussontimom8uh, kah ashqshoncheg ut Jerusalem, [á]shqshoncheg yeu ut ohkeit, kah neg wadohkitche Egypte ohkeit.
E.24.8 And as the evil figs, which cannot be eaten, they are so evil; surely thus saith the LORD, So will I give Zedekiah the king of Judah, and his princes, and the residue of Jerusalem, that remain in this land, and them that dwell in the land of Egypt:

α.24.9 Kah nag nuttinnumauóog ontahtauunat wame ass8tam8ongaṣh ohkeit, wutche woskeheaongan8, kehkomónat ushpunnamonat momontauonat, kah matchenánumáe unnonat ut wame ayeuonganehtu toh an8hkauog.
E.24.9 And I will deliver them to be removed into all the kingdoms of the earth for their hurt, to be a reproach and a proverb, a taunt and a curse, in all places whither I shall drive them.

α.24.10 Kah nutann8tam togkodteg, kah mahshagquodt, kah unninneaonk kenugke nagoh, nô pajeh mahchimwunneaóont wutch ohkeit, ne anumauogkup, kah 8sh8oh.
E.24.10 And I will send the sword, the famine, and the pestilence, among them, till they be consumed from off the land that I gave unto them and to their fathers.

α.25.1 WUttinn8waonk ne pauhônukqut Jeremiah papaume wame Judae missinninnúog, weyaue kodtum8m Jehojakim wunnaumonuh Josiah Judae ketass8t, ne 8skekodtum8g Nebuchad[r]ezzar Babylone ketass8t.
E.25.1 The word that came to Jeremiah concerning all the people of Judah in the fourth year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah, that was the first year of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon;

α.25.2 Ne Jeremiah quoshodtumwaen kôn8nompuh wame Judae missinninnúh, kah en wame wadohkitcheg Jerusalem, n8wau,
E.25.2 The which Jeremiah the prophet spake unto all the people of Judah, and to all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, saying,

α.25.3 Wutch nabo wunnishwe kodtum8mut Josiah wunnaumonuh Ammon Judae ketass8t, pajeh yeu kesukok (ne neesneechage nishwe kodtum8) wuttinn8waonk Jehovah nuppeyaonuk, kah kuttinnonunnáop, nompoáe omohkeon kah kodt8hkôon, qut matta kukkeihketam8uneau.
E.25.3 From the thirteenth year of Josiah the son of Amon king of Judah, even unto this day, that is the three and twentieth year, the word of the LORD hath come unto me, and I have spoken unto you, rising early and speaking; but ye have not hearkened.

α.25.4 Kah Jehovah nutann8nuk en wame kuhhogkaôut quoshodtumwaenûh wuttinninnúmoh, nompoáe omohkeon, kah ann8teamwean, qut matta ken8tam8m8, kah matta kenaúohtauogaemw8 n8tamunat.
E.25.4 And the LORD hath sent unto you all his servants the prophets, rising early and sending them; but ye have not hearkened, nor inclined your ear to hear.

α.25.5 Nag n8waog, qushkek wonk yeuyeu nishnoh pasuk wutch ummatche mayut, kah wutche kummatche usseonganit, kah ayekq ut ohkeit ne Jehovah aninnumunkqueog, kah k8sh8out micheme kah micheme.
E.25.5 They said, Turn ye again now every one from his evil way, and from the evil of your doings, and dwell in the land that the LORD hath given unto you and to your fathers for ever and ever:

α.25.6 Kah asuhkauúhteogk onkatogig manitt8og wuttinneumuhkauónat kah wowussumónat, kah ahque m8m8sqhegk en musquantam8onganit, nashpe kenutchegane anakausuongan8oash, kah matta piṣh k8woskhennomw8.
E.25.6 And go not after other gods to serve them, and to worship them, and provoke me not to anger with the works of your hands; and I will do you no hurt.

α.25.7 Qut matta kukkeiketiomw8 wussin Lord, onk woh kumm8hm8sqhinneaóut musquanitamunat nashpe kenutchegane anakausuonganóoaṣh, en k8woskhitteaongan8.
E.25.7 Yet ye have not hearkened unto me, saith the LORD; that ye might provoke me to anger with the works of your hands to your own hurt.

α.25.8 Newutche yeu wussin Jehovah ayeuteaunit, newutche matta ken8tam8mw8 nuttinn8waongaṣh.
E.25.8 Therefore thus saith the LORD of hosts; Because ye have not heard my words,

α.25.9 Kusseh, nutann8n kah nunneemun wame nannummiyeue teateashiyeuongash, wussin Jehovah, kah Nebuchadrezzar Babylone ketass8t nuttinninneum, k[a]h nag nutayeuuhkonittue pas8oog yeu ohkeit, kah ayeuuhkonittue neg na wadohkitcheg, kah ayeuuhkonittue yeush wutohtim[ó]ineaṣh waeenu, kah nag nuppapaquane pagwanóog, kah nutch[é]pshaheoog, kah nummishannánumweheaog, kah machemohtag touwushin.
E.25.9 Behold, I will send and take all the families of the north, saith the LORD, and Nebuchadrezzar the king of Babylon, my servant, and will bring them against this land, and against the inhabitants thereof, and against all these nations round about, and will utterly destroy them, and make them an astonishment, and an hissing, and perpetual desolations.

α.25.10 Nano, nag nutamaunumauóog póanittam8e wadatauatonkqussuonk kah weekontamóe wadtauatonkqussuonk, 8wadtauatonkqussuonk, wesseentamwaenin, kah 8wadtauatonkqussuonk weetauadteaenin, wadtauatonkque togguhwhonganompskosh kah 8wequai8m wequananteg.
E.25.10 Moreover I will take from them the voice of mirth, and the voice of gladness, the voice of the bridegroom, and the voice of the bride, the sound of the millstones, and the light of the candle.

α.25.11 Kah yeu mamusse ohke piṣh touwushin, kah chepshaonganú8, kah yeush wutohtimóinneaṣh piṣh wuttinneumuhkauáog Babylone ketass8tamwoh nesausuk tahshinchage kodtumwae.
E.25.11 And this whole land shall be a desolation, and an astonishment; and these nations shall serve the king of Babylon seventy years.

α.25.12 Kah piṣh n$nih nesausuk tahshinchag kodtum8aṣh mahtshunk, nussasamatoh Babylone ketass8t, kah ne wutohtim[ó]in, wussin Lord, wutch ummatcheseongan8, kah wutohtu Caldeansog, kah ne nummicheme touwushitteauwáhtauun.
E.25.12 And it shall come to pass, when seventy years are accomplished, that I will punish the king of Babylon, and that nation, saith the LORD, for their iniquity, and the land of the Chaldeans, and will make it perpetual desolations.

α.25.13 K[á]h nunnuhkinumau ne ohke wame nukkutt8wongaṣh ne áne ken8tam, wame ne ánsukwhosik yeu b8k, ne Jeremiah ayeuu[k]konittue quoshodtumwohtunk wame wutohtimóneaṣh.
E.25.13 And I will bring upon that land all my words which I have pronounced against it, even all that is written in this book, which Jeremiah hath prophesied against all the nations.

α.25.14 Newutche monatash wutohtimóneash, kah mogass8tamwog piṣh na 8chiinneauh wonk; kah nag piṣh nuttinunkquottauóog neaunak wutusseongan8aṣh, kah neaunak nehenwonche wunnutchegane anakausuonganooaṣh.
E.25.14 For many nations and great kings shall serve themselves of them also: and I will recompense them according to their deeds, and according to the works of their own hands.

α.25.15 Newutche yeu nuttugqun Lord um-Manitt8m8uh Israel, neemunush musquanittamwe wine wuttattamwaitch wutch nunnutcheganit, kah wame wutohtimóneash uttoh anann8nun wuttattamwáh.
E.25.15 For thus saith the LORD God of Israel unto me; Take the wine cup of this fury at my hand, and cause all the nations, to whom I send thee, to drink it.

α.25.16 Kah nag piṣh wuttattamwog, kah wogkouéog, kah kogkéyeuwaog, newutche togkodteg ne an8tam nag en kenugke.
E.25.16 And they shall drink, and be moved, and be mad, because of the sword that I will send among them.

α.25.17 Neit neemununup cup wutch Jehovah wunnutcheganit, kah wame wutohtimóneash n8tattamwaheoneáu, n$noh Jehovah ánunn8nukqueh.
E.25.17 Then took I the cup at the LORD's hand, and made all the nations to drink, unto whom the LORD had sent me:

α.25.18 Jerusalem, kah Judae keitotanaṣh, kah ukkeitass8tamóm8oh, kah wussontimóm8oh, n[á]g ayeuónaóut touwussinóonk, chepshaonk, mishanánittuonk, kah matchenanittuonk (neane yeu kesukok.)
E.25.18 To wit, Jerusalem, and the cities of Judah, and the kings thereof, and the princes thereof, to make them a desolation, an astonishment, an hissing, and a curse; as it is this day;

α.25.19 Pharaoh Egypte ketass8t, kah wuttinneumoh, kah wussontimomoh, kah wame ummissinninnúmoh.
E.25.19 Pharaoh king of Egypt, and his servants, and his princes, and all his people;

α.25.20 Kah wame kenukshae missinninnuog, kah wame ketass8tamwog ohkeit Uz, kah wame ketass8tamwog ohkeit Philistiansog, kah Ashkelon, kah Azzah, kah Ekron, kah sekqshoncheg ut Ashdod.
E.25.20 And all the mingled people, and all the kings of the land of Uz, and all the kings of the land of the Philistines, and Ashkelon, and Azzah, and Ekron, and the remnant of Ashdod,

α.25.21 Edom, kah Moab, kah wunnaumonuh Ammon.
E.25.21 Edom, and Moab, and the children of Ammon,

α.25.22 Kah wame Tyre ketass8tamwog, kah wame Zidon[é]e ketass8tamwog, kah munnáhhannu ketass8tamwog ut aongkoue ketahhanit.
E.25.22 And all the kings of Tyrus, and all the kings of Zidon, and the kings of the isles which are beyond the sea,

α.25.23 Dedan, kah tema, kah Buz, kah wame neg apitcheg aonkgoue adt nashik.
E.25.23 Dedan, and Tema, and Buz, and all that are in the utmost corners,

α.25.24 Kah wame Arabie ketass8tamwog, kah wame ukketass8tamómoh kenukshae missinninnúog apitcheg touohkomukqut.
E.25.24 And all the kings of Arabia, and all the kings of the mingled people that dwell in the desert,

α.25.25 Wame Zimrie ketass8tamwog, kah wame Elame ketass8tamwog, kah wame Medse ketass8tamwog.
E.25.25 And all the kings of Zimri, and all the kings of Elam, and all the kings of the Medes,

α.25.26 Kah wame nannummiyeue ketass8tamwog, nô apitcheg, kah páswoppitcheg, môeu, kah wame ass8tam8ongaṣh muttaohkeit, niṣh woskeche ut ohkeit, kah Sheshache ketass8t piṣh wutahtôe wuttattam8moh
E.25.26 And all the kings of the north, far and near, one with another, and all the kingdoms of the world, which are upon the face of the earth: and the king of Sheshach shall drink after them.

α.25.27 Newaj pish nag unnádt, yeu wussin Jehovah ayeuteaunit um-Manitt8moh Israel, wuttattum8k, kah kogkeiussippam8k, kah menadtam8k, kah kepshunk, kah omohkéhteók, newutche togkodteg ne ân8tam en kenugke kuhhogkaou.
E.25.27 Therefore thou shalt say unto them, Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel; Drink ye, and be drunken, and spue, and fall, and rise no more, because of the sword which I will send among you.

α.25.28 Kah piṣh n$nih, sekenamohettit nemunumunat wuttattamwaitch wutch kenutcheganit wuttattamunat, neit nag piṣh kuttinóog, yeu wussin Jehovah ayeuteaunit, wunnamuhkut piṣh k8tattamw8.
E.25.28 And it shall be, if they refuse to take the cup at thine hand to drink, then shalt thou say unto them, Thus saith the LORD of hosts; Ye shall certainly drink.

α.25.29 Newutche kusseh, nunn8che nuhkinnum machuk ut keitotanat, ne as8wésik wutche n8wesuonk, kah sun woh kuppapaquanne matta sasamatáhwhutteomw8? matta piṣh mat sasamatáhwhutteomw8: newutche n8wehquttum togkodteg ut wame wadohkitcheg ohkeit, wussin Jehovah ayeuteaunit.
E.25.29 For, lo, I begin to bring evil on the city which is called by my name, and should ye be utterly unpunished? Ye shall not be unpunished: for I will call for a sword upon all the inhabitants of the earth, saith the LORD of hosts.

α.25.30 Newutche ayeuuhkonittue quoshódtumau wame yeush kutt8wongash, kah nag us, Jehovah piṣh mishont8wau wutch wohqut, kah kussont8wau wutch 8neetupanatamwe appuonganit, piṣh menuhke mishont8wau ut wutappuonganit, piṣh ogque mishont8wau neg tahtahshkuhkogig weenomineash, ayeuuhkonittue wame wadohkitcheg ohkeit.
E.25.30 Therefore prophesy thou against them all these words, and say unto them, The LORD shall roar from on high, and utter his voice from his holy habitation; he shall mightily roar upon his habitation; he shall give a shout, as they that tread the grapes, against all the inhabitants of the earth.

α.25.31 Mishont8waonk piṣh peyaum8 wehqshik ohke: newutche Jehovah penuantam wutohtimoneash: piṣh kéketehtam wame weyaus, neh machetinutcheh ummagunuh en togkodteganit wussin Jehovah.
E.25.31 A noise shall come even to the ends of the earth; for the LORD hath a controversy with the nations, he will plead with all flesh; he will give them that are wicked to the sword, saith the LORD.

α.25.32 Yeu wussin Jehovah ayeuteaunit, kusseh, machuk piṣh sohham8m8 wutch wutohtimoinneat en wutohtimoinneat, kah mishe pemsquoh piṣh waabu wutch weehqshik ohke.
E.25.32 Thus saith the LORD of hosts, Behold, evil shall go forth from nation to nation, and a great whirlwind shall be raised up from the coasts of the earth.

α.25.33 Kah nashoncheh Jehovah, ne kesukok, piṣh wutch wee[h]qshik muttaok onk yaan weehqshik: nag matta piṣh maumuttam8[on]óog, asuh mukkinóog, asuh posekinóog, nag piṣh anohkeyeu8og ut ohkeit.
E.25.33 And the slain of the LORD shall be at that day from one end of the earth even unto the other end of the earth: they shall not be lamented, neither gathered, nor buried; they shall be dung upon the ground.

α.25.34 Mishont8wak kenaau nanaushepsaénuog, kah mau8k, kah ôiyômegk pukquee, kenaau negonneweógish ut flokut: newutch kenushitteae kesukodtoash, kah naswaiyeue pakodjteausuash, kah piṣh kutogque penushomw8 wunne wishquadt.
E.25.34 Howl, ye shepherds, and cry; and wallow yourselves in the ashes, ye principal of the flock: for the days of your slaughter and of your dispersions are accomplished; and ye shall fall like a pleasant vessel.

α.25.35 Kah nanaushepsaenuog matta piṣh ohtoog toh woh ashphow[á]hettit: asuh negonnewutcheg ut flokut pohquohhamunat.
E.25.35 And the shepherds shall have no way to flee, nor the principal of the flock to escape.

α.25.36 OOwadtauatonkqussue mauongan8 nanaushepsaenuog, kah wutt8noongan8 negoneyeuutcheg ut flockut, newutche Jehovah matchehteou wuttittanadtupp8ongan8.
E.25.36 A voice of the cry of the shepherds, and an howling of the principal of the flock, shall be heard: for the LORD hath spoiled their pasture.

α.25.37 Kah wunohteáe áyeuongaṣh tuméhthamun[a]ṣh, newutche ummishe musquanitteaonk Lord.
E.25.37 And the peaceable habitations are cut down because of the fierce anger of the LORD.

α.25.38 Ahquontam ukkuppiyeum onatuh qunnónou, newutche nag wutohkou touwushin, newutche wutchekee usseonk sunukkutchóhh8waénin, kah newutche wutunkque musquanitteaonk.
E.25.38 He hath forsaken his covert, as the lion: for their land is desolate because of the fierceness of the oppressor, and because of his fierce anger.

α.26.1 NOOche nanawuñuadt Jehojakim wunnaumonuh Josiah Judae ketass8t, wuttinn8waonk 8m88 Jehovah$ut, n8wau,
E.26.1 In the beginning of the reign of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah came this word from the LORD, saying,

α.26.2 Yeu wussin Jehovah, neepaush chippinneutunkanit ut Jehovah wekit, kah ken8s wame Judae keitotanash, neg paoncheg waussumónat ut wekit Jehovah, wame kutt8wongash nish an8nonish nag unnónaóut: ass[a]nukon pasuk kutt8onk.
E.26.2 Thus saith the LORD; Stand in the court of the LORD's house, and speak unto all the cities of Judah, which come to worship in the LORD's house, all the words that I command thee to speak unto them; diminish not a word:

α.26.3 N8tamwehettit, kah nishnoh pasuk qushkeit wutch ummatche mayut, onk woh nutaiuskoiantam ne machuk kodnéhheog, newutche ummatche usseongan8oaṣh.
E.26.3 If so be they will hearken, and turn every man from his evil way, that I may repent me of the evil, which I purpose to do unto them because of the evil of their doings.

α.26.4 Kah piṣh nag kuttinóog yeu wussin Jehovah, matta kukkehtiéog, pomusháonónat naumatuonk noh|pónog anaquabeog.
E.26.4 And thou shalt say unto them, Thus saith the LORD; If ye will not hearken to me, to walk in my law, which I have set before you,

α.26.5 N8tamunat ukkutt8wongan8oaṣh quoshodtumwaénue nuttinneumog, neg ann8nogig en kuhhogkaóut, naneeswe nompoáe omohkeon, kah ann8nog (qut matta ken8tamomw8.)
E.26.5 To hearken to the words of my servants the prophets, whom I sent unto you, both rising up early, and sending them, but ye have not hearkened;

α.26.6 Neit yeu wetu nutogquehteauun Shiloh, kah yeu keitotan nummatanatamwe hettamwátauun ut wame ohkee wutohtimoneaṣh.
E.26.6 Then will I make this house like Shiloh, and will make this city a curse to all the nations of the earth.

α.26.7 Neit sephausuenuog kah quoshodtumwaenuog, kah wame missinninnuog n8tauáog Jeremiahoh wussinneat yeush kutt8wongash ut wekit Jehovah.
E.26.7 So the priests and the prophets and all the people heard Jeremiah speaking these words in the house of the LORD.

α.26.8 Kah n$niyeup mahche Jeremiah unn8wadt wame Jehovah neanunn8nont, ken8nónat wame missinninnuog: sephausuenuog kah quoshodtumwaenuog, kah wame missinninnuog wuttohqunoush, n8waog, wunnamuhkut pish kenup.
E.26.8 Now it came to pass, when Jeremiah had made an end of speaking all that the LORD had commanded him to speak unto all the people, that the priests and the prophets and all the people took him, saying, Thou shalt surely die.

α.26.9 Tohwutch quoshódtuman ut 8wesuonganit Jehovah, unn8waan, yeu wetu piṣh tatuppeyeu8 Shiloh, kah yeu keitotan piṣh touwushin, amtta ayéyinat: kah wame missinninnuog ayeuuhkonittue miyaéhtauwaog Jeremiahoh, ut wekit Jehovah.
E.26.9 Why hast thou prophesied in the name of the LORD, saying, This house shall be like Shiloh, and this city shall be desolate without an inhabitant?  And all the people were gathered against Jeremiah in the house of the LORD.

α.26.10 Judae sontimòog yeush n8tamwéhettit, neit nag kuhkuhqueog wutch ketass8t wekit en wekit Jehovah, kah nag appuog ut ahhut petutteamuk wuskesquont ut wekit Jehovah.
E.26.10 When the princes of Judah heard these things, then they came up from the king's house unto the house of the LORD, and sat down in the entry of the new gate of the LORD's house.

α.26.11 Neit sephausuenuog kah quoshodtumwaenuog ken8naog sontimoh, kah wame missinninnúh n8waog: yeuoh wosketomp tumuhhouau nupp8onk, newutch yeuoh ayeuuhkonittue quoshaeu missohham yeu keitotan, neane n8tamóg ut kuhtauogk8w[ô]ut.
E.26.11 Then spake the priests and the prophets unto the princes and to all the people, saying, This man is worthy to die; for he hath prophesied against this city, as ye have heard with your ears.

α.26.12 Neit Jeremiah ken8nau wame sontimoh, kah wame missinninnúh, n8wau, Jehovah nutann8nuk ayeuuhkonittue quoshóe missohhamunat yeu wetu, kah ayeuuhkonittue yeu keitotan, wame kutt8wongash niṣh n8tamógish.
E.26.12 Then spake Jeremiah unto all the princes and to all the people, saying, The LORD sent me to prophesy against this house and against this city all the words that ye have heard.

α.26.13 Newutche yeuyeu sampweteau8k kummay8woash kah kutusseonganóoash, kah n8swehtam8k 8wadtauatonkqussuonk Jehovah kum-Manitt8mw8, kah Jehovah piṣh aiuskoiantam ne machuk ayeuuhkonittue pogkóduttumunkqueóg.
E.26.13 Therefore now amend your ways and your doings, and obey the voice of the LORD your God; and the LORD will repent him of the evil that he hath pronounced against you.

α.26.14 Qut nen, kusseh, nutap kenutchegan8wout: unnéhhek uttoh an tápeneámók.
E.26.14 As for me, behold, I am in your hand: do with me as seemeth good and meet unto you.

α.26.15 Qut wahteau8k wunnamuhkut, nushéóg, wunnamuhkut piṣh kenuhkenumauómw8 mat woskehuwae musqueheonk ut kuhhogkaóut, kah yeuut otanat, & neg na wadohkitcheg: newutche wunnamuhkut Jehovah nutann8nuk en kuhhogkaout, unn8wonat wame yeush ut kuttauogk8wout.
E.26.15 But know ye for certain, that if ye put me to death, ye shall surely bring innocent blood upon yourselves, and upon this city, and upon the inhabitants thereof: for of a truth the LORD hath sent me unto you to speak all these words in your ears.

α.26.16 Neit sontimoog kah wame missinninnúog, unnaog sephausuenuh, kah quoshodtumwaénúh, yeuoh matta tumuhhouóou nuppun: newutche kukken8nukqun ut 8wesuonganit Lord kum$Manitt8mun.
E.26.16 Then said the princes and all the people unto the priests and to the prophets; This man is not worthy to die: for he hath spoken to us in the name of the LORD our God.

α.26.17 Neit nawhutch eldersog ne ohkeit, neepoog kah ken8naog wame mukkinnée missinninnúh, n8waog,
E.26.17 Then rose up certain of the elders of the land, and spake to all the assembly of the people, saying,

α.26.18 Micah wut-Moràshit, quoshodtumup pomontog Hezechiah Judae ketass8t, kah ken8nau wame Judae missinninnuh, n8wau, yeu wussin Jehovah ayeuteaunit, Zion piṣh ogque anaskhamun ohteuhkonit, kah Jerusalem piṣh nanómukqueau; kah weetuome wadchu, touohkomukque qunuhqui ayeuongash.
E.26.18 Micah the Morasthite prophesied in the days of Hezekiah king of Judah, and spake to all the people of Judah, saying, Thus saith the LORD of hosts; Zion shall be plowed like a field, and Jerusalem shall become heaps, and the mountain of the house as the high places of a forest.

α.26.19 Hezechiah kah wame Judah wunnushóóussohhoh? sunnummatta wabesuonauous Lord, kah wehquetumauop Lord kah Lord aiuskoiantamup ne machuk, nean pogkodtittumauomp? ne woh nashpe kuppaudtauónan kukketeahogkôununónog mahshe matchuk.
E.26.19 Did Hezekiah king of Judah and all Judah put him at all to death?  did he not fear the LORD, and besought the LORD, and the LORD repented him of the evil which he had pronounced against them? Thus might we procure great evil against our souls.

α.26.20 Wonk na mo wosketomp noh quoshoe missohhogkup ut 8wesuonganit Jehovah, Urijah wunnaumonuh Shemajah, wutche[i] Kirajth$jearim: noh quoshae mussohhogkup ayeuuhkonittue yeu keitotan, kah ayeuuhkonittue yeu ohke, neaunak wame ukkutt8wongash Jeremiah.
E.26.20 And there was also a man that prophesied in the name of the LORD, Urijah the son of Shemaiah of Kirjathjearim, who prophesied against this city and against this land according to all the words of Jeremiah.

α.26.21 Kah Jehojakim ketass8t, kah wame ummenuhkesuenumoh, kah wame sontimóog n8tamwehettit ukkutt8wongash, ketass8t ukkod-nushoh: qut Urijah n8tog, wabesúp, kah wussemop, kah auop Egypt.
E.26.21 And when Jehoiakim the king, with all his mighty men, and all the princes, heard his words, the king sought to put him to death: but when Urijah heard it, he was afraid, and fled, and went into Egypt;

α.26.22 Kah Jehojakim ketass8t ann8nau wosketompuh en Egypt, Elnathan wunnaumonuh Achbor, kah wosketompoh weechok en Egypt.
E.26.22 And Jehoiakim the king sent men into Egypt, namely, Elnathan the son of Achbor, and certain men with him into Egypt.

α.26.23 Kah sohh8unaog Urijah wutch Egypt, kah uppas8ouh Jehojakimit ketass8t, kah wunnushoh nashpe togkodteg, kahwuttinnohkonoh nupp8e wuhhogkuh en 8weenohkeout missinninnuog.
E.26.23 And they fetched forth Urijah out of Egypt, and brought him unto Jehoiakim the king; who slew him with the sword, and cast his dead body into the graves of the common people.

α.26.24 Qut wunnutcheg Ahikam wunnaumonuh Shaphan weetomau Jeremiahoh, matta woh umag8unat en wunnutchegan8óut missinninnúog, wunnushonaout.
E.26.24 Nevertheless the hand of Ahikam the son of Shaphan was with Jeremiah, that they should not give him into the hand of the people to put him to death.

α.27.1 NOOche nanauwunnuadt Jehovjakim wunnaumonuh Josiah Judae ketass8t, yeu kutt8wonk peyaonukqun Jeremiah wutch Lordut, n8wau,
E.27.1 In the beginning of the reign of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah came this word unto Jeremiah from the LORD, saying,

α.27.2 Yeu Jehovah nuttugqun, ayimau kuhhog kishpissuongash kah yoakash, kah ponsh kussittuppukanit,
E.27.2 Thus saith the LORD to me; Make thee bonds and yokes, and put them upon thy neck,

α.27.3 Kah niṣh negonshhuash en Edome ketass8tamwut, kah en Moabe ketass8tamwut, kah en Amonitse ketass8tamwut, kah Tyruse ketass8tamwut, kah Zidone ketass8tamwut, ut wunnutchegan8out onn8naenuog neg paoncheg Jerusalem, en Zedechiahut Judae ketass8t.
E.27.3 And send them to the king of Edom, and to the king of Moab, and to the king of the Ammonites, and to the king of Tyrus, and to the king of Zidon, by the hand of the messengers which come to Jerusalem unto Zedekiah king of Judah;

α.27.4 Kah nag us wuttinnon[a]oont wussontimóm8oh: yeu wussin Jehovah ayeuteaunit um-Manitt8moh Israel, yeu piṣh kuttinnoneau wussontimóm8og,
E.27.4 And command them to say unto their masters, Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel; Thus shall ye say unto your masters;

α.27.5 Nutayim ohke, wosketomp kah puppinashim neg apitcheg wosketohkeit, nashpe ummishe menuhkesuonk, kah nashpe summagunumwe nuhput, kah nuttinnumauón uttoh woh kod aninnumaúog.
E.27.5 I have made the earth, the man and the beast that are upon the ground, by my great power and by my outstretched arm, and have given it unto whom it seemed meet unto me.

α.27.6 Kah yeuyeu wame yeush wutohtimoneash nummagunash en wunnutcheganit Nebuchadnezzar Babilone ketass8t, nuttinneum, kah ohteuhkone puppinashimwog wonk nuttinninnumau, 8tinninneumuhkongqunat.
E.27.6 And now have I given all these lands into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon, my servant; and the beasts of the field have I given him also to serve him.

α.27.7 Kah wame wutohtimoneash pish 8tinninneumuhkauouh, kah wunnaumonuh, kah wunnaumonuh wunnaumonuh, nô pajeh wutohkeé ahquompiyeum peyaum8uk: kah neit monateash wutohtimoneash kah mogke ketass8tamwog pish 8chiyeuounouh.
E.27.7 And all nations shall serve him, and his son, and his son's son, until the very time of his land come: and then many nations and great kings shall serve themselves of him.

α.27.8 Kah pish n$nih, ne wutohtimoin, kah ass8tamoonk ne matta wadtinninneumuhkauog nenan Nebucadnezzar Babilone ketass8t, kah matta agwe ponamog wussittuppuk 8weyokum Babilone ketass8t, ne wutohtimoin pish nussásamatahhamun, wussin Lord, nashpe togkodteg, kah nashpe mahshagquodt, kah nashpe enninneaonk, nô pajeh nummohtupanonaoont nashpe wunnutcheg.
E.27.8 And it shall come to pass, that the nation and kingdom which will not serve the same Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon, and that will not put their neck under the yoke of the king of Babylon, that nation will I punish, saith the LORD, with the sword, and with the famine, and with the pestilence, until I have consumed them by his hand.

α.27.9 Newutche ahque n8tau, kukquoshodtumwaenumog, asuh quoshae missohhamwaenuog, asuh kuttinnukquomweneum8woog, asuh kuppauwom8oog, asuh kummoneteum8oog, neg ànukqueogig, n8waog, matta pish k8tinninneumuhkauomw8 Babilone ketass8t.
E.27.9 Therefore hearken not ye to your prophets, nor to your diviners, nor to your dreamers, nor to your enchanters, nor to your sorcerers, which speak unto you, saying, Ye shall not serve the king of Babylon:

α.27.10 Newutche nag kuppann8wae quoshodtumunk8oog, nòadtit kuttin ontashikq[a]nnaoont wutch kutohtuout, ônk woh kussohh8kauununnaoont, onk woh kenuppunaoont.
E.27.10 For they prophesy a lie unto you, to remove you far from your land; and that I should drive you out, and ye should perish.

α.27.11 Qut wutohtimoneash neg paudtunkeg wussittipukan8 ut agwe weyokumut Babilone ketass8t, kah wadtinneumuhkauoncheg yeug nutappeheoog nehenwonche wutohtkeyeuout, wussin Lord, kah nag pish wutohteuhkoneau, kah pish na 8tohkinneau.
E.27.11 But the nations that bring their neck under the yoke of the king of Babylon, and serve him, those will I let remain still in their own land, saith the LORD; and they shall till it, and dwell therein.

α.27.12 Kah wonk nuttin Zedéchiah Judae ketass8t neaunak wame yeush kutt8wongash nussip, paudto8k kussittippukanash ut agwe weyokum Babilone ketass8t, kah noh wuttinneumuhkok, kah ummissinninnumoh kah pomantam8k.
E.27.12 I spake also to Zedekiah king of Judah according to all these words, saying, Bring your necks under the yoke of the king of Babylon, and serve him and his people, and live.

α.27.13 Tohwaj nuppog, ken kah kummissinninnumog nashpe togkodteg, nashpe mahshagquodt, kah nashpe enninneaonk neane ayeuuhkonittue ken8tog Jehovah wutohtimoin noh matta wadtinninnumuhkauonk Babilone ketass8t?
E.27.13 Why will ye die, thou and thy people, by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence, as the LORD hath spoken against the nation that will not serve the king of Babylon?

α.27.14 Newutche kuhkeitam8hteok wuttinn8waongan8oash quoshodtumwaeenuog, neg kon8nukqueogig, n8wahettit, matta pish k8tinninneumuhkauomw8 Babilone ketass8t: newutch kuppann8wae quoshodtumunk8oog.
E.27.14 Therefore hearken not unto the words of the prophets that speak unto you, saying, Ye shall not serve the king of Babylon: for they prophesy a lie unto you.

α.27.15 Newutche mag nag nutann8noog, wussin Jehovah, qut onch pann8wae quoshodtumwog ut n8wesuonganit, onk woh kussohh8kauunumw8, onk woh kuppagwanyimw8 kenaau kah quoshodtumwaenuog ne quoshae missohhamunkqueogig.
E.27.15 For I have not sent them, saith the LORD, yet they prophesy a lie in my name; that I might drive you out, and that ye might perish, ye, and the prophets that prophesy unto you.

α.27.16 Kah wonk nukken8nomp sephausuenuog, kah wame missinninnuog, nussip, yeu wussin Jehovah, n8tam8hteok ukkutt8wongan8oash kukquoshodtumwaeneum8oog neg quoshae missohhamunkqueogig, n8waog, kusseh, wishquash ut Jehovah wekit, pish teanuk nompe paudtauunash wutch Babilon, Newutche nag kuppann8wae quoshodtumunk8oog.
E.27.16 Also I spake to the priests and to all this people, saying, Thus saith the LORD; Hearken not to the words of your prophets that prophesy unto you, saying, Behold, the vessels of the LORD's house shall now shortly be brought again from Babylon: for they prophesy a lie unto you.

α.27.17 Nag ahque n8tau: wuttinneumuhkok Babilone ketass8t, kah pomantam8k: tohwutch woh yeu keitotan mahchumwushik?
E.27.17 Hearken not unto them; serve the king of Babylon, and live: wherefore should this city be laid waste?

α.27.18 Qut tohneit nag quoshodtumwaenuhettit, kah wuttinn8waonk Jehovah toh$neit nah weetomont, peantamauwahettich yeuyeu Jehovah ayeuteaunit, nish wishquash sequshunkish ut wekit Jehovah, kah weekit Judae ketass8t, kah ut Jerusalem, onk woh mo 8mun8ash Babilon.
E.27.18 But if they be prophets, and if the word of the LORD be with them, let them now make intercession to the LORD of hosts, that the vessels which are left in the house of the LORD, and in the house of the king of Judah, and at Jerusalem, go not to Babylon.

α.27.19 Newutche yeu n8wau Jehovah ayeuteaunit, papaume pillarsash, kah papaume keitoh, kah papaume agweyeu8gish, kah papaume ashqshunkish wishquash, nish|ohtagish yeu otanat.
E.27.19 For thus saith the LORD of hosts concerning the pillars, and concerning the sea, and concerning the bases, and concerning the residue of the vessels that remain in this city.

α.27.20 Nish Nebuchadnezar Babilone ketass8t mat neemunum8gkupash, masinohtead Jeconiah wunnaumonuh Jehojachin Judae ketass8t, wutch Jerusaleme en Babilon kah wame Judae kah Jerusalem sontimoog.
E.27.20 Which Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon took not, when he carried away captive Jeconiah the son of Jehoiakim king of Judah from Jerusalem to Babylon, and all the nobles of Judah and Jerusalem;

α.27.21 Nux yeu wussin Jehovah ayeuteaunit um-Manitt8moh Israel papaume wishquash nish ashqshunkish ut Jehovah wekit, k[á]h ut wekit Judae ketass8t kah Jerusalém.
E.27.21 Yea, thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel, concerning the vessels that remain in the house of the LORD, and in the house of the king of Judah and of Jerusalem;

α.27.22 Nash pish uss8tauunash Babylon, kah na pish ohteau nô pajeh ne kesukok nag natauwaheog wussin Lord, neit pish wonk nukkuhkuhk8uttauunash, kah nompatauunash yeu ut ayeuonganit.
E.27.22 They shall be carried to Babylon, and there shall they be until the day that I visit them, saith the LORD; then will I bring them up, and restore them to this place.

α.28.1 KAh n$niyeup ne nan kodtumuk n8che nánawunnuadt Zedechiah Judae ketass8t, yaue kodtum8g, kah napanna adtahs8it nepauz, Hananiah wunnaumonuh Azur quoshodtumwaen, noh wadchiit Gibeon, nukk[e]n8nuk ut Jehovah wekit, ut anaquabhettit sephausuenuog, kah wame missinninnúog, n8wau,
E.28.1 And it came to pass the same year, in the beginning of the reign of Zedekiah king of Judah, in the fourth year, and in the fifth month, that Hananiah the son of Azur the prophet, which was of Gibeon, spake unto me in the house of the LORD, in the presence of the priests and of all the people, saying,

α.28.2 Yeu wussin Lord ayeuteaunit um-Manitt8moh Israel n8wau, nuppohqshan weyoakumoh Babilone ketass8t.
E.28.2 Thus speaketh the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel, saying, I have broken the yoke of the king of Babylon.

α.28.3 Wuttuhshit yeu neeneese kodtum8, piṣh wonk nuppaudto yeuut ayeuonganit wame wishquash wadchikiish Jehovah wekit, niṣh Nebucad-nezzer Babilone ketass8t amaunukupash yeu wutch ayeuonganit, kah as8tunkupash Babilon.
E.28.3 Within two full years will I bring again into this place all the vessels of the LORD's house, that Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon took away from this place, and carried them to Babylon:

α.28.4 Kah wonk nuppasou yeuut ayeuonganit Jeconiah wunnaumonuh Jehoiachim Judae ketass8t, weeche wame missinóog neg aumpanneg Babilon wussin Jehovah, newutche nuppokshadtoh weyokum Babilone ketass8t
E.28.4 And I will bring again to this place Jeconiah the son of Jehoiakim king of Judah, with all the captives of Judah, that went into Babylon, saith the LORD: for I will break the yoke of the king of Babylon.

α.28.5 Neit Jeremiah quoshodtumwaén unnau quoshodtumwaenúh Hananiah ut anaquabhettit sephausuenuog, kah ut anaquabhettit wame missinninnúog, neg neepauutcheg wekit Lord.
E.28.5 Then the prophet Jeremiah said unto the prophet Hananiah in the presence of the priests, and in the presence of all the people that stood in the house of the LORD,

α.28.6 Quoshodtumwaen Jeremiah n8wau, Amen, Jehovah ne usseiteh, Lord usseitch wuttinn8waongash niṣh quoshae missohhogish, paudtauunat wonk wishquash wadchiigish wekit Jehovah kah neg wame másinóhteamukuppanneg, wutch Babilon, yeuut ayeuonganit.
E.28.6 Even the prophet Jeremiah said, Amen: the LORD do so: the LORD perform thy words which thou hast prophesied, to bring again the vessels of the LORD's house, and all that is carried away captive, from Babylon into this place.

α.28.7 Qut yeuyeu n8tash yeu kutt8wonk an8wi ut kehtauogkut, kah ut wuhtauogkut wame missinninnúh.
E.28.7 Nevertheless hear thou now this word that I speak in thine ears, and in the ears of all the people;

α.28.8 Quoshodtumwaenuog neg negonuhkiitcheg, & neg negonuhkunkqueaneg n8adt, nag ayeuuhkonittue quoshoe missohhamwontamwog monaash wutohtimoneash, kah kehche ass8tam8ongash, papaume mattompagq, kah papaume machuk, kah papaume enninneaonl.
E.28.8 The prophets that have been before me and before thee of old prophesied both against many countries, and against great kingdoms, of war, and of evil, and of pestilence.

α.28.9 Quoshodtumwaen noh quoshae missohhog wunohteaonk, wuttinn8waonk quoshodtumwaen nnák, neit quoshodtumwaen piṣh waheau, wunnamuhkut Jehovah wutañ8nuh.
E.28.9 The prophet which prophesieth of peace, when the word of the prophet shall come to pass, then shall the prophet be known, that the LORD hath truly sent him.

α.28.10 Neit Hannaniah quoshodtumwaen, nemunau yoakoh wutch Jeremiah quoshodtumwaen wussittuppukanit, kah uppohqenumun.
E.28.10 Then Hananiah the prophet took the yoke from off the prophet Jeremiah's neck, and brake it.

α.28.11 Kah Hannaniah kutt8, ut wame anaquabhettit missinninnúog n8wau, yeu wussin Lord, ne nuttinne pohquenon weyokumoh Nebuchadnezzar Babilone ketass8t, wutch wussittippukan8wóut wame wutohtimóneunk, ash naneese kodtumun8kup, kah Jeremiah quoshodtumwaen monchu.
E.28.11 And Hananiah spake in the presence of all the people, saying, Thus saith the LORD; Even so will I break the yoke of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon from the neck of all nations within the space of two full years. And the prophet Jeremiah went his way.

α.28.12 Neit wuttinn8waonk Jehovah peyaónuk Jeremiah quoshodtumwaen (mahche Hananiah quoshodtumwaen pohquenont yoakoh wutch wussittippukanit Jeremiah quoshodtumwaen) n8wau,
E.28.12 Then the word of the LORD came unto Jeremiah the prophet, after that Hananiah the prophet had broken the yoke from off the neck of the prophet Jeremiah, saying,

α.28.13 Monch, us Hannaniah n8wash, yeu wussin Jehovah, ken kuppohquenum mehtugque yokash, qut nag piṣ[k] kenompe ayimauoog mussehchuogque yoakoh.
E.28.13 Go and tell Hananiah, saying, Thus saith the LORD; Thou hast broken the yokes of wood; but thou shalt make for them yokes of iron.

α.28.14 Newutche yeu wussin Jehovah ayeuteaunit um-Manitt8moh Israel nupponam misséhchuogque yoak wussittippukan8óut wame wutohtimóinneunk, onk woh nag wuttinneumuhkauaog Nebucchad-nezzar Babilone ketass8t, kah nag piṣh 8tinninneumuhkauouh kah wonk nuttinninnumau wonk ohteuhkone puppinashimwoh.
E.28.14 For thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel; I have put a yoke of iron upon the neck of all these nations, that they may serve Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon; and they shall serve him: and I have given him the beasts of the field also.

α.28.15 Neit Jeremiah quoshodtumwaen unnau Hananiahoh quoshodtumwaen: yeuyeu n8tash Hananiah, Jehovah matta kut[á]nn8nuk8h, qut yeug missinninnúog kuppabahtantamwaheóog pann8waonk.
E.28.15 Then said the prophet Jeremiah unto Hananiah the prophet, Hear now, Hananiah; The LORD hath not sent thee; but thou makest this people to trust in a lie.

α.28.16 Newutche yeu wussin Jehovah, kusseh, kuppogkenush wutch wosket-ohkit: yeu kodtumuk piṣh kenup newutche kukkuhk8tomwehteam cheketauónat Lord.
E.28.16 Therefore thus saith the LORD; Behold, I will cast thee from off the face of the earth: this year thou shalt die, because thou hast taught rebellion against the LORD.

α.28.17 Neit Hannaniah quoshodumwaen nup ne nan kodtumuk, nabo nesausuk adtahs8it nepauz.
E.28.17 So Hananiah the prophet died the same year in the seventh month.

α.29.1 YEuyeu yeush wussukwhosue kutt8wongash, nish Jeremiah quoshodtumwaen negonshhuadche wutch Jerusalem, en ashqshoncheg eldersog, neg masinóhteámukeg, kah en sephausuénuut, kah en quoshodtumwaenuut, kahen wame missinninnuut, neh Nebuchhádnezzar másinohteacheh wutch Jerusalem en Babilon.
E.29.1 Now these are the words of the letter that Jeremiah the prophet sent from Jerusalem unto the residue of the elders which were carried away captives, and to the priests, and to the prophets, and to all the people whom Nebuchadnezzar had carried away captive from Jerusalem to Babylon;

α.29.2 (Ne mahche Jeconiah ketass8t, kah sonksq, kah eunuchsog, kah Judae kah Jerusaleme sontimoog, kah weekitteaenuog, kah smithsog mahche amaeog wutch Jerusalem)
E.29.2 (After that Jeconiah the king, and the queen, and the eunuchs, the princes of Judah and Jerusalem, and the carpenters, and the smiths, were departed from Jerusalem;)

α.29.3 Nashpe wunnutcheganit Elasah wunnaumonuh Shaphan, kah Gemariah wunnaumonuh Hilkiah, neh Zedechiah Judae ketass8t ánan8noncheh Babilon, en Nebucchadnezzar Babilone ketass8t n8wau,
E.29.3 By the hand of Elasah the son of Shaphan, and Gemariah the son of Hilkiah, (whom Zedekiah king of Judah sent unto Babylon to Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon) saying,

α.29.4 Yeu wuttinnon Jehovah ayeuhteaunit um$Manitt8moh Israel, wame neh másinóhteamukeh, neg masináhhuwáheogig wutch Jerusalem en Babilon.
E.29.4 Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel, unto all that are carried away captives, whom I have caused to be carried away from Jerusalem unto Babylon;

α.29.5 Wekikunk kah ne ayék, kah ohteuhkontam8k tanohketeaongash, kah meech8k ne nóh adtanegik.
E.29.5 Build ye houses, and dwell in them; and plant gardens, and eat the fruit of them;

α.29.6 Ummittamwussek, kah wunnaumonaek kah wuttaunek, kah ummittamwussuhkók kenaumona[o]og, kah 8wessukkauhkok kuttaun8oog, onk woh nag wunnaumoniyeuog kah wuttaunuog, onk woh na kuttit monôneau, kah matta kutogguhs8mw8.
E.29.6 Take ye wives, and beget sons and daughters; and take wives for your sons, and give your daughters to husbands, that they may bear sons and daughters; that ye may be increased there, and not diminished.

α.29.7 Kah nattinneham8k 8nohteaonk ne keitotan uttoh an missinóhkonittuáhinóg, kah peantamwanshúk Jehovahut, newutche ne piṣh k8nohteamw8 wunohteom8uk.
E.29.7 And seek the peace of the city whither I have caused you to be carried away captives, and pray unto the LORD for it: for in the peace thereof shall ye have peace.

α.29.8 Newutche yeu wussin Jehovah ayeuteaunit um-Manitt8moh Israel, kukquosh[ó]dtumwaenúmog, kah quoshoe missohhogig, neg apitcheg kenashom8óut as8kekodteamuk8teok, kah kuhkeihtam8hteok kuttinukquom8ongan8oash, nish anukquo[m]ogish.
E.29.8 For thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel; Let not your prophets and your diviners, that be in the midst of you, deceive you, neither hearken to your dreams which ye cause to be dreamed.

α.29.9 Newutche nag pann8waeu kukquoshoe missohhamunk8oog ut n8wesuonganit: matta nag nutann8noog wussin Lord.
E.29.9 For they prophesy falsely unto you in my name: I have not sent them, saith the LORD.

α.29.10 Newutche yeu wussin Jehovah, mahche nesausuk tahshinchage kodtum8ash mahtshunk ut Babilon, pish kenatauwahunumw8, kah pish nutussem n8ne kutt8onk en kuhhogkaoont, kukquinnuppekompauwah[eo]un naoont yeu en ayeuonganit.
E.29.10 For thus saith the LORD, That after seventy years be accomplished at Babylon I will visit you, and perform my good word toward you, in causing you to return to this place.

α.29.11 Newutche n8wahteoh unnanetam8ongash, nish ananatamonish en kuhhogkaout, wussin Jehovah, wunohteae unnantam8ongash, kah matta machuk, kuttinnumauununaoont pahtussuwontamoe wohkukquoshin.
E.29.11 For I know the thoughts that I think toward you, saith the LORD, thoughts of peace, and not of evil, to give you an expected end.

α.29.12 Neit pish kuppeantamaiimw8, kah pish kummonchem8, kah pish kuppeantamiimw8, kah pish ken8tauunumw8.
E.29.12 Then shall ye call upon me, and ye shall go and pray unto me, and I will hearken unto you.

α.29.13 Kah pish kenatinneahimw8, kah pish kummishkiimw8, natinneahwheog nashpe mamusse kuttahhou.
E.29.13 And ye shall seek me, and find me, when ye shall search for me with all your heart.

α.29.14 Kah pish kenamhimw8 8wau Jehovah, kah pish nukquinnuppinum kummissinnoongan8, kah kummukkinunumw8 wutch wame wutohtimoinneat, kah wutch wame ayeuonganehtu uttoh ann8hkauunog, wussin Jehovah kah wonk pish kuppas8unumw8, ut ayeuonganit ne$waj missinohkonuwahinogkup.
E.29.14 And I will be found of you, saith the LORD: and I will turn away your captivity, and I will gather you from all the nations, and from all the places whither I have driven you, saith the LORD; and I will bring you again into the place whence I caused you to be carried away captive.

α.29.15 Newutche kussimwop, Jehovah kuttahshinumunkq[un] quoshodtumwaenuh ut Babylon,
E.29.15 Because ye have said, The LORD hath raised us up prophets in Babylon;

α.29.16 Yeu wussin Jehováh papaume ketass8t noh quenapit wutappuonganit David, kah papaume wame missinninnuog neg apitcheg ne otanat, kah papaume kematt8oog neg matta weeche sohham8muk8ogig en missinnainneut.
E.29.16 Know that thus saith the LORD of the king that sitteth upon the throne of David, and of all the people that dwelleth in this city, and of your brethren that are not gone forth with you into captivity;

α.29.17 Yeu wussin Jehovah ayeuteaunit, kusseh, nunnuhkinnumauoog togkodteg, mahshagquodt kah enninneaonk kah nutogqheoog nishkeneunkque figsut, nish woh mo meech8mukish newutche matchitash.
E.29.17 Thus saith the LORD of hosts; Behold, I will send upon them the sword, the famine, and the pestilence, and will make them like vile figs, that cannot be eaten, they are so evil.

α.29.18 Kah nag nunn8sittahwhoog, nashpe togkodteg, kah nashpe máhshagquodt, kah nashpe enninneaonk, kah nag nupponoog ontsappinneat en wame ass8tam8ongash ut muttaohkit: mattanumwae unnonaoont, kah chepshónaóont & mishonánumónaoont, kah kekomonaoont ut kenugke wame wutohtimoneat uttoh ann8hkauog.
E.29.18 And I will persecute them with the sword, with the famine, and with the pestilence, and will deliver them to be removed to all the kingdoms of the earth, to be a curse, and an astonishment, and an hissing, and a reproach, among all the nations whither I have driven them:

α.29.19 Newutche matta kukkeitamoog nukkutt8wongash wussin Jehovah, nish negons[h]huwaánish nashpe quoshodtumwae nuttinnumog, nompoae omohkeon, kah ann8nog qut matta ken8tam8mw8 wussin Jehovah.
E.29.19 Because they have not hearkened to my words, saith the LORD, which I sent unto them by my servants the prophets, rising up early and sending them; but ye would not hear, saith the LORD.

α.29.20 Newutche n8tam8k wuttinn8waonk Jehovah, wame kenaau missinoog neg ann8nogeg wutch Jerusalem en Babylon.
E.29.20 Hear ye therefore the word of the LORD, all ye of the captivity, whom I have sent from Jerusalem to Babylon:

α.29.21 Yeu wussin Jehovah ayeuteaunit um-Manitt8moh Israel, papaume Ahab wunnaumonuh Kolajah, kah papaume Zedechiah wunnaumonuh Maasejah, nag quoshae missohhogig pann8waonk ut n8wesuonganit, kuss[é]h, nag nupponôog ut wunnutcheganit Nebuchad-nezzar Babilone ketass8t, kah noh piṣh wunnushoh ut anaquabeóg.
E.29.21 Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel, of Ahab the son of Kolaiah, and of Zedekiah the son of Maaseiah, which prophesy a lie unto you in my name; Behold, I will deliver them into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon; and he shall slay them before your eyes;

α.29.22 Kah nag papaume matanumwe uttuonk piṣh neemunnuma[u]óog wame Judae masin[á]itcheg, apitcheg Babilon, n8waog, Jehovah ogquehikqush Zedechiahut, kah Ahabut, neh Babilone ketass8t app8sipuh ut n8taut.
E.29.22 And of them shall be taken up a curse by all the captivity of Judah which are in Babylon, saying, The LORD make thee like Zedekiah and like Ahab, whom the king of Babylon roasted in the fire;

α.29.23 Newutche usseog nishkeneunkqussuonk ut Israel, kah mamussuog weetatteamunganóuh ummittamwuss8oh, kah n8waog pann8wae kutt8wongash ut n8wesuonganit, niṣh matta ann8nóogish nen n8wahteauunnash kah n8wauwaénuh, wussin Jehovah.
E.29.23 Because they have committed villany in Israel, and have committed adultery with their neighbours' wives, and have spoken lying words in my name, which I have not commanded them; even I know, and am a witness, saith the LORD.

α.29.24 Yeu wonk piṣh kuttinnon Shemajah wut-Nehelamit, n8wash,
E.29.24 Thus shalt thou also speak to Shemaiah the Nehelamite, saying,

α.29.25 Yeu wussin Jehovah ayeuteaunit um-Manitt8moh Israel n8wau, newutche negonshhuau lettersash ut k8wesuonganit en wame missinninnuut neg apitcheg Jerusalem, kah en Shephaniahut wunnaumonuh Maasejah sephausuwaen, en wame sephausuwaénuut, kussip,
E.29.25 Thus speaketh the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel, saying, Because thou hast sent letters in thy name unto all the people that are at Jerusalem, and to Zephaniah the son of Maaseiah the priest, and to all the priests, saying,

α.29.26 Jehovah kenompe sephausuwaenuwahik Jehojada sephausuwaen, onk woh kenaau aninnohsuenuog ut wekit Lord, wutch niṣh$noh pasuk noh kâgkéadt, kah quoshodtumwaenuwáheont wuhhogkuh, onk woh kukkupshagkin, kah ut stoksut.
E.29.26 The LORD hath made thee priest in the stead of Jehoiada the priest, that ye should be officers in the house of the LORD, for every man that is mad, and maketh himself a prophet, that thou shouldest put him in prison, and in the stocks.

α.29.27 Newutche yeuyeu, tohwutch mat auskomóad Jeremiah, wut-Anathoth, noh quoshodtumwaenuwáheont wuhhogkuh en kuhhogkaóut?
E.29.27 Now therefore why hast thou not reproved Jeremiah of Anathoth, which maketh himself a prophet to you?

α.29.28 Newutche newaj negonshhuau en kuhhogkanónut ut Babilon, n8wau, yeu missinno8onk sepeyeu8, wekekunk & ne ayék, ohkehteagk tanohketeaongash, kah meech8k ne adtannegik.
E.29.28 For therefore he sent unto us in Babylon, saying, This captivity is long: build ye houses, and dwell in them; and plant gardens, and eat the fruit of them.

α.29.29 Kah Zephaniah sephausuaen yeu wutogketamun wussukwheg, ut wuhtauogkit Jeremiah quoshodtumwaen.
E.29.29 And Zephaniah the priest read this letter in the ears of Jeremiah the prophet.

α.29.30 Neit wuttinn8waonk Jehovah peyaonuk Jeremiah n8wau,
E.29.30 Then came the word of the LORD unto Jeremiah, saying,

α.29.31 Aunchem8kae negonshhuash wame missinóog n8wash, yeu wussin Jehovah, papaume Shemajah wut-Nehelamit, newutche Shemajah kukquoshoe missohhamwa[n]shikkou, kah matta nutann8nuh, kah kuppabuhtanumwahikou pann8waonk;
E.29.31 Send to all them of the captivity, saying, Thus saith the LORD concerning Shemaiah the Nehelamite; Because that Shemaiah hath prophesied unto you, and I sent him not, and he caused you to trust in a lie:

α.29.32 Newutche yeu wussin Jehovah, kusseh, nussasametah Shemajah wut-Nehelamit, kah 8skanneumuneoh: matta piṣh 8wosketomp8moh ayeoh kenugke yeug missinninnúog, kah matta piṣh naum8 wanegik, ne piṣh aseaunshau nummissinninnúmog wussin Jehovah, newutche kuhk8tomwehteau cheketauónat Jehovah.
E.29.32 Therefore thus saith the LORD; Behold, I will punish Shemaiah the Nehelamite, and his seed: he shall not have a man to dwell among this people; neither shall he behold the good that I will do for my people, saith the LORD; because he hath taught rebellion against the LORD.

α.30.1 WUttinn8waonk ne pauhônukqut Jeremiah wutch Jehovah$ut, n8wau,
E.30.1 The word that came to Jeremiah from the LORD, saying,

α.30.2 Yeu wussin Jehovah um-Manitt8moh Israel, n8wau, wame kutt8wongash nish ánunonish, wussukhumush ut b8kut.
E.30.2 Thus speaketh the LORD God of Israel, saying, Write thee all the words that I have spoken unto thee in a book.

α.30.3 Newutche kusseh, kesukodtash peyaum8, wussin Jehovah, wonk nuppaudto ummissinnoongan8 Israelle kah Judae nummissinninnumog, wussin Jehovah, kah wonk nukqushkeáheaog en ohkeit ne anumauogkup 8sh8uh, kah nag pish wutoht[à]uuneau.
E.30.3 For, lo, the days come, saith the LORD, that I will bring again the captivity of my people Israel and Judah, saith the LORD: and I will cause them to return to the land that I gave to their fathers, and they shall possess it.

α.30.4 Kah yeush kutt8ongash nish Jehovah an8wopash papaume Israelloh kah papaume Judahoh.
E.30.4 And these are the words that the LORD spake concerning Israel and concerning Judah.

α.30.5 Newutche yeu wussin Jehovah nunn8támumun nunnukshae kah wabesue wuttauatonkqussuonk, kah matta wunohteae.
E.30.5 For thus saith the LORD; We have heard a voice of trembling, of fear, and not of peace.

α.30.6 Nat8tamwehte8k yeuyeu, kah naum8k sun wosketomp onkquommom8e neechau? tohwaj naum niṣh$noh wosketomp wunnutchegash ogque ut wusseganit mittamwoṣsis neechadt, kah wame muskesukquaṣh quinnuppem8aṣh en wompekuṣhonat.
E.30.6 Ask ye now, and see whether a man doth travail with child? wherefore do I see every man with his hands on his loins, as a woman in travail, and all faces are turned into paleness?

α.30.7 Woi, newutche ne kesukok miṣsi, newaj wanne tatuppein8g: ne ahquompi ne adt Jakob wuttamehpunadt, qut piṣh na wutch wadchanon.
E.30.7 Alas! for that day is great, so that none is like it: it is even the time of Jacob's trouble, but he shall be saved out of it.

α.30.8 Newutch piṣh n$nih ne kesukok, wuṣsin Jehovah ayeuteaunit, nuppohqun weyokumoh wutch kuṣsittippukanit, kah nuppashkukkom kukkenepissuongash, kah pen8wohteaog matta piṣh wonk 8chiéináuh naṣhpe nahoh.
E.30.8 For it shall come to pass in that day, saith the LORD of hosts, that I will break his yoke from off thy neck, and will burst thy bonds, and strangers shall no more serve themselves of him:

α.30.9 Qut nag piṣh wuttinneumuhkauáog Jehovah um-Manitt8m8oh, kah Davidoh ukketass8tamomoh neh piṣh tahshinnumauogeh.
E.30.9 But they shall serve the LORD their God, and David their king, whom I will raise up unto them.

α.30.10 Newutche wabesehkon woi nuttinninneum Jakob, wuṣsin Jehovah, asuh chepshuhteogk woi Israel: newutche kusseh, piṣh k8wadchanṣh wutch noadtit, kah k8skannemuneog wutch ummiṣinae ohkeyeout, kah Jakob piṣh qushku kah piṣh anwohsin, & pish chequnappu, kah matta piṣh howan 8wabesuwaheuh.
E.30.10 Therefore fear thou not, O my servant Jacob, saith the LORD; neither be dismayed, O Israel: for, lo, I will save thee from afar, and thy seed from the land of their captivity; and Jacob shall return, and shall be in rest, and be quiet, and none shall make him afraid.

α.30.11 Newutche k8weetomsh wussin Jehovah k8wadchanunat tôkonogque n8wohkukquoshitteauun wame wutohtimoneash uttoh an seahwhun: qut onk matta k8wohkukquosumun8: qut quttuhham8e kussásamatohwhush, kah matta mamusse mat kussasamatahwhun8 kenukkonun8.
E.30.11 For I am with thee, saith the LORD, to save thee: though I make a full end of all nations whither I have scattered thee, yet I will not make a full end of thee: but I will correct thee in measure, and will not leave thee altogether unpunished.

α.30.12 Newutche yeu wussin Jehovah, ken8chumweteahwhutteaonk matta woh neetskehteauouun, kah k8wosketeawhutteaonk unkqueneunkquot.
E.30.12 For thus saith the LORD, Thy bruise is incurable, and thy wound is grievous.

α.30.13 Matta howan kukkeket8konshik8, onk woh kutasseepsu: wanne kutahtoou ne neetskehuwom8uk.
E.30.13 There is none to plead thy cause, that thou mayest be bound up: thou hast no healing medicines.

α.30.14 Wame womonacheg k8wananumuk, matta nag kenatinneahik8og, newutché ken8chumwehtoush nashpe matwae n8chumwetahwhuttuonk, nashpe wussasamatuhh8waonk unkqueneunkqussit, wutch mataanukish kummatcheseongash, newutche kummatcheseongash nano monat[a]sh.
E.30.14 All thy lovers have forgotten thee; they seek thee not; for I have wounded thee with the wound of an enemy, with the chastisement of a cruel one, for the multitude of thine iniquity; because thy sins were increased.

α.30.15 Tohwutch wuttuhpôsean kutunkquanumoonk? kutunkquanumoonk matta woh neetskehteauouun, newutche mataanukish kummatcheseongash, newutche kummatcheseongash nano monatash waj yeu unnehen.
E.30.15 Why criest thou for thine affliction? thy sorrow is incurable for the multitude of thine iniquity: because thy sins were increased, I have done these things unto thee.

α.30.16 Newaj wame neg mahchipp8wonukqueaneg, nag pish mahchipwutuog, kah wame ayeuuhkonuhqueaneg nag pish missinno8og, nish$noh pasuk, kah nag magk8kinukqueaneg, pish mukk8kinittuog, & wame neg chechekqunukqueaneg, pish chechequnaog.
E.30.16 Therefore all they that devour thee shall be devoured; and all thine adversaries, every one of them, shall go into captivity; and they that spoil thee shall be a spoil, and all that prey upon thee will I give for a prey.

α.30.17 Newutche kenompenumoush neetskehettuonk, kah keneetskehteoush ken8chumwetahwhutteaongash, wussin Lord, newutche nag kutuss8wenukquog pagkenit: n8wahettit, yeuoh Zion, matta howan natinneawhonkeh.
E.30.17 For I will restore health unto thee, and I will heal thee of thy wounds, saith the LORD; because they called thee an Outcast, saying, This is Zion, whom no man seeketh after.

α.30.18 Yeu wussin Jehovah, kusseh, wonk nuppaudtoh Jakob ummissinnae komukquash, kah nummonaneteam wutáyeuonganooash, kah keitotan pish ayimun ut nehenwonche 8wadchumut; kah mishikkomuk pish sepohteau neaunak wuttinniyeuonk.
E.30.18 Thus saith the LORD; Behold, I will bring again the captivity of Jacob's tents, and have mercy on his dwellingplaces; and the city shall be builded upon her own heap, and the palace shall remain after the manner thereof.

α.30.19 Kah nag wutch pish sohham8m8 tabuttantamoonk, kah 8wadtauatonkqussuongan8 neg pôacheg, kah nag nummuttaanheoog, kah nag matta pish ogguhs88og; nag wonk nussohsumwaheoog, kah n[a]g matta pish ogguhs8og.
E.30.19 And out of them shall proceed thanksgiving and the voice of them that make merry: and I will multiply them, and they shall not be few; I will also glorify them, and they shall not be small.

α.30.20 wunneechan8oh wonk pish tatuppeyeu8oh n8adt, ummukkinneongan8 pish menehketeauun ut anaquabeh: kah nussasamatoh wame neg sanakutchohwhoncheg.
E.30.20 Their children also shall be as aforetime, and their congregation shall be established before me, and I will punish all that oppress them.

α.30.21 Kah ukkencheiyeum8uh pish nehenwoncheyeu8og kah wunnanawunnuaeneum8oh pish wutch sohhamog wutch wunnasha[u]m8o[ut]: nkah nuppas8tshah, kah noh pish nuppas8su[k]unk: newutche howan yeuoh quoshauom8uk wuttah nuppas8sukunkqunat wussin Jehovah.
E.30.21 And their nobles shall be of themselves, and their governor shall proceed from the midst of them; and I will cause him to draw near, and he shall approach unto me: for who is this that engaged his heart to approach unto me? saith the LORD.

α.30.22 Kah kenaau pish nummiṣsinninnuog, kah nen kum-Manitt8mw8.
E.30.22 And ye shall be my people, and I will be your God.

α.30.23 Kusseh uppemsquohhumoh Jehovah chekee sohham, sepohtae pemsquoh, onkquomom8e pish appu uppuhkukqut matcheetou
E.30.23 Behold, the whirlwind of the LORD goeth forth with fury, a continuing whirlwind: it shall fall with pain upon the head of the wicked.

α.30.24 Ummishe musquanitteaonk Jehovah matta pish qushkemun8 nô pajeh mahche usseit, kah nó pajeh mahche ussenat wuttahh8wae unnantam8ongash: ut maumachish késukodtut pish kenatwontamumw8.
E.30.24 The fierce anger of the LORD shall not return, until he hath done it, and until he have performed the intents of his heart: in the latter days ye shall consider it.

α.31.1 NEnan ahquompag wuṣsin Jehovah nen um-Manitt8m8oh wame wutteateashiyeuongan8 Israel, kah nag pish num[-]miṣsinninnumog.
E.31.1 At the same time, saith the LORD, will I be the God of all the families of Israel, and they shall be my people.

α.31.2 Yeu wussin Jehovah, missinninnuog neg ashquttahwhoncheh togkodteg namehteoog kitteamonteanittuonk ut touohkomukqut, Israel, nonche anwohsinw[a]heog.
E.31.2 Thus saith the LORD, The people which were left of the sword found grace in the wilderness; even Israel, when I went to cause him to rest.

α.31.3 Jehovah n8adt nunnaehtunk, n8wau, nux, kenashpe womonsh machemohtag womonittuonk: newaj nashpe womonittuonk kuppas8tshahesh.
E.31.3 The LORD hath appeared of old unto me, saying, Yea, I have loved thee with an everlasting love: therefore with lovingkindness have I drawn thee.

α.31.4 Wonk, k8weekekonsh, kah pish k8weekekonit woi Israelle penomp, pish wonk kenashpe wunn8whos kuttabretsash, kah pish kussohhom ut uppumukkaongan8oont neg weekontogeg.
E.31.4 Again I will build thee, and thou shalt be built, O virgin of Israel: thou shalt again be adorned with thy tabrets, and shalt go forth in the dances of them that make merry.

α.31.5 Pish wonk kutohketeam weenomwussippogwosh ut Samaria wadchutu, ohkehteaenuog pish wutohteakonaoash, kah nish pish nutogque meechinaoash nanweguk.
E.31.5 Thou shalt yet plant vines upon the mountains of Samaria: the planters shall plant, and shall eat them as common things.

α.31.6 Newutche pish kesukodu8, askuhwheteaenuog ut 8wadchumut Ephraim pish mishont8waog, neepok, kah kuhkuhquetuh en Zion en Jehovah num-Mánitt8mut.
E.31.6 For there shall be a day, that the watchmen upon the mount Ephraim shall cry, Arise ye, and let us go up to Zion unto the LORD our God.

α.31.7 Newutche yeu wussin Jehovah, weekontamwe ket8hamwanshuk Jákob, kah mishont8agk ut kenugke kehche wutohtimoinneat n8tamwahuwagk, tabuttántam8k, kah n8wak, woi Jehovah wadchán kummissinninnumog, sekqshoncheg ut Israel.
E.31.7 For thus saith the LORD; Sing with gladness for Jacob, and shout among the chief of the nations: publish ye, praise ye, and say, O LORD, save thy people, the remnant of Israel.

α.31.8 Kusseh, nag n8s8woog nanumohkeit, kah nag nummukkinoog wutch wekqshik óhke, kah nag kenugke pogkenukeg kah quanukquesitcheg, kah wompequae mittamwossis, kah noh neechadt moeu, m8chequshaog pish na wuttin quinnuppenau.
E.31.8 Behold, I will bring them from the north country, and gather them from the coasts of the earth, and with them the blind and the lame, the woman with child and her that travaileth with child together: a great company shall return thither.

α.31.9 Nag pish maue peyaog, kah nashpe peantam8ongash nussagkompa[n]oog: nuppannupwushaheáog sepupagwut, en sampwe mayut uttoh matta pish togkuṣsittassunehettég: newutche nen 8sh8oh Israel kah Ephraim noh mohtammegheog.
E.31.9 They shall come with weeping, and with supplications will I lead them: I will cause them to walk by the rivers of waters in a straight way, wherein they shall not stumble: for I am a father to Israel, and Ephraim is my firstborn.

α.31.10 N8tam8k wuttinn8waonk Jehovah woi kenáau wutohtimoinneunk, kah wahteauwahuagk en n8adte m[u]nahhannehtu, kah n8wak, noh seahwhont Israelloh pish ummoúnuh, kah pish wutogque nanawéheuh nanaushepsuenuut ufflokumut.
E.31.10 Hear the word of the LORD, O ye nations, and declare it in the isles afar off, and say, He that scattered Israel will gather him, and keep him, as a shepherd doth his flock.

α.31.11 Newutche Jehovah man8hwhau Jakoboh, kah wuttáphumauónuh neh anúe menuhkesumukqutcheh.
E.31.11 For the LORD hath redeemed Jacob, and ransomed him from the hand of him that was stronger than he.

α.31.12 Newaj piṣh peyahettit kah ket8hamóog ut kodtuhkóag Zion, kah nag piṣh moe kussitchuwanúog ut 8nétuwonganit Jehovah, wutch wheatash, kah wutche wine, kah wutche pummee, kah wutch floke kah hearde wuskoshimwesit: kah ukketeáhogkon8oh piṣh tatuppeyeu8oh sokenippontamwe tanohketeaonganit, kah matta piṣh wonk unkquanumoog.
E.31.12 Therefore they shall come and sing in the height of Zion, and shall flow together to the goodness of the LORD, for wheat, and for wine, and for oil, and for the young of the flock and of the herd: and their soul shall be as a watered garden; and they shall not sorrow any more at all.

α.31.13 Neit penomp piṣh pumukáeu muskauantam, naneeswe kehchiog kah wuskenuog moeu: newutche nukquinnuppinnum ummauongan8 en weekontam8onganit, kah nuttapheóog, kah nummuskauantamwaheoog mahche onkquanumwéhettit.
E.31.13 Then shall the virgin rejoice in the dance, both young men and old together: for I will turn their mourning into joy, and will comfort them, and make them rejoice from their sorrow.

α.31.14 Kah nuttapehteau ukketeahogkôunoh seph[á]usuwaen nashpe wees, kah nummissinninnúmog piṣh tapheóog wanegik, wussin Jehovah.
E.31.14 And I will satiate the soul of the priests with fatness, and my people shall be satisfied with my goodness, saith the LORD.

α.31.15 Yeu wussin Jehovah, wuttauatonkqussuonk n8tonkquod ut Ramah, maumuttam8onk, kah weesogohp[ó]suonk, Rachel mauémont wunneechanoh sekeneam taphettinneat wutch wunneechanoh, newutche nag matta ayeu8og.
E.31.15 Thus saith the LORD; A voice was heard in Ramah, lamentation, and bitter weeping; Rahel weeping for her children refused to be comforted for her children, because they were not.

α.31.16 Yeu wussin Jehovah, quehtittaush kummauongane wadtauatonqussuonk, kah kuskesukque missippegwash, newutche kutanakausuonk piṣh onkquodtantamun, wussin Jehovah, kah nag piṣh wonk 8mwog wutohtuóut matwaug.
E.31.16 Thus saith the LORD; Refrain thy voice from weeping, and thine eyes from tears: for thy work shall be rewarded, saith the LORD; and they shall come again from the land of the enemy.

α.31.17 Kah ne annoósuonganú8 ut k8wóhkukquosininat, wussin Jehovah, onk woh keneechanog wonk peyaog ut nehenwonche wutohkeit.
E.31.17 And there is hope in thine end, saith the LORD, that thy children shall come again to their own border.

α.31.18 Wunnamuhkut nunn8tamup Ephraim maumuttamwaheont wuhhogkuh, kussasamatahheh, kah nussasamatahwhutteap; onatuh ox asquam yokhôsegk: quinnuppineh, kah piṣh nukquinnuppinit, newutche ken Jehovah num-Manitt8m.
E.31.18 I have surely heard Ephraim bemoaning himself thus; Thou hast chastised me, and I was chastised, as a bullock unaccustomed to the yoke: turn thou me, and I shall be turned; for thou art the LORD my God.

α.31.19 Wunnamuhkut mahche quinnuppinitteap, nutaiuskoiantamup: kah mahche kuhk8tomonteaon nupponketahhamup neehquau: nutakodchip, nux nutchepshomp, newutche nunnayeutamup n8skenue kehkomitteaonk.
E.31.19 Surely after that I was turned, I repented; and after that I was instructed, I smote upon my thigh: I was ashamed, yea, even confounded, because I did bear the reproach of my youth.

α.31.20 Sun Ephraim womonog nunnaumon? sun noh nuttapeneaue mukkies? newutche nadteah ayeuuhkonittue ken8nog, nummenuhke ash pumme mehquanum; newaj nunnogkis na[b] wutt[à]mánumont, wunnamuhkut piṣh nummonanum, wussin Jehovah.
E.31.20 Is Ephraim my dear son? is he a pleasant child? for since I spake against him, I do earnestly remember him still: therefore my bowels are troubled for him; I will surely have mercy upon him, saith the LORD.

α.31.21 Wunohtoush, maye kuhkinneasuongash: mishe numwonkquodtush: ponsh kuttah nogque toumáogquehtu, may ne ayôop: qushkish wonk woi Israelle penomp, qushkish wonk en kukkeitotanahtu.
E.31.21 Set thee up waymarks, make thee high heaps: set thine heart toward the highway, even the way which thou wentest: turn again, O virgin of Israel, turn again to these thy cities.

α.31.22 Toh kuttitt8che papaumṣham, woi ken as8ep8sue wuttaunin? newutch Lord kesteauun wuske ne teag ut ohkeit: mittamwossis piṣh quinuppekauau wosketompoh.
E.31.22 How long wilt thou go about, O thou backsliding daughter? for the LORD hath created a new thing in the earth, A woman shall compass a man.

α.31.23 Yeu wussin Jehovah ayeuteaunit um-Manitt8moh Israel, aṣhpumme yeu piṣh auwohteaog kutt8onk ut ohkit Judah, kah ut ukkeitotanahtu, wonk paudtauon ummissinnoongan8, wunánumukquṣh Jehovah, woi sampweusseae ayeuonk, kah wunneetupanatamwe wadchu.
E.31.23 Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel; As yet they shall use this speech in the land of Judah and in the cities thereof, when I shall bring again their captivity; The LORD bless thee, O habitation of justice, and mountain of holiness.

α.31.24 Kah ohketeaenuog piṣh ayeuog Judah, kah ut wame ukkeitotanehtu moeu; kah nag sohwhuttunkeg flocksaṣh.
E.31.24 And there shall dwell in Judah itself, and in all the cities thereof together, husbandmen, and they that go forth with flocks.

α.31.25 Newutche nuttapeh sauunumwe keteahogkou, kah numwaméchumeh niṣh$noh neuantamwe keteahogkou.
E.31.25 For I have satiated the weary soul, and I have replenished every sorrowful soul.

α.31.26 Yeu ânag, nutt8hkep, nunnatauwompip, kah nukouéonk wunnegen ut nuhhogkat.
E.31.26 Upon this I awaked, and beheld; and my sleep was sweet unto me.

α.31.27 Kusseh, kesukodtaṣh peyaum8 wussin Jehovah, nutohketeam wek Israel kah wek Judah nashpe wosketompae wuskannem, kah nashpe puppinaṣhimwe wuskannem.
E.31.27 Behold, the days come, saith the LORD, that I will sow the house of Israel and the house of Judah with the seed of man, and with the seed of beast.

α.31.28 Kah piṣh n$nih, neane nag askuhwhekonog, nukkôdtinónat, kah pohqunónat, kah nukkepuhkonat, kah pagwanonat, kah onkapunuhkonat, ne nuttinne askuhwhekonóneáu weekekonat, ohteuhkonat, wussin Lord.
E.31.28 And it shall come to pass, that like as I have watched over them, to pluck up, and to break down, and to throw down, and to destroy, and to afflict; so will I watch over them, to build, and to plant, saith the LORD.

α.31.29 Ut yeuṣh kesukodtaṣh matta piṣh wonk n8wa8og, wut8shinneunk meechwog seáne weenominneaṣh, kah mukkiog wusketompeteáog.
E.31.29 In those days they shall say no more, The fathers have eaten a sour grape, and the children's teeth are set on edge.

α.31.30 Qut niṣh$noh pasuk piṣh nupp8wontam nehenwonche ummatcheseonk, niṣh$noh pasuk noh meechik seáne wenominneaṣh, piṣh wuskeompeteau.
E.31.30 But every one shall die for his own iniquity: every man that eateth the sour grape, his teeth shall be set on edge.

α.31.31 Kusseh, kesukodtaṣh peyaum8aṣh wussin Jehovah, piṣh nutáyimau wuske wunn8waonk wek Israel, kah wek Judah.
E.31.31 Behold, the days come, saith the LORD, that I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah:

α.31.32 Matta neaunak wunn8waonk ne ayimauogkup 8sh8uh, ne kesukok ânunog wunnutchegan8out, sohh8wunónat wutch ohkeit Egypt, ne n8n8waonk pohquenumhettit, tôkonogque nen nag wásukó8uh wussin Jehovah.
E.31.32 Not according to the covenant that I made with their fathers in the day that I took them by the hand to bring them out of the land of Egypt; which my covenant they brake, although I was an husband unto them, saith the LORD:

α.31.33 Qut ne wunn8waonk ne áyimauog wek Israel, mahche yeuṣh kesukodtaṣh, wussin Jehovah, nuppon nuttinnaumatuonk wuttinnomiyeum8óut, kah n8sukkuhhumun ut wuttahh8wout, kah neen um-Manitt8moh, kah nag piṣh nummissinninnúmog.
E.31.33 But this shall be the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel; After those days, saith the LORD, I will put my law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts; and will be their God, and they shall be my people.

α.31.34 Kah matta piṣh wonk kuhk8tomauó8 niṣh$noh pasuk weetatteamung, kah niṣh$noh pasuk wematoh, n8wonat wahúk Jehovah: newutche nag piṣh wame n8wahikquóg, wutch p[e]ississit pajeh másukkenuk wussin Jehovah, newutche nutahquontamauóog ummatcheseongan8, kah matta wonk nummequontam8 ummatcheseongan8.
E.31.34 And they shall teach no more every man his neighbour, and every man his brother, saying, Know the LORD: for they shall all know me, from the least of them unto the greatest of them, saith the LORD: for I will forgive their iniquity, and I will remember their sin no more.

α.31.35 Yeu wussin Lord, noh maguk nepauzsoh wutch kesukque wequai, kah nanepauh[s]hadt, & anogqse kuhquttum8ongash wutch nuhkonáe wequai; noh chachapenuk keitoh, tukk8og mahshont8wahetticheh, Jehóvah ayeuuhteanit ussowesu.
E.31.35 Thus saith the LORD, which giveth the sun for a light by day, and the ordinances of the moon and of the stars for a light by night, which divideth the sea when the waves thereof roar; The LORD of hosts is his name:

α.31.36 Yeush kuhk8wwaongash amaem8uk wutch anaquabeh wussin Jehovah, neit 8skannemuneoh Israel piṣh wohkukquoshinin wutohtimo88ut anaquabeh micheme.
E.31.36 If those ordinances depart from before me, saith the LORD, then the seed of Israel also shall cease from being a nation before me for ever.

α.31.37 Yeu wussin Jehovah tohneit kesuk wohqut woh quttuhhumuk, kah quenohtag ohke mishkomuk ut agque, nen piṣh wonk nuppogketam wame 8skannem Israel, wutch wame ne matche ussehettit, wussin Jehovah.
E.31.37 Thus saith the LORD; If heaven above can be measured, and the foundations of the earth searched out beneath, I will also cast off all the seed of Israel for all that they have done, saith the LORD.

α.31.38 Kusseh kesukkodtash peyaum8ash wussin Jehovah, keitotan piṣh ayimauau Jehovah, wutch qunnikommuk Hananeel, wehque [hâssá]nue squontamut.
E.31.38 Behold, the days come, saith the LORD, that the city shall be built to the LORD from the tower of Hananeel unto the gate of the corner.

α.31.39 Kah quttuhhumoe pemuneat piṣh na en piuhsuke summagunumun, ut wadchuut Gareb, kah piṣh weenisheáu wehque Gath.
E.31.39 And the measuring line shall yet go forth over against it upon the hill Gareb, and shall compass about to Goath.

α.31.40 Kah mamusse 8nôuhkoiyeu nupp8e muhhogkunk, kah pukque, kah ohteuhkonash wehque sepuissit Kidron, wehque adt nahshik horsese wutchepwoiyeue squont, piṣh wunneetupanatamweyeu8 en Lordut, matta piṣh pohqunnum8un, asuh wonk kepuhteaun micheme.
E.31.40 And the whole valley of the dead bodies, and of the ashes, and all the fields unto the brook of Kidron, unto the corner of the horse gate toward the east, shall be holy unto the LORD; it shall not be plucked up, nor thrown down any more for ever.

α.32.1 KUtt8onk ne p[á]uh[ô]nukqut Jeremiah wutch Jehovahut, ut uppiukque kodtum8mut Zedechiah Judae ketass8t, ne nabo shwosuk wutteáshe kodtum8m Nebuchad-nezar.
E.32.1 The word that came to Jeremiah from the LORD in the tenth year of Zedekiah king of Judah, which was the eighteenth year of Nebuchadrezzar.

α.32.2 Newutche neit ukkenauwameonk Babilone ketass8t weenuhkom Jerusalem: kah Jeremih quoshodtumwaen kuppuhhôsu ut chippinnutongane kuppishagkinittuonganit, ne ut wekit Judae ketass8t.
E.32.2 For then the king of Babylon's army besieged Jerusalem: and Jeremiah the prophet was shut up in the court of the prison, which was in the king of Judah's house.

α.32.3 Newutche Zedechiah Judae ketass8t ukkuppuhwhoh, n8wau, tohwaj quoshodtuman, n8w[a]an, yeu wussin Lord, kusseh, nummag ne keitotan ut wunnutcheganit Babilone ketass8t, kah noh piṣh wussohkomun?
E.32.3 For Zedekiah king of Judah had shut him up, saying, Wherefore dost thou prophesy, and say, Thus saith the LORD, Behold, I will give this city into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he shall take it;

α.32.4 Kah Zedechiah Judae ketass8t matta piṣh pohquohham8 wutch wunnutchegan8óut Caledansog, qut wunnamuhkut noh piṣh ponau wunnutcheganit Babilone ketass8t, kah mutt8n8e piṣh keket8koadtuog, kah piṣh wuskesuk88ash moninneadtum8ash.
E.32.4 And Zedekiah king of Judah shall not escape out of the hand of the Chaldeans, but shall surely be delivered into the hand of the king of Babylon, and shall speak with him mouth to mouth, and his eyes shall behold his eyes;

α.32.5 Kah noh piṣh uss8wunau Zedechiahhoh en Babilon, kah na piṣh wutappin nô pajeh nunnátauahónat, wussin Jehovah, tôkonogque kutáyeuuhkonon Caldeansog, matta piṣh kussohkôsu.
E.32.5 And he shall lead Zedekiah to Babylon, and there shall he be until I visit him, saith the LORD: though ye fight with the Chaldeans, ye shall not prosper.

α.32.6 Kah Jeremiah n8wau, wuttinn8waonk Jehovah nuppeyaonuk n8wau,
E.32.6 And Jeremiah said, The word of the LORD came unto me, saying,

α.32.7 Kusseh, Hanameel wunnaumonuh Shallum, kussusses, noh piṣh kuppeyaónuk, n8wau, adtôash nutohteuk ne ut Anathoth: ne wutche kussampwe adtôon.
E.32.7 Behold, Hanameel the son of Shallum thine uncle shall come unto thee saying, Buy thee my field that is in Anathoth: for the right of redemption is thine to buy it.

α.32.8 Neit Hanameel n8susses wunnaumonuh nuppeyaonuk ut kuppishagkinnittue chippinneutunganit, neaunak wuttinn8waonk Lord, kah nuttinuk, [á]dtôash nutohteuk, k8wehquetumoush, ne ut An[a]thoth, ne ut wutohkit Benjamin; newutche sampwe ohto[ó]nk ne kuttaihe, kah adtoâonk kuttaihe, adt[ô]ash ken. Neit n8wahteóh ne wuttinn8waonk Jehovah.
E.32.8 So Hanameel mine uncle's son came to me in the court of the prison according to the word of the LORD, and said unto me, Buy my field, I pray thee, that is in Anathoth, which is in the country of Benjamin: for the right of inheritance is thine, and the redemption is thine; buy it for thyself. Then I knew that this was the word of the LORD.

α.32.9 Kah nuttaphumauop wutohteuk Hanameel nussusses wunnaumonuh, ut Aanathoth, kah nukquthamau teaugwash, nabo nesausuk tahshinash silvere shekelsash.
E.32.9 And I bought the field of Hanameel my uncle's son, that was in Anathoth, and weighed him the money, even seventeen shekels of silver.

α.32.10 Kah n8sukkuhhumup wussukwhosuongash, kah nukkehkinneas[ú]hkonah, kah n8wauwaeneúteáp, kah nukquthum[á]uop teagwash ut quttompagh8teganit.
E.32.10 And I subscribed the evidence, and sealed it, and took witnesses, and weighed him the money in the balances.

α.32.11 Neit nunneemunomp adtô[á]e wussukwhosuongash, naneeswe ne kahkinne[a]sukósik neaunak naumatuonk, kah uṣhuwaonk, kah ne wôshwohtag.
E.32.11 So I took the evidence of the purchase, both that which was sealed according to the law and custom, and that which was open:

α.32.12 Kah adtô[á]e wussukwhosuongash nuttinnumauomp Baruch wunnaumonuh Neriah, wunnaumonuh Maasejah, ut anaquabit Hanameel nussusses wunnaumonuh, kah ut anaquabhettit wauwacheg, neg wásukkuhhukeg adtoáe wussukwhosuonk, ut anaquabhettit wame Jewsog, neg apitcheg kuppishagkinittue chippinnutunkanit.
E.32.12 And I gave the evidence of the purchase unto Baruch the son of Neriah, the son of Maaseiah, in the sight of Hanameel mine uncle's son, and in the presence of the witnesses that subscribed the book of the purchase, before all the Jews that sat in the court of the prison.

α.32.13 Kah nummeechumuhkonomp Baruch, ut anaquabhettit, nussip,
E.32.13 And I charged Baruch before them, saying,

α.32.14 Yeu wussin Jehovah ayeuteaunit um-Manitt8moh Israel, yeush neemunush wussukwhosuongash, adtoae wussukwhosuongash, naneeswe ne sealhausik, kah ne woshwohtag wussukwhosuonk, kah ponsh ohkee wishqut, onk woh nish m8cheke kesukquohtaash.
E.32.14 Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel; Take these evidences, this evidence of the purchase, both which is sealed, and this evidence which is open; and put them in an earthen vessel, that they may continue many days.

α.32.15 Newutche yeu wussin Jehovah ayeuteaunit umManitt8moh Israel, weetuomash, kah ohtéuhkonash, kah wenominneohtekonash piṣh wonk ohtauunash yeuut ohkeit.
E.32.15 For thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel; Houses and fields and vineyards shall be possessed again in this land.

α.32.16 Kah mag8on adtoáe wussukwhosuongash en Barachut wunnaumonuh Neriah, nuppeantamauomp Jehovah, nussip,
E.32.16 Now when I had delivered the evidence of the purchase unto Baruch the son of Neriah, I prayed unto the LORD, saying,

α.32.17 Woi Lord Manit, kusseh, kukkezteoh kesuk kah ohke nashpe kummishe menuhkesuonk kah kussummagunnum8e kuhpit, kah monteag kussiogkéhik8.
E.32.17 Ah Lord GOD! behold, thou hast made the heaven and the earth by thy great power and stretched out arm, and there is nothing too hard for thee:

α.32.18 Kenáhtin womoausuonk muttannonganogkussuog, kah ummatcheseongan8oash 8sh8oh, kutonkquatantam ut upp8chenauóun8óut nahohtôeu wunneechan8oh, Masugkenuk, kah M[a]nuhkesit Manit, Jehovah ayeuteaunit ne 8wesuonk.
E.32.18 Thou shewest lovingkindness unto thousands, and recompensest the iniquity of the fathers into the bosom of their children after them: the Great, the Mighty God, the LORD of hosts, is his name,

α.32.19 Noh missugken ut kogohqutteamwunneat, kah menuhkesu ut anakausuonganit, (newutche kuskesukquash woshwohtaash ut wame ummayeu[ou]t wunnaumonuh wosktompaog, aninnumauonat nishnoh pasuk neaunak ummayash, kah neanummeechumuk wutusseongash)
E.32.19 Great in counsel, and mighty in work: for thine eyes are open upon all the ways of the sons of men: to give every one according to his ways, and according to the fruit of his doings:

α.32.20 Noh ponuk kuhkinneasuongash kah monchanatam8ongash ut ohkit Egypt, pajeh yeu késukok, kah ut Israel kah kenugke onkatogig wosketompaog, kah k8wesuonganuhkau ku[h]hog, onatuh ne kesukok.
E.32.20 Which hast set signs and wonders in the land of Egypt, even unto this day, and in Israel, and among other men; and hast made thee a name, as at this day;

α.32.21 Kah kussohh8wun Israelle kummissinninnumog wutch Egypte ohkeit, nashpe kuhkinneasuongash, kah nonchanatam8ongash, kah nashpe menuhkiyeue menutcheg kah nashpe summagunnum8e muhpit, kah nashpe mishe wabesuonk.
E.32.21 And hast brought forth thy people Israel out of the land of Egypt with signs, and with wonders, and with a strong hand, and with a stretched out arm, and with great terror;

α.32.22 Kah neg kittinnumau8og yeu ohke, ne chadchekeimop 8sh8oh kittinnumauónat, ohke ne tomogok sogkodtunk, kah hony.
E.32.22 And hast given them this land, which thou didst swear to their fathers to give them, a land flowing with milk and honey;

α.32.23 Kah nag petutteaog, kah wutahtauunneau, qut nag matta n8swehtam8og k8wadtauatonkqussuonk, asuh pomushontam8og kuttinnaumatuonk, nag monteag usséog nean ann8nadt wutussenaout, newaj wame ne machuk nuhkunumauadt.
E.32.23 And they came in, and possessed it; but they obeyed not thy voice, neither walked in thy law; they have done nothing of all that thou commandedst them to do: therefore thou hast caused all this evil to come upon them:

α.32.24 Kusseh, wadchukontamwog, nag peyaog keihtotanat sohkomunnaoont, kah keitotan magun wunnutchegan8out Coldeansog, neg ayeuuhkontogig, wutche togkodteg, kah mahshagquodt kah unninneaonk, kah uttoh an8waon n$nih, kah kusseh kenaumun.
E.32.24 Behold the mounts, they are come unto the city to take it; and the city is given into the hand of the Chaldeans, that fight against it, because of the sword, and of the famine, and of the pestilence: and what thou hast spoken is come to pass; and, behold, thou seest it.

α.32.25 Kah kutussip, woi Lord Jehovah, adtoash ohteuk wutch teagwash, kah wauwaenuog neemun: newutche keitotan magun en wunnutchegan8out Caldeansog.
E.32.25 And thou hast said unto me, O Lord GOD, Buy thee the field for money, and take witnesses; for the city is given into the hand of the Chaldeans.

α.32.26 Neit peyaonuk Jeremiah wuttinn8waonk Jehovah, n8wau,
E.32.26 Then came the word of the LORD unto Jeremiah, saying,

α.32.27 Kusseh nen Jehovah um-Manitt8moh wame weyaus: sun ne teag nussioggehik?
E.32.27 Behold, I am the LORD, the God of all flesh: is there any thing too hard for me?

α.32.28 Newutche yeu wussin Jehovah kusseh, yeu nummagun keitotan en wunnutchegan8wout Caldeansog, kah en wunnutcheganit Nebuchadnezzár Babilone ketass8t, kah noh pish wussohkomun.
E.32.28 Therefore thus saith the LORD; Behold, I will give this city into the hand of the Chaldeans, and into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, and he shall take it:

α.32.29 Kah Caldeansog neg ayeuuhkontogig yeu keitotan, nag pish peyaog, kah pish chikohsumwog ne keitotan, kah chikohsumwog weetuomash nish ut woskeche sephamauwahetteup weetemungquok Baal, kah sokanumauw[á]hetteup wuttattamwe sephausuongash onkatogeh manittoh, m8m8sqhikqunnaoont.
E.32.29 And the Chaldeans, that fight against this city, shall come and set fire on this city, and burn it with the houses, upon whose roofs they have offered incense unto Baal, and poured out drink offerings unto other gods, to provoke me to anger.

α.32.30 Newutche wunnaumonuh Israel, kah wunnaumonuh Judah webe matcheseog ut anaquabeh wutch 8kenuunneaoont: newutche wunnaumonuh Israel webe numm8m8sqhikquog, nashpe wunnutchegane anakausuongan8, wussin Lord.
E.32.30 For the children of Israel and the children of Judah have only done evil before me from their youth: for the children of Israel have only provoked me to anger with the work of their hands, saith the LORD.

α.32.31 Newutche yeu keitotan nummusquantamwahikqun, kah nuppehchhikqun, wutch ne kesukok kezteauhettit, pajeh yeu kesukok, onk woh nutontahtauun wutch anaquabeh.
E.32.31 For this city hath been to me as a provocation of mine anger and of my fury from the day that they built it even unto this day; that I should remove it from before my face,

α.32.32 Wutche wame ummatchitt8m8 wunnaumonuh Israel, kah wunnaumonuh Judah, ne asehettit numm8m8sqhikqunnaout, nag, ukkehtass8tamóm8uh, wussontimom8uh, wussephausueneum8uh, kah ukquoshodtumwaeneum8uh, kah Judae wosketompaog kah wadohkitcheg Jerusalem.
E.32.32 Because of all the evil of the children of Israel and of the children of Judah, which they have done to provoke me to anger, they, their kings, their princes, their priests, and their prophets, and the men of Judah, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem.

α.32.33 Kah quinnuppinnumwog uppisquan8 en nuhhogkat, qut matta wuskesuk8, tôhkônogque nukkuhk8tomauóneau nompoáeu omohkéonish, kah kuhk8tomauog, qut o[n]ch matta n8tam8og attumunumunat kuhk8tomóadtuonk.
E.32.33 And they have turned unto me the back, and not the face: though I taught them, rising up early and teaching them, yet they have not hearkened to receive instruction.

α.32.34 Qut nag ponamwog wunnishkeneunkquodt8m8, ne ahhettammuk nashpe n8wesuonk, nishketeauunat.
E.32.34 But they set their abominations in the house, which is called by my name, to defile it.

α.32.35 Kah nag ayimauáog qunúhqui ayeuongaṣh Baaloh, niṣh ut wut8nouhkôiyeumut wunnaumonuh Hinnom: wunnaumonáuh kah wuttaunoh pannupwusháheaog n8taut en Molechut, ne matta a[n]ann8náog, asuh matta paómun8g nuttenantam8onganit, nag woh yeu wutussenáout unkquanumukquok, matcheseáheónat Judah.
E.32.35 And they built the high places of Baal, which are in the valley of the son of Hinnom, to cause their sons and their daughters to pass through the fire unto Molech; which I commanded them not, neither came it into my mind, that they should do this abomination, to cause Judah to sin.

α.32.36 Kah yeu$yeu yeu$waj n8wadt Jehovah um-Manitt8moh Israel, papaume yeu keitotan, uttoh adt n8wáog, ne piṣh magun en wunnutcheganit Babylone ketass8t nashpe togkodteg, nashpe mohshagquodt kah nashpe enninneaonk.
E.32.36 And now therefore thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel, concerning this city, whereof ye say, It shall be delivered into the hand of the king of Babylon by the sword, and by the famine, and by the pestilence;

α.32.37 Kusseh, nag nummukkinóog wutch wame wutohtimoneat, uttoh ann8hkauog musquanumog kah chenauosánumog, kah mishe musquantamon, kah wonk nuppas8óog yeu ayeuonganit, kah n8niyeuhéoog:
E.32.37 Behold, I will gather them out of all countries, whither I have driven them in mine anger, and in my fury, and in great wrath; and I will bring them again unto this place, and I will cause them to dwell safely:

α.32.38 Kah nag piṣh nummissinninnúmog, kah nen um-Manitt8m8uh.
E.32.38 And they shall be my people, and I will be their God:

α.32.39 Kah nag nuttinnumauóog pasuk metah, kah pasuk may, onk woh nag nukqushhukquog micheme, wutche 8niyeuongan8, kah wunneechan8oh nahohtôeu.
E.32.39 And I will give them one heart, and one way, that they may fear me for ever, for the good of them, and of their children after them:

α.32.40 Kah nutayimauoog machemohtag wunn8waonk, onk woh matta nukqushkehtauóog, n8neunneheonáóont, qut nupponum wuttahh8wout n8wabesuwónitteaonk onk woh nag mat nunnukkonuk8og.
E.32.40 And I will make an everlasting covenant with them, that I will not turn away from them, to do them good; but I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from me.

α.32.41 Nux, nummuskouantamounóog n8neunneheonaóont, kah nag piṣh wunnamuhkut nutohteuhkonunk ut ohkeit, nashpe mamusse nuttah, kah mamusse nukketeahogkou.
E.32.41 Yea, I will rejoice over them to do them good, and I will plant them in this land assuredly with my whole heart and with my whole soul.

α.32.42 Newutche yeu wussin Jehovah, neane nuhkunumauog yeug missinninnúog wame yeu mishe machuk, ne nuttinne paudtauóneau wame wanegik ne quoshómogkup.
E.32.42 For thus saith the LORD; Like as I have brought all this great evil upon this people, so will I bring upon them all the good that I have promised them.

α.32.43 Kah ohteuhkonash pish taphumunash yeu ohkeit, uttoh ad n8waog, tne touwushin, wanne wosketompaun8, asuh puppinashimun8, ne magun ut wunnutchegan8out Caldeansog.
E.32.43 And fields shall be bought in this land, whereof ye say, It is desolate without man or beast; it is given into the hand of the Chaldeans.

α.32.44 Wosketómpaog pish adtoaog ohteuhkonash wutche teagwash, kah wussukhumwog wauwaongash, kah kuhkinneasukóntam8ongash, kah pish wauwaenuhteaog ut ohkeit Benjamin, kah ut ayeuonganehtu quinnuppe Jerusalem, kah ut Judae keitotanehtu, kah ut wadchae keitotanehtu, kah ut 8nouhkoiyeue keitotanehtu, kah ut sowanie keitotanehtu, newutche nukqushkeah missinoog wussin Jehovah.
E.32.44 Men shall buy fields for money, and subscribe evidences, and seal them, and take witnesses in the land of Benjamin, and in the places about Jerusalem, and in the cities of Judah, and in the cities of the mountains, and in the cities of the valley, and in the cities of the south: for I will cause their captivity to return, saith the LORD.

α.33.1 NAno wuttinn8waonk Jehovah peyaonuk Jeremiah, nahohtoeu (ashpamu kuppuhhausit kuppishagkinittue chippinneutunkanit) n8wau,
E.33.1 Moreover the word of the LORD came unto Jeremiah the second time, while he was yet shut up in the court of the prison, saying,

α.33.2 Yeu wussin Jehovah noh kesteunk, Jehovah noh kahkenauwehteunk, ummenuhkehtinat, Jehovah ne 8wesuonk.
E.33.2 Thus saith the LORD the maker thereof, the LORD that formed it, to establish it; the LORD is his name;

α.33.3 Wehkomeh, kah kenamp8hamoush, kah kukkuhk8tomoush mogagish kah mamenuhkagish, nish mo wahteau8anish.
E.33.3 Call unto me, and I will answer thee, and shew thee great and mighty things, which thou knowest not.

α.33.4 Newutche yeu wussin Jehovah um-Manitt8moh Israel, papaume weetuomash yeu ut keitotanat, kah papaume week8oash Judae ketass8tamwog nish kepuhteamukish nashpe wadchuuhkontam8ongash, kah nashpe togkodteg.
E.33.4 For thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel, concerning the houses of this city, and concerning the houses of the kings of Judah, which are thrown down by the mounts, and by the sword;

α.33.5 Nag peyaog ayeuuhkononat Caldeansog, qut ne nashpe numwohtauóneau nupp8e muhhogkuh, neg nohshogeg nashpe nummusquanitteaonk, kah nashpe nutchenauausuonk, kah wutche wame yeuṣh matcheseongaṣh nupputtogguhhum nuskesuk wutch yeu keitotanat.
E.33.5 They come to fight with the Chaldeans, but it is to fill them with the dead bodies of men, whom I have slain in mine anger and in my fury, and for all whose wickedness I have hid my face from this city.

α.33.6 Kusseh, nuppaudtauwontamun pomantamóonk, kah neetskehuwaonk, kah nag nunneetskeheaog, kah n8wahteauwahéoog monat wunoht[é]aonk kah wanamuhkutéyeuuk.
E.33.6 Behold, I will bring it health and cure, and I will cure them, and will reveal unto them the abundance of peace and truth.

α.33.7 Kah ummissinoóonk Judah ah ummissinoóonk Israel nukqushkeaheoog, kah nutogque wekitteahéoog weskeu.
E.33.7 And I will cause the captivity of Judah and the captivity of Israel to return, and will build them, as at the first.

α.33.8 Kah nuppahkhéoog wutch wame ummatcheseongan8óut, uttiyeu nashpe matchenéhehetteup, kah nutahquontamauóog wame ummatcheseongan8óaṣh, nish nashpe matchenehetticheh kah pannesehtiehetticheh.
E.33.8 And I will cleanse them from all their iniquity, whereby they have sinned against me; and I will pardon all their iniquities, whereby they have sinned, and whereby they have transgressed against me.

α.33.9 Kah piṣh ut nuhhogkat wekonatmwe wesuonk, waeenomáonk kah quttiánittuonk ut wame anaquabhettit wutohtimoneunk ut ohkeit, neg n8togiṣh wame wanegik ne ánheog: kah nag piṣh wabesuog kah nunnuksháog wutche wame wanegik, kah wutche wame wunáyeuonk, ne ánteau.
E.33.9 And it shall be to me a name of joy, a praise and an honour before all the nations of the earth, which shall hear all the good that I do unto them: and they shall fear and tremble for all the goodness and for all the prosperity that I procure unto it.

α.33.10 Yeu wussin Jehovah, wonk piṣh n8tamun yeu$ut ayeuonganit (ne an8waog ne touwushin matta wosketompaun8, kah matta puppinashimun8, ut Judae keitotan[e]htu, kah Jerusalemme toumaogquehtu, nish touushikiṣh wanne wosketom[a]un8, wanne wutohkeit, wanne puppinashimun8.)
E.33.10 Thus saith the LORD; Again there shall be heard in this place, which ye say shall be desolate without man and without beast, even in the cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem, that are desolate, without man, and without inhabitant, and without beast,

α.33.11 Muskouanatamwe wadtauatonkqussuonk, kah weekontamwe wadtauatonkqussuonk, 8wadtauatonkqussuonk weetauadteaénin, 8wadtauatonkqussuongan8 nag piṣh an8wacheg, tabuttantamok Jehôvah ayeuuhteaunit, newutche Jehov[a]h wunneetou, newutche ummonanitteaonk michemohteau, kah neg piṣh paudtunkeg tabuttantamoe sephausuonk ut wekit Jehovah: newutche nukqushkeáh ohkee missinoonk, neane wesku wussin Jehovah.
E.33.11 The voice of joy, and the voice of gladness, the voice of the bridegroom, and the voice of the bride, the voice of them that shall say, Praise the LORD of hosts: for the LORD is good; for his mercy endureth for ever: and of them that shall bring the sacrifice of praise into the house of the LORD. For I will cause to return the captivity of the land, as at the first, saith the LORD.

α.33.12 Yeu wussin Jehovah ayeuteaunit, wonk yeu$ut ayeuonganit, ne touushik matta wosketompaun8ut, kah mat puppinashimun8, kah ut wame niṣh keitotanehtu piṣh wutáyeuongan8 nanaushepsaenuog, sepsinn8waheog ut flocksum8uh.
E.33.12 Thus saith the LORD of hosts; Again in this place, which is desolate without man and without beast, and in all the cities thereof, shall be an habitation of shepherds causing their flocks to lie down.

α.33.13 Ut wadchu[é] keitotanahtu, ut 8nouhkoiyeue otanahtu, kah sowaniyeue otanahtu, kah ut wutohkit Benjamin, kah ut ayeuonganéhtu quinnuppe Jerusalem, kah ut Judae otanahtu flocksog piṣh wonk pámwushaog ut agwe wunnutcheganit noh agkemont, wussin Jehovah.
E.33.13 In the cities of the mountains, in the cities of the vale, and in the cities of the south, and in the land of Benjamin, and in the places about Jerusalem, and in the cities of Judah, shall the flocks pass again under the hands of him that telleth them, saith the LORD.

α.33.14 Kusseh, kesukodtaṣh peyom8aṣh, wussin Jehovah, nutussen ne wanegik ne quoshoái ut wekit Israel, kah ut wekit Judah.
E.33.14 Behold, the days come, saith the LORD, that I will perform that good thing which I have promised unto the house of Israel and to the house of Judah.

α.33.15 Ut yeush kesukodtaṣh, kah na ahquompag, nunneetuwáht[ó]h ut wekit David sampweusseae Wuttuhk, kah noh piṣh usseu wussittumóonk kah sampweusseonk ut ohkeit.
E.33.15 In those days, and at that time, will I cause the Branch of righteousness to grow up unto David; and he shall execute judgment and righteousness in the land.

α.33.16 Yeush ut kesukodtash Judah pish wadchanau, kah Jerusalem pish wadchanae wutayin, kah yeu pish ussowetamun, Jehovah nussampweusseonganun.
E.33.16 In those days shall Judah be saved, and Jerusalem shall dwell safely: and this is the name wherewith she shall be called, The LORD our righteousness.

α.33.17 Newutche yeu wussin Jehovah, David matta pish quena[u]ahik8 wosketompuh quenapinutche Israelle weke appuonganit.
E.33.17 For thus saith the LORD; David shall never want a man to sit upon the throne of the house of Israel;

α.33.18 Kah sephausuenuog kah Levitsog matta pish quenauehikk8og wosketompuh ut anaquabeh, magunat chikohtae sephausuongash, kah nashqussumunat metsue sephausuongash kah nagwutteáe sephausinneat.
E.33.18 Neither shall the priests the Levites want a man before me to offer burnt offerings, and to kindle meat offerings, and to do sacrifice continually.

α.33.19 Kah wuttinn8waonk Jehovah peyaonuk Jeremiah n8wau,
E.33.19 And the word of the LORD came unto Jeremiah, saying,

α.33.20 Yeu wussin Jehovah pohquenumóg nukkesukodte wunn8waonk, kah nunnukkonae wunn8waonk, onk woh mo kesukodtino, kah nuhkonunn8, ut utt8cheyeu8ut.
E.33.20 Thus saith the LORD; If ye can break my covenant of the day, and my covenant of the night, and that there should not be day and night in their season;

α.33.21 Neit wonk woh n8n8waonganun David nuttinneum pohqunnumun, matta 8naumoniyeinat nanawunnuonat ut wuttappuonganit: kah n8n8waonganun Levitsog kah sephausuenuog nunohtompeantogomog.
E.33.21 Then may also my covenant be broken with David my servant, that he should not have a son to reign upon his throne; and with the Levites the priests, my ministers.

α.33.22 Neane kesukque kenauwameonk woh mo wáogketamomuk, kah kehtahhunomuk matta woh waeu quttuhhum8un, ne nuttinne mishehteauun 8skannem David nuttinneum, káh Levitsog neg wowussumukqueaneg.
E.33.22 As the host of heaven cannot be numbered, neither the sand of the sea measured: so will I multiply the seed of David my servant, and the Levites that minister unto me.

α.33.23 Nano wuttinn8waonk Jehovah peyaonuk Jeremiah, n8wau,
E.33.23 Moreover the word of the LORD came to Jeremiah, saying,

α.33.24 Sun matta kenatwontam8 yeug missinninnuog toh an8wahettit, n8wahettit, neesit teashiyeu8onk neh Jehovah pepenog, uppogkenuh? yeu wuttinne jishanumoneau nummissinninnumog onk woh matta wonk wutohtimoeinn8 ut anaquabhettit.
E.33.24 Considerest thou not what this people have spoken, saying, The two families which the LORD hath chosen, he hath even cast them off? thus they have despised my people, that they should be no more a nation before them.

α.33.25 Yeu wussin Jehovah, tohneit kesukodae kah nukkonae n8n8waonk matta ohtan8g, kah mátta kuhquttum8on kesukque kah ohkee kuhquttum8ongash.
E.33.25 Thus saith the LORD; If my covenant be not with day and night, and if I have not appointed the ordinances of heaven and earth;

α.33.26 Neit nuppogketam 8skannem Jakob kah David nuttinneum, newaj matta noh wuttinnum8 8skannem, wunnanauwunnumunnaoont 8skannemuneoh Abraham Isaak, kah Jakob: newutche nukqushkeahto ummissinn8ongan8, kah nag nummonanumoog.
E.33.26 Then will I cast away the seed of Jacob and David my servant, so that I will not take any of his seed to be rulers over the seed of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: for I will cause their captivity to return, and have mercy on them.

α.34.1 WUttinn8waonk ne pauonukqut Jeremiah wutch Jehovah$ut (Nebuchadnezzer Babilone ketass8t, kah wame ukkenauwameumoh kah wame ass8tam8ongash ut ohkeit, ut wunnanauúnnum8onganit, & wame missinninnuog ayeuuhkontamwog Jerusalem, & ayeuuhkonittue wame keitotanash na ohtagish) n8wau.
E.34.1 The word which came unto Jeremiah from the LORD, when Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, and all his army, and all the kingdoms of the earth of his dominion, and all the people, fought against Jerusalem, and against all the cities thereof, saying,

α.34.2 Yeu wussin Jehovah um-Manitt8moh Israel, monchish ken8s Zedechiah Judae ketass8t, kah us, yeu wussin Jehovah, kusseh; yeu nummagun keitotan en wunnutcheganit Babilone ketass8t, kah noh pish wutchikkossumun ut n8taut.
E.34.2 Thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel; Go and speak to Zedekiah king of Judah, and tell him, Thus saith the LORD; Behold, I will give this city into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he shall burn it with fire:

α.34.3 Kah ken matta pish kuppogquohham8 wutch wunnutcheganit: qut pish wunnamuhkut kuttohqunit, kah kuskesukquash pish naum wuskesukquash Babilone ketass8t, kah noh mutt8n8e kukken8nuk, kah pish kuttom Babilon.
E.34.3 And thou shalt not escape out of his hand, but shalt surely be taken, and delivered into his hand; and thine eyes shall behold the eyes of the king of Babylon, and he shall speak with thee mouth to mouth, and thou shalt go to Babylon.

α.34.4 Qut onch n8tash wuttinn8waonk Jehovah, woi Zedechiah Judae ketass8t: yeu wussin Lord papaume ken, matta pish kenupp8h, nashpe togkodteg.
E.34.4 Yet hear the word of the LORD, O Zedekiah king of Judah; Thus saith the LORD of thee, Thou shalt not die by the sword:

α.34.5 Qut pish k8nohteae nup, kah nashpe wutchikkossum8ongan8oash k8sh8oog, negonne ketass8tamwog, neg negonnekunkqueaneg, ne pish kitt[t]nne chikkohsumunkquneau, kah nag pish kummauwemukquog n8wahettit woi Lord: newutche nukkutt8kontam kutt8onk wussin Jehovah.
E.34.5 But thou shalt die in peace: and with the burnings of thy fathers, the former kings which were before thee, so shall they burn odours for thee; and they will lament thee, saying, Ah lord! for I have pronounced the word, saith the LORD.

α.34.6 Neit Jeremiah quoshodtumwaen, wuttinnonash wame yeush kutt8ongash Zedechiahoh Judae ketass8t ut Jerusalem.
E.34.6 Then Jeremiah the prophet spake all these words unto Zedekiah king of Judah in Jerusalem,

α.34.7 Ukkenauwameonk Babilone ketass8t ayeuuhkontamunit Jerusalem, kah wame Judae keitotanash nish sequttahhamukish, Lachish kah Azekah: newutche yeush pummenutausue keitotanash ashpumohtáash wutch Judae keitotanat.
E.34.7 When the king of Babylon's army fought against Jerusalem, and against all the cities of Judah that were left, against Lachish, and against Azekah: for these defenced cities remained of the cities of Judah.

α.34.8 Yeu kutt8onk ne pauhonukup Jeremiah wutch Jehovah$ut, mahche Zedechiah wunn8wahettit wame missinninnuh neg, apitcheg Jerusalem, nag wahteauwahuonat chippinnu8onk.
E.34.8 This is the word that came unto Jeremiah from the LORD, after that the king Zedekiah had made a covenant with all the people which were at Jerusalem, to proclaim liberty unto them;

α.34.9 Nish$noh wosketmp woh chippinnuwaheau wosketompae wuttinninneumoh Hebrewyeu8it kah nish$noh wosketomp mittamwussisse wuttinninneumoh Hebrewyeu8it, wanne howan 8chieinneat Jewsue wematoh.
E.34.9 That every man should let his manservant, and every man his maidservant, being an Hebrew or an Hebrewess, go free; that none should serve himself of them, to wit, of a Jew his brother.

α.34.10 Kah wame sontimoog, kah wame missinninnuog neg wán8wacheg n8tamwehettit, nish$noh wosketomp woh chippinnewah[é]au wosketompae wuttinninnumoh, kah nishnoh mittumwossisse wuttinninneumoh, matta woh wonk 8chienaoont, neit n8swehtámwog kah ummoncheaheuh.
E.34.10 Now when all the princes, and all the people, which had entered into the covenant, heard that every one should let his manservant, and every one his maidservant, go free, that none should serve themselves of them any more, then they obeyed, and let them go.

α.34.11 Qut ompetak nag quinnuppeog kah ukqushkeaheóuh wuttinneum8ut kah ummaidum8uh neh chapinninnuwaheahetteupoh, kah wutagwapehheouh 8tinninneumunaóut.
E.34.11 But afterward they turned, and caused the servants and the handmaids, whom they had let go free, to return, and brought them into subjection for servants and for handmaids.

α.34.12 Newaj wuttinn8waonk Jehovah peyaonukqut Jeremiah wutch Jehovah n8wau,
E.34.12 Therefore the word of the LORD came to Jeremiah from the LORD, saying,

α.34.13 Yeu wussin Lord um$Manitt8moh Israel, n8n8waheomp k8sh8óog ne kesukok sohh8wunog wutch Egypte ohkeit, wutch missinnae-kommukqut nussip,
E.34.13 Thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel; I made a covenant with your fathers in the day that I brought them forth out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondmen, saying,

α.34.14 Wehqhshik nesausuk tahshe kodtumm8, nishnoh wosketomp moncheáheonch wemátoh Hebrewoh, noh kodtauwompámunuukkus: kah noh wuttinneumuhkonukquean nequtta tahshe kodtumwaeu, neit piṣh kutchippinninnuáh wutch kuhhogkat, qut k8sh8óog matta nukkeihketónk8, asuh nutáhchuwussittuonk8og.
E.34.14 At the end of seven years let ye go every man his brother an Hebrew, which hath been sold unto thee; and when he hath served thee six years, thou shalt let him go free from thee: but your fathers hearkened not unto me, neither inclined their ear.

α.34.15 Kuhquinnuppinitteamw8 yeuyeu, kah kutussemwop ne sampwag ut anaquabeh, wahteauwáhuwáóg chippinnú8onk nishnoh pasuk en weetatteamonganit, & k8n8wamwop ut anaquabeh, ut wetuomut ne áhettamuk nashpe n8wesuonk.
E.34.15 And ye were now turned, and had done right in my sight, in proclaiming liberty every man to his neighbour; and ye had made a covenant before me in the house which is called by my name:

α.34.16 Qut kukquinnuppemw8, kah kenishketeomw8 n8wesuonk, kah kukqushkeáheomw8 nishnoh wosketomp wuttinneumoh, kah nishnoh wosketomp ummaidumoh, neg chappinninnuwáheógkuppanneg, uttoh án kodtantamwéhettit, kah kutagwapéhe[ó]óog, k8tinninneumunneaóut kah k8maidumunneaóont.
E.34.16 But ye turned and polluted my name, and caused every man his servant, and every man his handmaid, whom he had set at liberty at their pleasure, to return, and brought them into subjection, to be unto you for servants and for handmaids.

α.34.17 Newaj yeu n8wadt Lord, matta nukkehketi8mw8, wahteauwáhuónat chippinnú8onk, niṣhnoh pasuk weematoh, nishnoh pasuk wetatteamungoh: kusseh n8wahteauwáhuwam kutchippinninnu8ongan8 wussin Jehovah, en togkodteganit, en enneaonganit, kah en mahshogquodtut: kah kutontashinnumw8 en wame ass8tam8ongash ut ohkeit.
E.34.17 Therefore thus saith the LORD; Ye have not hearkened unto me, in proclaiming liberty, every one to his brother, and every man to his neighbour: behold, I proclaim a liberty for you, saith the LORD, to the sword, to the pestilence, and to the famine; and I will make you to be removed into all the kingdoms of the earth.

α.34.18 Kah wosketompaog neg panneusséhtunkeg n8n8waonk neg matta asegek wunn8wae kutt8wongash niṣh áyimukish ut anaquabeh, póhshiswáhettit calfoh, kah pannupwusháhettit ut nôeu chippaiyeuut.
E.34.18 And I will give the men that have transgressed my covenant, which have not performed the words of the covenant which they had made before me, when they cut the calf in twain, and passed between the parts thereof,

α.34.19 Judae seontimoog, kah Jerusalemme sontimoog eunuchsog, kah sephausuenuog, kah wame missinninnúog ohkeit, neg pannupwushacheg nashaue calfe chippaiyeuut.
E.34.19 The princes of Judah, and the princes of Jerusalem, the eunuchs, and the priests, and all the people of the land, which passed between the parts of the calf;

α.34.20 Neg nummagununk en wunnutchegan8out ummatwomoh, kah ut wunnutchegan8óut neg kodnushoncheg, kah nupp8e wuhhogkauh ne piṣh ummeetsuongan8 kesukque puppinshasog, kah ohkee puppinashimw[o]g.
E.34.20 I will even give them into the hand of their enemies, and into the hand of them that seek their life: and their dead bodies shall be for meat unto the fowls of the heaven, and to the beasts of the earth.

α.34.21 Kah Zedechiah Judae ketass8t kah wussontimomoh, neg nummagununk ut wunnutchegan8out ummatwom8uh, kah ut wunnutchegan8óut neg kod nushoncheg, kah ut wunnutchegan8out ukkenauwameongan8 Babilone ketass8t, neg kuhkuhquecheg wutch kuhhogkaóut.
E.34.21 And Zedekiah king of Judah and his princes will I give into the hand of their enemies, and into the hand of them that seek their life, and into the hand of the king of Babylon's army, which are gone up from you.

α.34.22 Kusseh, nag nutann8nóog, wussin Lord, kah nukqushkeaheóog yeu in otanat, kah nag piṣh wutayeuuhkontamuneau, kah piṣh wussohkomuneau, kah piṣh chikkossumuneau ut n8taut: kah Judae keitotanash nuttauwushitteauunash, matta wutohkeinneat.
E.34.22 Behold, I will command, saith the LORD, and cause them to return to this city; and they shall fight against it, and take it, and burn it with fire: and I will make the cities of Judah a desolation without an inhabitant.

α.35.1 WUttinn8waonk ne pauhónukqut Jeremiah wutch Jehovah, ut ukkesukodtumut Jehojakim wunnaumonuh Josiah Judae ketass8t n8wau,
E.35.1 The word which came unto Jeremiah from the LORD in the days of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah, saying,

α.35.2 Aush wekuout Rechabitsog, kah nag ken8s, kah nag petukos wekit Jehovah, ut pasuk chamberut, kah aninnumau wine wuttatumunat.
E.35.2 Go unto the house of the Rechabites, and speak unto them, and bring them into the house of the LORD, into one of the chambers, and give them wine to drink.

α.35.3 Neit nunnemunomp Jaazaniah wunnaumonuh Jeremiah, wunnaumonuh Habaziniah, kah weematoh, kah wame wunnaumonuh, kah mamusse wek8 Rechabitsog.
E.35.3 Then I took Jaazaniah the son of Jeremiah, the son of Habaziniah, and his brethren, and all his sons, and the whole house of the Rechabites;

α.35.4 Kah nuppetukonóog wekit Jehovah, ut wutchamberum8out wunnaumonuh Hanan wunnaumonuh Igdaliah Manittowomp, ne ohtag kishke wutchamberum8out sontimóog, ne waabe wutchamberumut Maasejah wunnaumonuh Shallum nanasquontamaenin,
E.35.4 And I brought them into the house of the LORD, into the chamber of the sons of Hanan, the son of Igdaliah, a man of God, which was by the chamber of the princes, which was above the chamber of Maaseiah the son of Shallum, the keeper of the door:

α.35.5 Kah nupponum anaquabhettit wunnaumonuh Rechabitse wetu, wishquahtu nanumwohteau wine, kah wuttattamwaitchuaṣh, kah nag nuttinnópanneg wuttattam8k wine.
E.35.5 And I set before the sons of the house of the Rechabites pots full of wine, and cups, and I said unto them, Drink ye wine.

α.35.6 Kah nag n8waog, matta n8tattam8mun wine: newutche Jonadab wunnaumonuh Rechab, nutann8nukqunnónup, n8wop, wuttattam8hteok wine kenaau asuh kenaumonáog micheme.
E.35.6 But they said, We will drink no wine: for Jonadab the son of Rechab our father commanded us, saying, Ye shall drink no wine, neither ye, nor your sons for ever:

α.35.7 Weekitteáhteogk, kah ohketeáhteogk, kah weenominneohketeahteogk, kah ahque ohtau8k: qut [n]isohke|pomantamog ayék weetuomut, onk woh kussepepomantamumw8 ut ohkeit ne adt penuwohteayeóg.
E.35.7 Neither shall ye build house, nor sow seed, nor plant vineyard, nor have any: but all your days ye shall dwell in tents; that ye may live many days in the land where ye be strangers.

α.35.8 Yeu nuttinne n8swetamunan 8wadtauatonkqussuonk Jonadab wunnaumonuh Rechab n8shun, wame neáne meechumuhkonukquéog, matta wuttattam8unat wine nisohke pomantamog, nenawun, nummittamwussinnonog, nunnaumonánonog, kah nuttaununónog.
E.35.8 Thus have we obeyed the voice of Jonadab the son of Rechab our father in all that he hath charged us, to drink no wine all our days, we, our wives, our sons, nor our daughters;

α.35.9 Matta n8wékekongk8unnanónut, ayinneat, kah matta n8weenominneohtekoneumun, matta n8tohteuhkoneumun, asuh n8skennémunneumun.
E.35.9 Nor to build houses for us to dwell in: neither have we vineyard, nor field, nor seed:

α.35.10 Qut nut[á]yimun wetuómut, kah nunn8swehtamumun, kah n8wame ussénan ne Jonadab n8shun ánann8nukqueog.
E.35.10 But we have dwelt in tents, and have obeyed, and done according to all that Jonadab our father commanded us.

α.35.11 Qut n$niyeup Nebuchadnezzar Babylone ketass8t kó[h]ku[h]quit yeu in ohkeit, nussi[m]unnonup, kah, ontuh Jerusalem, newutche n8wabesuóntamumun Syrianse kenauwameonk, kah Babylone kenauwameonk, ne$waj ayéog Jerusalem.
E.35.11 But it came to pass, when Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon came up into the land, that we said, Come, and let us go to Jerusalem for fear of the army of the Chaldeans, and for fear of the army of the Syrians: so we dwell at Jerusalem.

α.35.12 Neit wuttinn8waonk Jehovah peyaonuk Jeremiah, kah n8wau,
E.35.12 Then came the word of the LORD unto Jeremiah, saying,

α.35.13 Yeu wussin Jehovah ayeuteaunit um-Manitt8moh Israel, monchish, us Judae wosketompaog, kah wadohkitcheg Jerusalem, sunnummatta kuttattumunumomw8 kuhk8tomwehteaonk n8tamunat nukkutt8wongaṣh, wussin Jehovah.
E.35.13 Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel; Go and tell the men of Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, Will ye not receive instruction to hearken to my words? saith the LORD.

α.35.14 Wuttinn8waongash Jonadab wunnaumonuh Rechab, neanann8nomp wunnaumonuh matta wuttattam8unat wine, wutusseneau, newutche pajeh yeu kesukok matta wuttattam8og, qut n8wehtamwog 8sh8oh wutann8team8onk: qut kukken8numw8, nompoáeu omohkeon kah kodt8hkôon, qut matta kukkehketiyeúmw8.
E.35.14 The words of Jonadab the son of Rechab, that he commanded his sons not to drink wine, are performed; for unto this day they drink none, but obey their father's commandment: notwithstanding I have spoken unto you, rising early and speaking; but ye hearkened not unto me.

α.35.15 Nutann8nop wonk en kuhhogkaóut wame nuttinninnumwog quoshodtumwaenuog, nompoáe omohkeon, kah nag ann8nog, nussip, yeuyeu qushkek nishnoh pasuk wutch ummatche mayut kah oncheteau8k kutusseongan8oaṣh, kah asuhkauúhteok onkatogig manitt8og nag wuttinneumuhkauónat, kah piṣh kutayimw8 ohkeit, ne anumauunóg, kah k8sh8wóog, qut matta kutahchuwussittam8mw8,asuh kukkeihketai8mw8.
E.35.15 I have sent also unto you all my servants the prophets, rising up early and sending them, saying, Return ye now every man from his evil way, and amend your doings, and go not after other gods to serve them, and ye shall dwell in the land which I have given to you and to your fathers: but ye have not inclined your ear, nor hearkened unto me.

α.35.16 Newutche wunnaumonuh Jonadab, wunnaumonuh Rechab, usseog wutann8team8onk 8sh8uh, ne ánann8nomp nahoh, qut yeug missinninnuog matta nukkehketunk8og.
E.35.16 Because the sons of Jonadab the son of Rechab have performed the commandment of their father, which he commanded them; but this people hath not hearkened unto me:

α.35.17 Newaj yeu n8wadt Jehovah ayeuhteaunit um-Manitt8moh Israel, kusseh, nunnuhkinnumauôog Judah kah wame wadohkitcheg Jerusalem, wame machuk ne ayeuuhkone áne ken8nog: newutche nag nukken8nóog, qut nag matta n8tam8og, kah nag n8wehkomóog, qut namp8hamunk8og.
E.35.17 Therefore thus saith the LORD God of hosts, the God of Israel; Behold, I will bring upon Judah and upon all the inhabitants of Jerusalem all the evil that I have pronounced against them: because I have spoken unto them, but they have not heard; and I have called unto them, but they have not answered.

α.35.18 Kah Jeremiah unnop wek8 Rechabitsog, yeu wussin Jehovah ayeuteaunit um-Manitt8moh Israel, newutche ken8swehtamumw8 wutann8team8onk Jonadab k8shw8, kah kenanawehteomw8 wame ukkuhk8waongaṣh, kah kutussemw8 wame neánan8nukqueóg.
E.35.18 And Jeremiah said unto the house of the Rechabites, Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel; Because ye have obeyed the commandment of Jonadab your father, and kept all his precepts, and done according unto all that he hath commanded you:

α.35.19 Newajeh yeu n8wadt Jehovah ayeuteaunit um-Manitt8moh Israel, Jonadab wunnaumonuh Rechab matta piṣh quenanéhik8 wosketompuh nepauinneat anaquabeh micheme.
E.35.19 Therefore thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel; Jonadab the son of Rechab shall not want a man to stand before me for ever.

α.36.1 KAh nniyeup ut weyaue kodtum8mut Jehojakim wunnaumonuh Josiah Judae ketass8t, yeu kutt8onk uppeyaónukqun Jeremiah wutch Jehovahut, n8wau,
E.36.1 And it came to pass in the fourth year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah, that this word came unto Jeremiah from the LORD, saying,

α.36.2 Nemunumush tuttuppequia[n]ôsuwu b8k, kah ne ut wawawussukwhuṣh, kutt8wongash nish ayeuuhkonittue ânogish Israel, kah Judah, kah wame wutohtimoneaṣh, wutch ne kesukok kôn8nunon, wutch ukkesukkodtumut Josiah pajeh yeu kesukok.
E.36.2 Take thee a roll of a book, and write therein all the words that I have spoken unto thee against Israel, and against Judah, and against all the nations, from the day I spake unto thee, from the days of Josiah, even unto this day.

α.36.3 Pagwodche wek Judah woh n8tam wame machuk ne kod néhheog, onk woh nag qushkeog nishnoh pasuk wutch ummatche mayut onk woh nutahquontam ummatcheseongan8, kah uppanneseongan8.
E.36.3 It may be that the house of Judah will hear all the evil which I purpose to do unto them; that they may return every man from his evil way; that I may forgive their iniquity and their sin.

α.36.4 Neit Jeremiah wehkomau Baruchoh wunnaumonuh Neriah, kah Baruch wussuhkhum wutch wutt8nut Jeremiah, wame ukkutt8wongaṣh Jehovah, nish ánompaṣh, ut tuttuppequanausue b8kut.
E.36.4 Then Jeremiah called Baruch the son of Neriah: and Baruch wrote from the mouth of Jeremiah all the words of the LORD, which he had spoken unto him, upon a roll of a book.

α.36.5 Kah Jeremiah ann8nau Baruchoh, n8wau, nukkuphaus, matta woh nutóh weekit Jehovah.
E.36.5 And Jeremiah commanded Baruch, saying, I am shut up; I cannot go into the house of the LORD:

α.36.6 Newutche monchish, kah ogketash ut tuttuppequanausuut ne wásuhkuhhuman wutch nutt8nut, ukkutt8wongash Jehovah ut wu[h]tauogk8out missinninnuog, ut wekit Jehovah, ut matta meetsue kesukkodtut: kah niṣh piṣh wonk kutogketmunash, ut wame wuhtauogk8óut Judah neg sohhogeg wutch wutotanaóut.
E.36.6 Therefore go thou, and read in the roll, which thou hast written from my mouth, the words of the LORD in the ears of the people in the LORD's house upon the fasting day: and also thou shalt read them in the ears of all Judah that come out of their cities.

α.36.7 Pâguodcheh piṣh ponamwog uppeantam8ongan8 ut anaquabit Jehovah, kah piṣh qushkeog nishnoh pasuk wutch ummatche mayut, newutche missi ummusquanittam8onk kah wutchenauausuonk ne Jehov[a]h kôn8tog ayeuuhkonittue yeuh missinninnúh.
E.36.7 It may be they will present their supplication before the LORD, and will return every one from his evil way: for great is the anger and the fury that the LORD hath pronounced against this people.

α.36.8 Kah Baruch wunnaumonuh Neriah wutussen neane wame ne Jeremiah quoshodtumwaen ánann8nont, ogketamup ut b8kut wuttinn8waongash Jehovah, ut Jehovah wekit.
E.36.8 And Baruch the son of Neriah did according to all that Jeremiah the prophet commanded him, reading in the book the words of the LORD in the LORD's house.

α.36.9 Kah nniyeup napanna wutteashe kodtum8mut Jehoiakim wunnaumonuh Josiah Judae ketass8t, ut pasuk8gun adtas8it nepauz, nag wahteauwáhuwaog mat meetsuonk ut anaquabit Jehovah wutch wame missinninnúog ut Jerusalem, kah wutch wame missinninnúog neg wagig Judae keitotanahtu en Jerusalem.
E.36.9 And it came to pass in the fifth year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah, in the ninth month, that they proclaimed a fast before the LORD to all the people in Jerusalem, and to all the people that came from the cities of Judah unto Jerusalem.

α.36.10 Neit Baruch ogketamup b8k, ukkutt8wongash Jeremiah ut wekit Jehovah, ut wutchambarumut Gemariah wunnaumonuh Shaphan noh scribe, ut qunnunkquohtag chippinnutunkanit, ahhut petutteamuk wuske squontamut wekit Jehvoah, ut wuhtauogk8óut wame missinninnúog.
E.36.10 Then read Baruch in the book the words of Jeremiah in the house of the LORD, in the chamber of Gemariah the son of Shaphan the scribe, in the higher court, at the entry of the new gate of the LORD's house, in the ears of all the people.

α.36.11 Michajah wunnaumonuh Gemariah, wunnaumonuh Shaphan, n8tog wutch b8kut [vv]ame [vv]uttinn8[vv]aongash Jehovah.
E.36.11 When Michaiah the son of Gemariah, the son of Shaphan, had heard out of the book all the words of the LORD,

α.36.12 Neit w8msu en ketass8t weekit, ut wut-chamberumut Scribe, kah kusseh wame sontimóog na wutappinneau, Elishama noh Scribe, kah Del[a]jah wunnaumonuh Shemajah, kah Elnathan wunnaumonuh Achbor, kah Gemariah wunnaumonuh Shaphan, kah Zedekiah wunnaumonuh Hananiah, kah wame sontimóog.
E.36.12 Then he went down into the king's house, into the scribe's chamber: and, lo, all the princes sat there, even Elishama the scribe, and Delaiah the son of Shemaiah, and Elnathan the son of Achbor, and Gemariah the son of Shaphan, and Zedekiah the son of Hananiah, and all the princes.

α.36.13 Neit Michajah na 8wahteauwâhuun wame kutt8wongaṣh nish n8togish: Baruch ágkeetog b8k ut wuhtauogk8óut missinninnúog.
E.36.13 Then Michaiah declared unto them all the words that he had heard, when Baruch read the book in the ears of the people.

α.36.14 Newaj wame sontimóog negont8waog Jehudi wunnaumonuh Nethaniah, wunnaumonuh Shelemiah, wunnaumonuh Cushi en Baruch$ut n8waog, nemunuṣh ut kenutcheg[a]nit tuttuppéquianaúsik ne agketaman ut wuhtauogk8[ó]ut missinninnuog, kah peyauṣh; neit Baruch wunnaumonuh Neriah nemunum wuttuppequianaúsik ut wunnutcheganit, kah nah uppeyaonuh.
E.36.14 Therefore all the princes sent Jehudi the son of Nethaniah, the son of Shelemiah, the son of Cushi, unto Baruch, saying, Take in thine hand the roll wherein thou hast read in the ears of the people, and come. So Baruch the son of Neriah took the roll in his hand, and came unto them.

α.36.15 Kah nah wuttinóuh nummatappish, kah ogketaṣh ut nehtauogkinnónut.
E.36.15 And they said unto him, Sit down now, and read it in our ears. So Baruch read it in their ears.

α.36.16 Kah n$nih n8tamwehettit wame kutt8wongaṣh wabesuog nishnoh pasuk, kah nag unnaog Baruchoh, wunnamuhkut nuttinnonnánonaṣh ketass8t wame yeush kutt8wongaṣh.
E.36.16 Now it came to pass, when they had heard all the words, they were afraid both one and other, and said unto Baruch, We will surely tell the king of all these words.

α.36.17 Kah nag nat8tomauáog Baruchoh, n8waog, ussunan yeuyeu, uttoh kuttin wussukhumunas wame yeush kutt8wongaṣh ut wutt8nut?
E.36.17 And they asked Baruch, saying, Tell us now, How didst thou write all these words at his mouth?

α.36.18 Neit Baruch wunnamp8hamauoh, yeush wame kutt8wongaṣh nuttugqunaṣh nashpe wutt8n, kah niṣh n8sukkuhhumunaṣh nashpe ink ut b8kut.
E.36.18 Then Baruch answered them, He pronounced all these words unto me with his mouth, and I wrote them with ink in the book.

α.36.19 Neit sontimóog unnáog Baruchoh, puttogquesh, ken kah Jeremiah, kah howan wahteau8hkitch ut$toh apeóg.
E.36.19 Then said the princes unto Baruch, Go, hide thee, thou and Jeremiah; and let no man know where ye be.

α.36.20 Kah petutteaunaog ketass8toh, ut mishe-komukqut, qut ponamwog tuttuppequayânôsik ut wut[-]chamberumut Elishama noh Scribe, kah wussinnaoaṣh wame kutt8wongaṣh ut wuhtauogkut ketass8t.
E.36.20 And they went in to the king into the court, but they laid up the roll in the chamber of Elishama the scribe, and told all the words in the ears of the king.

α.36.21 Neit ketass8t ann8nau Jehudi neemskomunat tuttuppequianaúsik; kah wunnemunnumun wutch wut-chamberumut Elishama noh Scribe, kah Jehudi wutogketamun ut wehtauogut ketass8t, kah wame wehtauogk8óut sontimóog neg kéhchekompauwéhtauoncheg ketass8toh.
E.36.21 So the king sent Jehudi to fetch the roll: and he took it out of Elishama the scribe's chamber. And Jehudi read it in the ears of the king, and in the ears of all the princes which stood beside the king.

α.36.22 Kah ketass8t appu popone-komukqut, ut pasuk8gun adtahs8it nepauz, kah na n8tau ut ahohtag n8tau chikohteau, ut anaquabit.
E.36.22 Now the king sat in the winterhouse in the ninth month: and there was a fire on the hearth burning before him.

α.36.23 Kah n$nih Jehudi agketog shuoh asuh yauoh wunnepagwoh, w[u]ttummussumun nashpe méqunéhquog, kah wuttinnúhkon n8taut, ne ut ahohtag n8teau, nô pajeh mamusse tuttuppéquianuk mahchikuttaut, ut n8taut ne ahhohtag n8teau.
E.36.23 And it came to pass, that when Jehudi had read three or four leaves, he cut it with the penknife, and cast it into the fire that was on the hearth, until all the roll was consumed in the fire that was on the hearth.

α.36.24 Qut matta wabesuog asuh nehnekikkom8og wutohtk8un8aṣh, matta ketass8t asuh howae wuttinneumoh n8taminnit wame yeush kutt8wongaṣh.
E.36.24 Yet they were not afraid, nor rent their garments, neither the king, nor any of his servants that heard all these words.

α.36.25 Qut onch Elnathan, kah Delajah, kah Gemariah wehquetumauópanneg ketass8toh matta wutchikkossum8unat tuttuppequiánunk, qut nah mat wunn8tauoh.
E.36.25 Nevertheless Elnathan and Delaiah and Gemariah had made intercession to the king that he would not burn the roll: but he would not hear them.

α.36.26 Qut ketass8t ann8team8 Jerahmeel wunnaumonuh Hammelech, kah Serajah wunnaumonuh Azriel, kah Shelemiah wunnaumonuh Abdiel, tohqunnónat Baruch noh Scribe, kah Jeremiah quoshodtumwaen: qut Jehovah wutadtahshuh.
E.36.26 But the king commanded Jerahmeel the son of Hammelech, and Seraiah the son of Azriel, and Shelemiah the son of Abdeel, to take Baruch the scribe and Jeremiah the prophet: but the LORD hid them.

α.36.27 Neit wuttinn8waonk Jehovah peyaonuk Jermiah, (mahche ketass8t chikkohsuk tuttuppéquianaúsik kah kutt8wongaṣh nish Baruch wasukk8hukupaṣh ut wutt8nut Jeremiah) n8wau,
E.36.27 Then the word of the LORD came to Jeremiah, after that the king had burned the roll, and the words which Baruch wrote at the mouth of Jeremiah, saying,

α.36.28 Nemunush wonk onkatuk tuttuppéquianausik, kah tanúhsukkuhwhush wame negonne kutt8wongaṣh nish ohtagkupaṣh negonne tuttuppéquianausik, ne Jehojakim Judae ketass8t châgkossik.
E.36.28 Take thee again another roll, and write in it all the former words that were in the first roll, which Jehoiakim the king of Judah hath burned.

α.36.29 Kah piṣh kuttin Jehojakim Judae ketass8t, yeu wussin Jehovah yeu kutchikkossumunáh tuttuppèquianaúsik kussip, tohwhutch na$ut wussukhuman, Babylone ketass8t pish wunnamuhkut peyau, kah piṣh yeu pagwadtauun ohke, kah piṣh wohkukquôsumau na wutch wosketompoh kah puppinashimwoh?
E.36.29 And thou shalt say to Jehoiakim king of Judah, Thus saith the LORD; Thou hast burned this roll, saying, Why hast thou written therein, saying, The king of Babylon shall certainly come and destroy this land, and shall cause to cease from thence man and beast?

α.36.30 Newutche yeu wussin Jehovah papaume Jehojakim Judae ketass8t, matta pish wadchanóon howane appinneat wutappuonganit David, kah nupp8e wuhhogkuh piṣh sohwhôkauónuh ut kussittae kesukodtut, kah ut t8hpue nuhkonut.
E.36.30 Therefore thus saith the LORD of Jehoiakim king of Judah; He shall have none to sit upon the throne of David: and his dead body shall be cast out in the day to the heat, and in the night to the frost.

α.36.31 Kah noh piṣh nussasamatoh kah 8skannemunneoh, kah wuttinneumoh, wutch ummatcheseongan8, kah nunnuhkinnumauóog, kah ut wadohkitcheg Jerusalem, kah ut Judae wosketompaut, wame machuk ne ayeuuhkonittue únnog: qut matta kukkeihtam8og.
E.36.31 And I will punish him and his seed and his servants for their iniquity; and I will bring upon them, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and upon the men of Judah, all the evil that I have pronounced against them; but they hearkened not.

α.36.32 Neit Jehovah onkatog nemunum tuttuppéquianaúsik, kah wuttinnumauoh Baruchoh noh Scribe wunnaumonuh Neriah, kah na wuttit wussukhumun wutch wutt8nut Jeremiah, wame b8ke kutt8wongaṣh niṣh Jehojakim Judae ketass8t châgossukupash ut n8taut, kah naut k8tnéhteauunash onkatogaṣh monaash kutt8wongaṣh neyaneyeu8gish.
E.36.32 Then took Jeremiah another roll, and gave it to Baruch the scribe, the son of Neriah; who wrote therein from the mouth of Jeremiah all the words of the book which Jehoiakim king of Judah had burned in the fire: and there were added besides unto them many like words.

α.37.1 KAh ketass8t Zedekiah wunnaumonuh Josiah nompinau Coniahoh wunnaumonuh Jehojakim, neh Nebuchadnezzar Babylone ketass8t kóhtahs8tamwéhteóhpoh ut Judae ohkeit.
E.37.1 And king Zedekiah the son of Josiah reigned instead of Coniah the son of Jehoiakim, whom Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon made king in the land of Judah.

α.37.2 Qut matta nagum asuh wuttinneumoh, asuh ne ohkee missinninnuog kuhkeitamóog wuttinn8waongash Jehovah, nish án8wopash nashpe Jeremiah quoshodtumwaen.
E.37.2 But neither he, nor his servants, nor the people of the land, did hearken unto the words of the LORD, which he spake by the prophet Jeremiah.

α.37.3 Kah Zedekiah ketass8t an8team8 Jehucal wunnaumonuh Shelemiah, kah Zephaniah wunnaumonuh Maasejah sephausuaen, en Jeremiahut quoshodtumwaen, n8wop, yeuyeu peantamwanshinnean en Lord num-Manitt8munónut.
E.37.3 And Zedekiah the king sent Jehucal the son of Shelemiah and Zephaniah the son of Maaseiah the priest to the prophet Jeremiah, saying, Pray now unto the LORD our God for us.

α.37.4 Kah Jeremiah petutteau, kah sohham ut kenugke missinninnútu: newutche nag matta ukkupshagkinóuh.
E.37.4 Now Jeremiah came in and went out among the people: for they had not put him into prison.

α.37.5 Neit Pharaoh ukkenauwameumoh sohhamwop wutch Egypt: kah Caldeansog neg weenuhkogig Jerusalem n8tamwehettit unaunchem8k[o]naongan8, nag nukkodtumwog Jerusalem.
E.37.5 Then Pharaoh's army was come forth out of Egypt: and when the Chaldeans that besieged Jerusalem heard tidings of them, they departed from Jerusalem.

α.37.6 Neit wuttinnw8aonk Jehovah peyaónuk Jeremiah quoshodtumwaen, n8wau,
E.37.6 Then came the word of the LORD unto the prophet Jeremiah saying,

α.37.7 Yeu wussin Jehovah um-Manitt8m8oh Israel, yeu piṣh kuttinnoneau Judae ketass8t noh an8nukquéog en nuhhogkat, nat8tamonteanat, kusseh, ukkenauwameonk Pharaoh ne sohham8m8uk kutann8munkqunnaóut, piṣh qushkeog en Egypt nehenwonche wutohtuóut.
E.37.7 Thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel; Thus shall ye say to the king of Judah, that sent you unto me to enquire of me; Behold, Pharaoh's army, which is come forth to help you, shall return to Egypt into their own land.

α.37.8 Kah Caldeansog piṣh wonk peyaog, kah piṣh ayeuuhkontámwog yeu keitotan, kah piṣh wussohkomuneau, kah piṣh wutchikkossumuneau.
E.37.8 And the Chaldeans shall come again, and fight against this city, and take it, and burn it with fire.

α.37.9 Yeu wussin Jehovah, as8kekomuhteógk kuhhogkaóog, n8wáog, Caldeansog piṣh wunnamuhkut nunnukkonukqunnónog: newutche nag matta piṣh moncheog.
E.37.9 Thus saith the LORD; Deceive not yourselves, saying, The Chaldeans shall surely depart from us: for they shall not depart.

α.37.10 Tôhkônogque kuttogkomonáoh mamusse Caldeanse kenauwameonk, ne ayeuuhkonukqueógig, kah webe squsháhettis n8chumwehtahwhutcheg missinninnúog ut kenugke nagoh, qut onch nag woh neepóog nishnoh pasuk ut wekit, kah piṣh chikohsumwog yeu keitotan nashpe n8tau.
E.37.10 For though ye had smitten the whole army of the Chaldeans that fight against you, and there remained but wounded men among them, yet should they rise up every man in his tent, and burn this city with fire.

α.37.11 Kah n$nihyeup ukkenauwameongan8 Caldeansog neepauwehettit wutch anaquohtag Jerusalem, quhtamunat ukkenauwameonk Pharaoh.
E.37.11 And it came to pass, that when the army of the Chaldeans was broken up from Jerusalem for fear of Pharaoh's army,

α.37.12 Neit Jeremiah sohham wutch Jerusalem, ônat wutohkeit Benjamin, na$wutch chippeinat ut nashaue missinninnútu.
E.37.12 Then Jeremiah went forth out of Jerusalem to go into the land of Benjamin, to separate himself thence in the midst of the people.

α.37.13 Kah apit 8squontamut Benjamin, askuhwheteae mugquomp na wutappináh, noh ussoweu Irijah wunnaumonuh Shelemiah, wunnaumonuh Hananiah, kah tohqunau Jeremiahoh quoshodtumwaénuh, n8wau, kutontsehtau Caldeansog.
E.37.13 And when he was in the gate of Benjamin, a captain of the ward was there, whose name was Irijah, the son of Shelemiah, the son of Hananiah; and he took Jeremiah the prophet, saying, Thou fallest away to the Chaldeans.

α.37.14 Neit Jeremiah n8wau, ne pann8waonk, matta nutontsehtauoh, Caldeansog, qut matta ukkehketauoh: neit Irijah tohqunau Jeremiah kah uppas8uh sontimmouhtu.
E.37.14 Then said Jeremiah, It is false; I fall not away to the Chaldeans. But he hearkened not to him: so Irijah took Jeremiah, and brought him to the princes.

α.37.15 Newaj sontimoog musquanumaog Jeremiahoh, kah wuttogkomouh, kah ukkupshagkinau, ut wekit Jonathan noh Scribe, newutche ne ukkupshagkinegonuhkoneau.
E.37.15 Wherefore the princes were wroth with Jeremiah, and smote him, and put him in prison in the house of Jonathan the scribe: for they had made that the prison.

α.37.16 Jeremiah petuttead[t] pohkenaekomukqut, kah wonogquehtu, & Jeremiah na m8chetikqunohteadt,
E.37.16 When Jeremiah was entered into the dungeon, and into the cabins, and Jeremiah had remained there many days;

α.37.17 Neit Zedechiah ketass8t ann8team8 & uppohquohshagkunuh; & ketass8t ukkeme nat8tomauoh ut wékit, kah n8wop, sun ne teagwe kutt8onk wutch Jehovahut? kah Jeremiah n8wau, ohtau, newutche n8wau, ken pish kupponit ut wunnutcheganit Babylone ketass8t.
E.37.17 Then Zedekiah the king sent, and took him out: and the king asked him secretly in his house, and said, Is there any word from the LORD? And Jeremiah said, There is: for, said he, thou shalt be delivered into the hand of the king of Babylon.

α.37.18 Nano Jeremiah unnau ketass8toh Zedechiahhoh, toh kittinne matchenehesh, asuh kittinneumog, asuh yeug missinninnuog, waj kuppishagkinneog?
E.37.18 Moreover Jeremiah said unto king Zedekiah, What have I offended against thee, or against thy servants, or against this people, that ye have put me in prison?

α.37.19 Uttiyeug kukquoshodtumwaeneumog, neg quoshodtumunkqueaneg, n8wahettit, Babylone ketass8t matta pish kutayeuuhkonuk8 asuh yeu ohke.
E.37.19 Where are now your prophets which prophesied unto you, saying, The king of Babylon shall not come against you, nor against this land?

α.37.20 Newutch yeuyeu n8tash k8wehquetumoush, woi nul$Lordum ketass8t, nunnanumpanwaonk tapeneaumunach ut anaquabean k8wehquetumoush, onk woh mo kukqushkeahheu en wekit Jonathan noh Scribe, ishkont ná nuttit nuppun.
E.37.20 Therefore hear now, I pray thee, O my lord the king: let my supplication, I pray thee, be accepted before thee; that thou cause me not to return to the house of Jonathan the scribe, lest I die there.

α.37.21 Neit Zedechiah ketass8t ann8team8 woh pononat Jeremiah kuppishagkinnittue chippinneutunganit, kah asekesukokish woh wutassamonaoont kodchuhki petukqunnunk wutch wuttaumaogkumut petukqununganehteaenuog, nô pajeh wame petukquneg keitotanat mahtshunk yeu wuttinne Jeremiah appin kuppishagkinnittue chippinneutunganit.
E.37.21 Then Zedekiah the king commanded that they should commit Jeremiah into the court of the prison, and that they should give him daily a piece of bread out of the bakers' street, until all the bread in the city were spent. Thus Jeremiah remained in the court of the prison.

α.38.1 NEit Shephatiah wunnaumonuh Mattan kah Gedaliah wunnaumonuh Pashur kah J[u]cal wunnaumonuh Shelemiah kah Pashur wunnaumonuh Malchiah, nag n8tamw[ô]g kutt8wongash nish Jeremiah an8wajish en wame missinninnuut, n8wau,
E.38.1 Then Shephatiah the son of Mattan, and Gedaliah the son of Pashur, and Jucal the son of Shelemiah, and Pashur the son of Malchiah, heard the words that Jeremiah had spoken unto all the people, saying,

α.38.2 Yeu wussin Jehovah, noh yeu apit keitotanat, pish nup nashpe togkodteg, nashpe mahshagquodt, kah nashpe enninneaonk, qut noh sohhog en Caldeansut pish pomantam: newutche noh pish ohto uppomantamoonk wutch toh an tohqunuk, kah pish pomantam.
E.38.2 Thus saith the LORD, He that remaineth in this city shall die by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence: but he that goeth forth to the Chaldeans shall live; for he shall have his life for a prey, and shall live.

α.38.3 Yeu wussin Jehovah, yeu keitotan pish wunnamuhkut magun en wunnutchegan8out Babylone ketass8t ukkenauwameonk, neg pish sohhogig
E.38.3 Thus saith the LORD, This city shall surely be given into the hand of the king of Babylon's army, which shall take it.

α.38.4 Newaj sontimoog unnahettit ketass8toh, k8wehquetumauunumun yeuoh wosketomp nushunach: newutche yeu wuttiñe n8chumwehteauun wunnutchegan8oash ayeuhteaenuog neg apitcheg yeu otanat, kah wunnutcheganooash wame missinninnuog, nish anont kutt8wongash newutche yeuoh wosketomp matta natinneham8 8niyeuongan8 yeug missinninnuog, qut woskehuonat.
E.38.4 Therefore the princes said unto the king, We beseech thee, let this man be put to death: for thus he weakeneth the hands of the men of war that remain in this city, and the hands of all the people, in speaking such words unto them: for this man seeketh not the welfare of this people, but the hurt.

α.38.5 Neit Zedechiah kétass8t n8wau, kusseh noh appu kenutchegan8out, newutche ketass8t matta woh toh kuttin wuttamhik8.
E.38.5 Then Zedekiah the king said, Behold, he is in your hand: for the king is not he that can do any thing against you.

α.38.6 Neit nag nemunaog Jeremiahoh, kah wuttinuhkonauh ut uppohkononogk8mut Malchiah wunnaumonuh Hammelech, ne [ó]htag kuppishagkinnittue chippinnutonganit, kah n8kompanaog Jeremiahoh nashpe pemuneahtonash: kah ut pohkenonogque matta nippen8, qut pisseogquanu8: neit Jeremiah quttaueu ut pisseogqu[a]nit.
E.38.6 Then took they Jeremiah, and cast him into the dungeon of Malchiah the son of Hammelech, that was in the court of the prison: and they let down Jeremiah with cords. And in the dungeon there was no water, but mire: so Jeremiah sunk in the mire.

α.38.7 Neit Ebedmelech wut-Ethiopian, pasuk euneuch ut ketass8t wekit, n8tog nag ponaog Jeremiahoh pohkinnaonogqut (ketass8t neit apit ut Benjamine squontamut.)
E.38.7 Now when Ebedmelech the Ethiopian, one of the eunuchs which was in the king's house, heard that they had put Jeremiah in the dungeon; the king then sitting in the gate of Benjamin;

α.38.8 Ebedmelech sohham wutch wekit ketass8t kah ken8nau ketass8toh n8wau,
E.38.8 Ebedmelech went forth out of the king's house, and spake to the king saying,

α.38.9 Nul$Lordum ketass8t yeug wosketompaog matche usseog wame ne anheahettit Jeremiahhoh quoshodtumwaenuh neh pánonteahetticheh en pohkinonogqut, kah noh nahen paskanontam ut ayeuonganit ne ayit, newutche matta wonk petukqununganun8 ut keitotanat.
E.38.9 My lord the king, these men have done evil in all that they have done to Jeremiah the prophet, whom they have cast into the dungeon; and he is like to die for hunger in the place where he is: for there is no more bread in the city.

α.38.10 Neit ketass8t ann8nau Ebedmelech wut-Ethiopian, n8wau, neemun yeu wutch nishwinchahkodtog wosketompaog, kah kuhkuhquin, Jeremiah quoshodtumwaenin wutch pohkenónog[p]ut, ash na nupp8kup.
E.38.10 Then the king commanded Ebedmelech the Ethiopian, saying, Take from hence thirty men with thee, and take up Jeremiah the prophet out of the dungeon, before he die.

α.38.11 Neit Ebedmelech neemunau wosketompuh, kah petutteau wekit ketass8t ut agwe nompak8unnekomukqut, kah na 8tinnumun nukkononákinaṣh, kah nukkonéwhiash, kah niṣh uppinnompánumaú[o]náoaṣh nashpe pemunneahtonaṣh en pohkinónogqut en Jeremiahut.
E.38.11 So Ebedmelech took the men with him, and went into the house of the king under the treasury, and took thence old cast clouts and old rotten rags, and let them down by cords into the dungeon to Jeremiah.

α.38.12 Kah Ebedmelech wut-Ethiopian unnau Jeremiahoh, ponsh yeuyeu yeush nukkononakinash, kah nukkonéhwhiaṣh agwe kenukqueit agwe pemuneohtonit, kah Jeremiah ne wutussen.
E.38.12 And Ebedmelech the Ethiopian said unto Jeremiah, Put now these old cast clouts and rotten rags under thine armholes under the cords. And Jeremiah did so.

α.38.13 Neit kuhkuhqu[n]aoh Jeremiah nashpe pemuneohtanash, kah nag wunneemun[o]uh wutch pohkinónogqut, kah Jeremiah appu kuppishagkinnittue chippinnutunkanit.
E.38.13 So they drew up Jeremiah with cords, and took him up out of the dungeon: and Jeremiah remained in the court of the prison.

α.38.14 Neit Zedekiah ketass8t ann8team8, kah nemunumau, Jeremiahoh quoshodtumwanúh, ut nashwunnú8k ahhut petutteamuk Jehovah wekit, kah ketass8t unnau Jeremiahoh, kenat8tomouṣh ne teag adtahtiéhkon ne teag.
E.38.14 Then Zedekiah the king sent, and took Jeremiah the prophet unto him into the third entry that is in the house of the LORD: and the king said unto Jeremiah, I will ask thee a thing; hide nothing from me.

α.38.15 Neit Jeremiah unnau Zedekiahoh, wahteauwahunon sunnummatta woh wunnamuhkut kenusheu? kah kogkuhtimunon, sunnummatta woh kukkehketiyeu?
E.38.15 Then Jeremiah said unto Zedekiah, If I declare it unto thee, wilt thou not surely put me to death? and if I give thee counsel, wilt thou not hearken unto me?

α.38.16 Neit ketass8t kemu chadchekéimoh Jeremiahoh, n8wau, pomantog Jehovah noh ayimukquean yeuh keteahogkôunoh, matta kenushin8h, asuh matta nummag8 kuhhog en wunnutchegan8wóut yeug woskeompaog kod nushhukqueaneg.
E.38.16 So Zedekiah the king sware secretly unto Jeremiah, saying, As the LORD liveth, that made us this soul, I will not put thee to death, neither will I give thee into the hand of these men that seek thy life.

α.38.17 Neit Jeremiah unnau Zedekiahoh, yeu wussin Jehovah um-Manitt8m8oh ayeuteaog, um-Manitt8m8oh Isr[à]el, tohneit wunnamuhkut sohhaman en wussontim[ô]mut Babylone ketass8t, neit kukketeahogkou piṣh pomantam, kah yeu keitotan matta piṣh chikohtano n8taut, kah piṣh ken kuppomantam, kah kek. 
E.38.17 Then said Jeremiah unto Zedekiah, Thus saith the LORD, the God of hosts, the God of Israel; If thou wilt assuredly go forth unto the king of Babylon's princes, then thy soul shall live, and this city shall not be burned with fire; and thou shalt live, and thine house:

α.38.18 Qut matta sohham8an en wussontimómut Babylone ketass8t, neit piṣh yeu keitotan magun en wunnutchegan8óut Caldeansog, kah nag piṣh wutchi[k]kossùmuneau ut n8taut, kah matta piṣh kuppohquohham8 wutch wunnutchegan8out.
E.38.18 But if thou wilt not go forth to the king of Babylon's princes, then shall this city be given into the hand of the Chaldeans, and they shall burn it with fire, and thou shalt not escape out of their hand.

α.38.19 Kah Zedekiah ketass8t unnau Jeremiahoh, n8wabesuon Jewsog neg anogquehcheg Caldeansog, ishkont nag nupponukquog wunnutchegan8óut Caldeansog, kah nuttôontohkônukquog.
E.38.19 And Zedekiah the king said unto Jeremiah, I am afraid of the Jews that are fallen to the Chaldeans, lest they deliver me into their hand, and they mock me.

α.38.20 Qut Jeremiah n8wau, nag matta piṣh magwog kuhhog, n8swetaṣh k8wehquetumoush 8wadtauatonkqussuonk Lord, ne ânun: neit piṣh k8nihukqun, kah kukketeahogkou piṣh pomantam.
E.38.20 But Jeremiah said, They shall not deliver thee. Obey, I beseech thee, the voice of the LORD, which I speak unto thee: so it shall be well unto thee, and thy soul shall live.

α.38.21 Qut sekeneaman sohhamun, yeu kutt8onk ne Jehovah nahtussit.
E.38.21 But if thou refuse to go forth, this is the word that the LORD hath shewed me:

α.38.22 Kah kusseh, wame mittamwussissog sekqshoncheg ut Judae ketass8t wekit piṣh sohh8wunóog ut wussontimóm8ut Bablyone ketass8t, kah yeug piṣh n8waog, keetompaog kukkitchittôusháhikquog, kah kussohkunkquog, kusseetash quttauushauṣh ut pissagquanit, kah nag qushkeog.
E.38.22 And, behold, all the women that are left in the king of Judah's house shall be brought forth to the king of Babylon's princes, and those women shall say, Thy friends have set thee on, and have prevailed against thee: thy feet are sunk in the mire, and they are turned away back.

α.38.23 Neit nag piṣh sohh8wunaog wame kummittamwussoh kah kummukkiésumoh en Caldeansut, kah matta piṣh kuppohquohham8 wutch wunnutchegan8out, qut piṣh ken kuttohqunit nashpe wunnutcheg Babylone ketass8t: kah yeu piṣh kutchikkossumwáhtauun keitotan ut n8taut.
E.38.23 So they shall bring out all thy wives and thy children to the Chaldeans: and thou shalt not escape out of their hand, but shalt be taken by the hand of the king of Babylon: and thou shalt cause this city to be burned with fire.

α.38.24 Neit Zedekiah unnau Jeremiahoh, howan wohteau8hkitch yeush kutt8wongaṣh kah matta piṣh kenupp8.
E.38.24 Then said Zedekiah unto Jeremiah, Let no man know of these words, and thou shalt not die.

α.38.25 Qut sontimóog n8tamwehettit kukkeket8hkouṣh, kah nag peyaonukquean, kah unnukquean, wahteauwáhenan uttoh âun adt ketass8t: ahque adtohtaiinnean, kah matta kenushin8mun, kah wonk toh ánukquean ketass8t.
E.38.25 But if the princes hear that I have talked with thee, and they come unto thee, and say unto thee, Declare unto us now what thou hast said unto the king, hide it not from us, and we will not put thee to death; also what the king said unto thee:

α.38.26 Neit nag piṣh kuttinnóog, nupponamup n8wehquetum8onk anaquabit ketass8t, woh mo nukqushkeáhik8unat en [J]onathan wekit naut nuppunat.
E.38.26 Then thou shalt say unto them, I presented my supplication before the king, that he would not cause me to return to Jonathan's house, to die there.

α.38.27 Neit wame sontimóog peyaonóog Jeremiahoh, kah nag wunat8tomauóuh, kah wuttinónash wame niṣh neaunak ketass8t ánann8nont: neit wutahque keket8hkauóuh, newutche matta wahsham8 ne teag.
E.38.27 Then came all the princes unto Jeremiah, and asked him: and he told them according to all these words that the king had commanded. So they left off speaking with him; for the matter was not perceived.

α.38.28 Neit Jeremiah appu kuppishagkinittue chippinnutunkanit pajeh nâ kesukok Jerusalem sohkomuk, kah na wutappineah Jerusalem sohkomuk.
E.38.28 So Jeremiah abode in the court of the prison until the day that Jerusalem was taken: and he was there when Jerusalem was taken.

α.39.1 PAsuk8gun wutteashe kodtum8muk Zedekiah Judae ketass8t, ut piogqussit nepauz, Nebuchádrezzar Babylone ketass8t, kah wame ukkenauwameónk ayeuuhkonittue peyaontamwog Jerusalem, kah nag 8wéenuhkomuneau.
E.39.1 In the ninth year of Zedekiah king of Judah, in the tenth month, came Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon and all his army against Jerusalem, and they besieged it.

α.39.2 Nabowunnukqutte kodtum8mit Zedekiah, ut yaue nepauzsaut, kah pasuk8gun adtashikqunohhog, keitotan pokqsheau.
E.39.2 And in the eleventh year of Zedekiah, in the fourth month, the ninth day of the month, the city was broken up.

α.39.3 Kah wame wussontimom[ô]h Babylone ketass8t petutteaog, kah appuog nasha[ú]e usquontamut, Nergal-Sharezer, Samger-Nebo, Sarsechim, Rabsaris, Nergal-Sharezer, Rabmag, kah wame onkatogig Babylone ketass8t wussontimómoh.
E.39.3 And all the princes of the king of Babylon came in, and sat in the middle gate, even Nergalsharezer, Samgarnebo, Sarsechim, Rabsaris, Nergalsharezer, Rabmag, with all the residue of the princes of the king of Babylon.

α.39.4 Kah n$nih[,] Zedekiah Judae ketass8t noh nauont, kah wame ayeuhteénúh, neit nag wussem8og, kah sohhamwog wutch [ó]tanat nukkonáeu, en may$ut ne kishke ketass8t tanohketeaonganit, en squontamut ut nashaue neese qussukquaneuntunkanit, kah en sohham mukoshquttae may$ut.
E.39.4 And it came to pass, that when Zedekiah the king of Judah saw them, and all the men of war, then they fled, and went forth out of the city by night, by the way of the king's garden, by the gate betwixt the two walls: and he went out the way of the plain.

α.39.5 Qut Caldeansog ukkenauwameongan8 nah wunn8swuttahwhóuh, kah mattanáog Zedekiahoh ut Jerichoe mukoshquttaut, k[á]h tohqunáhettit, nag uppas8óuh Nebuchadnezzarut Babylone ketass8t ut Riblah ut ohkeit Hamath, uttoh adt wussumomp.
E.39.5 But the Chaldeans' army pursued after them, and overtook Zedekiah in the plains of Jericho: and when they had taken him, they brought him up to Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon to Riblah in the land of Hamath, where he gave judgment upon him.

α.39.6 Neit Babylone ketass8t nushau wunnaumonuh Zedekiah ut anaquabit, ut Riblah, kah wonk Babylone ketass8t nushau wame Judae sontimuh.
E.39.6 Then the king of Babylon slew the sons of Zedekiah in Riblah before his eyes: also the king of Babylon slew all the nobles of Judah.

α.39.7 Nano, skojkesukquánau Zedekiahoh, kah wutáhtogkuppanuh chainsaṣh wutuss8unónat Babylon.
E.39.7 Moreover he put out Zedekiah's eyes, and bound him with chains, to carry him to Babylon.

α.39.8 Kah Caldeansog chikkossumwog ketass8t wek, kah wek8oash missinninnuwog ut n8taut, kah n8konteaog Jerusaleme pummeneutunk.
E.39.8 And the Chaldeans burned the king's house, and the houses of the people, with fire, and brake down the walls of Jerusalem.

α.39.9 Neit Nebuzaradan askuhwheteáe mugquomp missinóhteau ashqshoncheg missinninnuog, neg apitcheg keitotanat, kah yeug amaéhcheg, ummosogquéhtunkquoh, kah onkatogig missinninnuog neg ashqshoncheg.
E.39.9 Then Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard carried away captive into Babylon the remnant of the people that remained in the city, and those that fell away, that fell to him, with the rest of the people that remained.

α.39.10 Qut Nebuzaradan askuhwheteáe mugquomp nukkonau matchekue missinninnúh neg monteag ohtau8gig ut ohkeit Judah, kah nah wuttinnumauoh weenominneohtekonaṣh kah ohteukonash ne nan ahquompág.
E.39.10 But Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard left of the poor of the people, which had nothing, in the land of Judah, and gave them vineyards and fields at the same time.

α.39.11 Kah Nebuchanezzar ketass8t ann8nau papaume Jeremiah, Nebuzaradan askuhwhetae mugquomp, n8wau,
E.39.11 Now Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon gave charge concerning Jeremiah to Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard, saying,

α.39.12 Nemun kah wunádchan, kah woskeheúhkon, qut unneh ne woh ánukquean.
E.39.12 Take him, and look well to him, and do him no harm; but do unto him even as he shall say unto thee.

α.39.13 Neit Nebuzaradan askuhwhetae mugquomp, ann8team8, kah Nebushazban, Rabsaris, kah Nergal-Sh[a]rezer, Rabmag, kah wame wussontimómuh Babylone ketass8t.
E.39.13 So Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard sent, and Nebushasban, Rabsaris, and Nergalsharezer, Rabmag, and all the king of Babylon's princes;

α.39.14 Nag ann8team8og kah neemunoog Jeremiahoh wutch kuppishagkinnittue chippinnutunkanit, kah wutáhtashónuh ut Gedaliah wunnaumonuh Ahikam, wunnaumonuh Shaphan, woh nummonchanónat en weekit, neit weechayeumau missinninnúh.
E.39.14 Even they sent, and took Jeremiah out of the court of the prison, and committed him unto Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the son of Shaphan, that he should carry him home: so he dwelt among the people.

α.39.15 Neit wuttinn8waonk Jehovah peyaónuk Jeremiah ash kophâusit kuppishagkinnittue chippinnútunkanit, n8wau,
E.39.15 Now the word of the LORD came unto Jeremiah, while he was shut up in the court of the prison, saying,

α.39.16 Monchish ken8s Ebedmelech wut-Ethiopian, n8wash, yeu wussin Jehovah ayeuhteaunit, um-Manitt8moh Israel, kusseh, nunnuhkinnumau nuttinn8waongaṣh yeuoh keitotan, wutche machuk kah matta wanegik, kah nish pish pakodche n$niyeuash ut anaquabean.
E.39.16 Go and speak to Ebedmelech the Ethiopian, saying, Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel; Behold, I will bring my words upon this city for evil, and not for good; and they shall be accomplished in that day before thee.

α.39.17 Qut kupppohquohwhunush ne kesukok wussin Jehovah, kah matta pish kupponitteoh wunnutchegan8óut yeug wosketompaog quoshadcheg.
E.39.17 But I will deliver thee in that day, saith the LORD: and thou shalt not be given into the hand of the men of whom thou art afraid.

α.39.18 Newutche wunnamuhkut kuppohquohwhunush, kah matta piṣh kuppenushoh n[a]shpe togkodteg, qut pish kuppomantam 8w[o]ntam kuttohqunnum8onk, newutche kuppabuhtanumeh wussin Jehovah.
E.39.18 For I will surely deliver thee, and thou shalt not fall by the sword, but thy life shall be for a prey unto thee: because thou hast put thy trust in me, saith the LORD.

α.40.1 WUttinn8wank ne pauhónukqut Jeremiah wutch Jehovahut, mahche Nebuzaradan askuhwhetae mugquomp moncheáheont wutch Ramath, noh nemunont tohtogkuppissit chainsaṣh, ut kenugke wame neg masinohteamukeg wutch Jerusalem kah Judah, nag masinohteamukeg en Babylon.
E.40.1 The word that came to Jeremiah from the LORD, after that Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard had let him go from Ramah, when he had taken him being bound in chains among all that were carried away captive of Jerusalem and Judah, which were carried away captive unto Babylon.

α.40.2 Kah askuhwheteae mugquomp nemunau Jeremiahoh, kah wuttinuh, Lord kum-Manitt8m matche ken8tam ne machuk yeu ut ayeuonganit.
E.40.2 And the captain of the guard took Jeremiah, and said unto him, The LORD thy God hath pronounced this evil upon this place.

α.40.3 Yeuyeu Jehovah uppaudtauun, kah wutussen ne an8wop: newutche kummatcheneheomw8 Jehovah, kah matta ken8swehtam8mw8 8wadtauatonkqussuonk, newaj yeu nuhkuhkongqueóg.
E.40.3 Now the LORD hath brought it, and done according as he hath said: because ye have sinned against the LORD, and have not obeyed his voice, therefore this thing is come upon you.

α.40.4 Kah yeuyeu kusseh, kutompenush yeu kesukok wutch chainsash ohtagish kenutcheganit; wekontaman k8weechaiinneat Babylon, peyaush, kah k8ne nanauwuhhesh; qut matta wekontam8an k8weechaiinneat en Babylon, ne nohtaj: kusseh wame ohke anaquabean; uttoh wekontaman ónat ne âush.
E.40.4 And now, behold, I loose thee this day from the chains which were upon thine hand. If it seem good unto thee to come with me into Babylon, come; and I will look well unto thee: but if it seem ill unto thee to come with me into Babylon, forbear: behold, all the land is before thee: whither it seemeth good and convenient for thee to go, thither go.

α.40.5 Kah asquam quashkeit, n8wop, qushkish wonk en Gedaliahut wunnaumonuh Ahikam, wunnaumonuh Shaphan, neh Babylone ketass8t nanawunumwaheumpoh wame Judae keitotanash, kah noh weetom ut kenugke missinninnuog: asuh aush uttoh an tapeneaman ônat neit askuhwheteae mugquomp wuttinnumauoh m[é]echum, kah onkquatunk, kah ummoncheaheuh.
E.40.5 Now while he was not yet gone back, he said, Go back also to Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the son of Shaphan, whom the king of Babylon hath made governor over the cities of Judah, and dwell with him among the people: or go wheresoever it seemeth convenient unto thee to go. So the captain of the guard gave him victuals and a reward, and let him go.

α.40.6 Neit Jeremiah âonau Gedaliahoh wunnaumonuh Ahikam en Mizpah, & 8weetomuh ut kenugke missininnuh neg asqunutcheg ut ohkeit.
E.40.6 Then went Jeremiah unto Gedaliah the son of Ahikam to Mizpah; and dwelt with him among the people that were left in the land.

α.40.7 Neit wame kenauwamee mukquompaog ut ohteuhkontu, nag kah 8wosketomp8m8uh, n8tamohettit Babylone ketass8t nanawunnumwaheau Gedaliahoh wunnaumonuh Ahikam, ut ohkeit: & wutahtohshuh wosketompoh, kah mittamwussissoh kah mukkiesoh, madchekitcheg ut óhkeit, neg sequnutcheg wutche ma[u]nohteamukeg ut Bablyon;
E.40.7 Now when all the captains of the forces which were in the fields, even they and their men, heard that the king of Babylon had made Gedaliah the son of Ahikam governor in the land, and had committed unto him men, and women, and children, and of the poor of the land, of them that were not carried away captive to Babylon;

α.40.8 Neit nag peyaonaog Gedaliahoh ut Mizpah, Ishmael wunnaumonuh Nethaniah, & Johanan kah Jonathan wunnaumonuh Kareah, & Serajah wunnaumonuh Tanhumeth; & wunnaumonuh Ephai, wut-Netophathite[,] kah Jezaniah wunnaumonuh wut-Maachathite, nag kah 8wosketompom8uh,
E.40.8 Then they came to Gedaliah to Mizpah, even Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, and Johanan and Jonathan the sons of Kareah, and Seraiah the son of Tanhumeth, and the sons of Ephai the Netophathite, and Jezaniah the son of a Maachathite, they and their men.

α.40.9 Kah Gedaliah wunnaumonuh Ahikam, wunnaumonuh Shaphan, nah wutchadchekeimuh, kah wuttinninneum8uh, n8wau, wabesehteok k8tinninneumuhkauonaoont Caldeansog: wutohkek yeu ohkeit, kah wuttinninneumuhkok Babylone ketass8t, & pish k8niyeuwontamuneau.
E.40.9 And Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the son of Shaphan sware unto them and to their men, saying, Fear not to serve the Chaldeans: dwell in the land, and serve the king of Babylon, and it shall be well with you.

α.40.10 Kah nen, kusseh, nuttai Mizpah wuttinninneumuhkauonat Caldeansog, neg pish páuh[ó]nukqueagig: qut kenaau mauinne[á]k wine, kah neepunné meechummuongash kah pummee, kah nish ponam8k k8wishquaout kah ayek kukkeitotanahtu, nish attumunumogish.
E.40.10 As for me, behold, I will dwell at Mizpah, to serve the Chaldeans, which will come unto us: but ye, gather ye wine, and summer fruits, and oil, and put them in your vessels, and dwell in your cities that ye have taken.

α.40.11 Nano wame Jewsog ut Moab, kah kenugke Ammonitsog, kah ut Edom, & neg ayitcheg wame ohkeit, nag n8tamwehettit Babylone ketass8t, sequnau Judae sequnutcheg, kah nanawunnumwaheau Gedaliahoh wunnaumonuh Ahikam wunnaumonuh Shaphan.
E.40.11 Likewise when all the Jews that were in Moab, and among the Ammonites, and in Edom, and that were in all the countries, heard that the king of Babylon had left a remnant of Judah, and that he had set over them Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the son of Shaphan;

α.40.12 Wame Jewsog qushkeog wutch wame ayeuonganehtu uttoh an8kauuttus, kah nag peyaog Judae ohkeit, en Gedaliahut, en Mizpah, kah nag mukkinnumwog wine, kah neepunne meechummuongash m8naash.
E.40.12 Even all the Jews returned out of all places whither they were driven, and came to the land of Judah, to Gedaliah, unto Mizpah, and gathered wine and summer fruits very much.

α.40.13 Nano, Johanan wunnaumonuh Kareah, kah wame kenauwamee mugquompaog ut ohteuhkontu, nag peyaonaog Gedaliahoh ut Mizpah.
E.40.13 Moreover Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the forces that were in the fields, came to Gedaliah to Mizpah,

α.40.14 Kah wuttinuh, sun kuppahke wahteoh, Baal Ammonitse ketass8t, ann8nau Ishmaeloh wunnaumonuh Nethaniah kenushikqunat qut Geadliah wúnnaumonuh Ahika matta wunnamptauoh.
E.40.14 And said unto him, Dost thou certainly know that Baalis the king of the Ammonites hath sent Ishmael the son of Nethaniah to slay thee? But Gedaliah the son of Ahikam believed them not.

α.40.15 Neit Johanan wunnaumonuh Kareah, keme ken8nau Gedaliahoh ut Mizpah, n8wau, k8wehquetumoush moncheti, kah nunnush Ishmael wunnaumonuh Nethaniah, kah matta howan pish 8wahteau8un, tohwutch woh noh nushikquean, neg wame Jewsog miaehtunkquéaneg, woh noswaiyeuog, kah yeug sequnutcheg ut Judah woh pagwanoog.
E.40.15 Then Johanan the son of Kareah spake to Gedaliah in Mizpah secretly saying, Let me go, I pray thee, and I will slay Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, and no man shall know it: wherefore should he slay thee, that all the Jews which are gathered unto thee should be scattered, and the remnant in Judah perish?

α.40.16 Qut Gedaliah wunnaumonuh Ahikam, unnau Johananoh wunnaumonuh Kareah, matta yeu pish kutussein, newutche kuppann8wáh Ishmael.
E.40.16 But Gedaliah the son of Ahikam said unto Johanan the son of Kareah, Thou shalt not do this thing: for thou speakest falsely of Ishmael.

α.41.1 KAh n$nih, ut nesausuk adtahs8it nepauz, Ishmael, wunnaumonuh Nethaniah wunnaumonuh Elishamah, ketass8tamwe wuskannem, kah wussontimausoh ketass8t piogqussuoh woskeotmpuh weechog, peyaonog Gedaliahoh wunnaumonuh Ahikam ut Mizpah, kah na meechwog petukqunneg ut Mizpah.
E.41.1 Now it came to pass in the seventh month, that Ishmael the son of Nethaniah the son of Elishama, of the seed royal, and the princes of the king, even ten men with him, came unto Gedaliah the son of Ahikam to Mizpah; and there they did eat bread together in Mizpah.

α.41.2 Neit Ishmael wunnaumonuh Nethaniah kah piogqussuh wosketompuh weechogqutcheh neepoog, kah togkomaog Gedaliahoh wunnaumonuh Ahikam wunnaumonuh Shaphan nashpe togkodteg, kah wunnushouh, neh Babylone ketass8t nanawunnumwaheompoh ut ohkeit.
E.41.2 Then arose Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, and the ten men that were with him, and smote Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the son of Shaphan with the sword, and slew him, whom the king of Babylon had made governor over the land.

α.41.3 Ishmael wonk nushau wame Jewsoh, neh weechayeumumpoh, weeche Gedaliah ut Mizpah, kah Caldeansog neg na apitcheg, kah ayeuhteaenuog.
E.41.3 Ishmael also slew all the Jews that were with him, even with Gedaliah, at Mizpah, and the Chaldeans that were found there, and the men of war.

α.41.4 Kah n$niyeup, nahohtôeu kesukok mahche nushit Gedaliah, k[á]h matta howan 8wahteauouun.
E.41.4 And it came to pass the second day after he had slain Gedaliah, and no man knew it,

α.41.5 Na 8muneau nawhutche wutch Shechem, wutch Shiloh, kah wutch Samaria, shwosuk tahshinchagkodtog, m8sôsik 8weeshitt8un8òash, wuthogk8un8ash nehneekuhkôsuash, kah neekussôsik wuhhogkauh, mag8ongash kah weetemungquok ohtag wunnutchegan8óut, nish paudtauunat wekit Jehovah.
E.41.5 That there came certain from Shechem, from Shiloh, and from Samaria, even fourscore men, having their beards shaven, and their clothes rent, and having cut themselves, with offerings and incense in their hand, to bring them to the house of the LORD.

α.41.6 Kah Ishmael wunnaumonuh Nethaniah, sohham wutch Mizpah nah wunnogskauonat, nauwadtohpausu ne ayont, kah n$nih nah nogskauo[n]t, nah wuttinuh, peyaón8k Gedaliah wunnaumonuh Ahikam.
E.41.6 And Ishmael the son of Nethaniah went forth from Mizpah to meet them, weeping all along as he went: and it came to pass, as he met them, he said unto them, Come to Gedaliah the son of Ahikam.

α.41.7 Kah n$nih paahettit nô|8tâni, Ishmael wunnaumonuh Nethaniah nah wuñushoh, kah wuttinuhkonuh ut nanashaue pasáhtheganit, nagum, kah wosketompuh neh weechógqutcheh.
E.41.7 And it was so, when they came into the midst of the city, that Ishmael the son of Nethaniah slew them, and cast them into the midst of the pit, he, and the men that were with him.

α.41.8 Qut piukqussuog ut kenugke wuhhogkaout neg anoncheg Ishmaeloh, ahque nushinnean, nutohtomun nompak8unash ut ohteuhkontu, wheatash, kah barlyhash, kah pummee kah hony, neit kehchithau, kah matta wunnushoh ut kenugke wematut.
E.41.8 But ten men were found among them that said unto Ishmael, Slay us not: for we have treasures in the field, of wheat, and of barley, and of oil, and of honey. So he forbare, and slew them not among their brethren.

α.41.9 Kah ne passohtheg ne Ishmael petuhteadt wame nupp8e wuhhogkauh (neh nashoncheh newutche Gedaliah) né Asa ketass8t ayikup wutche u[k]qushaonk Baashahoh Israelle ketass8toh, kah Ishmael wunnaumonuh Nethaniah wunnumwamechumuhkon neh nashómukeh.
E.41.9 Now the pit wherein Ishmael had cast all the dead bodies of the men, whom he had slain because of Gedaliah, was it which Asa the king had made for fear of Baasha king of Israel: and Ishmael the son of Nethaniah filled it with them that were slain.

α.41.10 Neit Ishmael missinohteau wame sekqshonutcheh missinninúh ut Mizpéh, ketass8t wuttaunoh, kah wame missinninúog, neg sekqshoncheg ut Mizpah: neh Nebuzaradan askuhwhete[a]e mugquomp ohtúhshau Gedaliahoh wunnaumonuh Ahikam; kah Ishmael wunnaumonuh Nethaniah ummissinóhkonu[h] kah monchu qushkogkonat en Ammonitsut.
E.41.10 Then Ishmael carried away captive all the residue of the people that were in Mizpah, even the king's daughters, and all the people that remained in Mizpah, whom Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard had committed to Gedaliah the son of Ahikam: and Ishmael the son of Nethaniah carried them away captive, and departed to go over to the Ammonites.

α.41.11 Qut Johanan wunnaumonuh Kareah, kah wame kenawamee mugquompaog, n8tamwehettit wame ne machuk Ishmael wunnaumonuh Nethaniah ne asit,
E.41.11 But when Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the forces that were with him, heard of all the evil that Ishmael the son of Nethaniah had done,

α.41.12 Neit nemunaog wame wosketompuh, kah ayeuuhkonaog Ishmaeloh wunnaumonuh Neth[a]niah, kah nag wunnamheouh ut kishke mishe nippeut ne ut Gibeon.
E.41.12 Then they took all the men, and went to fight with Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, and found him by the great waters that are in Gibeon.

α.41.13 Kah n$nihyeup, wame missinninnuog neg weechayeumoncheg Ishmaeloh, n[a]uahettit Johananoh wunnaumonuh Kareah, kah wame kenauwamee mugquompaog, neh weetómukqutcheh, neit weekontamwog.
E.41.13 Now it came to pass, that when all the people which were with Ishmael saw Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the forces that were with him, then they were glad.

α.41.14 Neit wame missinninnúog neh Ishmael masinohteacheh wutch Mizpah, quinnuppeog, kah qushkeog, kah auog Johananut wunnaumonuh Kareah.
E.41.14 So all the people that Ishmael had carried away captive from Mizpah cast about and returned, and went unto Johanan the son of Kareah.

α.41.15 Qut Ishmael wunnaumonuh Nethaniah pohquohham wutch Johananut, kah weeche shwosuk tahsuog, kah auog Ammonitsut.
E.41.15 But Ishmael the son of Nethaniah escaped from Johanan with eight men, and went to the Ammonites.

α.41.16 Neit Johanan wunnaumonuh Kareah, kah wame kenauwamee mugquompaog, nag neemunáog wame ashqshonutcheh missinninnúh, neh pohquohwhunoncheh wutch Ishmaelut wunnaumonuh Nethaniah, wutch Mizpah, (mahche nushont Gedaliah wunnaumonuh Ahikam) menuhkesue ayeuhteaenúog, kah mittamwussissog, kah mukki[é]sog, kah Eunuchsog neh wôs8oncheh Gibeon.
E.41.16 Then took Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the forces that were with him, all the remnant of the people whom he had recovered from Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, from Mizpah, after that he had slain Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, even mighty men of war, and the women, and the children, and the eunuchs, whom he had brought again from Gibeon:

α.41.17 Kah nag monch[é]og, kah appuog wutappuonganit Chimham, ne kishke Bethlehem, woh wutch petutteamuk en Egypt.
E.41.17 And they departed, and dwelt in the habitation of Chimham, which is by Bethlehem, to go to enter into Egypt,

α.41.18 Wutch Caldeansog: newutche nag ukqushóuh, newutche Ishmael wunnaumonuh Nethaniah nushop Gedaliahoh wunnaumonuh Ahikam, neh Babylone ketass8t nanawunnumwáheumpoh ut ohkeit.
E.41.18 Because of the Chaldeans: for they were afraid of them, because Ishmael the son of Nethaniah had slain Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, whom the king of Babylon made governor in the land.

α.42.1 NEit wame kenauwamee mugquompaog, kah Johanan wunnaumonuh Kareah, Jeremiah wunnaumonuh Hoshajah, kah wame missinninnuog wutch peississit pajeh masugkenuk, nag pas8tshaog.
E.42.1 Then all the captains of the forces, and Johanan the son of Kareah, and Jezaniah the son of Hoshaiah, and all the people from the least even unto the greatest, came near,

α.42.2 Kah unnaog J[e]remiahoh quoshodtumwaénuh, k8wehquetumunumun, n8wehquetum8onganun tapeneunkqutch ut anaquabean, kah peantamwanshinnean en Jehovah kum-Manitt8mut, wutche wame yeug ashqshoncheg (newutche nutogguhse sekqshomun wutch mattaanukuppanneg, neh kuskesukquash yeuyeu nauoncheh)
E.42.2 And said unto Jeremiah the prophet, Let, we beseech thee, our supplication be accepted before thee, and pray for us unto the LORD thy God, even for all this remnant; (for we are left but a few of many, as thine eyes do behold us:)

α.42.3 Onk woh Jehovah kum-Manitt8m nunnáhtinukqun may uttoh woh aôog, kah ne woh aséog.
E.42.3 That the LORD thy God may shew us the way wherein we may walk, and the thing that we may do.

α.42.4 Neit Jeremiah quoshodtumwaen nah wuttinuh, ken8tauunumw8, kusseh, nuppeantamau Jehovah kum-Manitt8mw8 neaunak kukkutt8wonganooash, kah pish nnih, uttoh áne Jehovah namp8hamunkqueóg, pish k8wahteauwáhenuneau: wanne teag kukkogkôununumauun8mw8.
E.42.4 Then Jeremiah the prophet said unto them, I have heard you; behold, I will pray unto the LORD your God according to your words; and it shall come to pass, that whatsoever thing the LORD shall answer you, I will declare it unto you; I will keep nothing back from you.

α.42.5 Neit nag unnáog Jeremiahoh, Lord noh wunnamuhkutee, kah pabuhtánumwe wauwaeni[e]ch nashauwe ut nenawun, matta usseog neaunak wame nish Jehovah kum-Manitt8m, ann8nukqueániṣh en nuhhogkanónut.
E.42.5 Then they said to Jeremiah, The LORD be a true and faithful witness between us, if we do not even according to all things for the which the LORD thy God shall send thee to us.

α.42.6 Wanegik asuh machuk n8swehtamumun 8wadtauatonkqussuonk Jehovah num-Manitt8mun, noh ánunn8nunog, onk woh n8niyeuhhikqunan n8swehtomog 8wadtauatonkqussuonk Jehovah num-Manitt8mun.
E.42.6 Whether it be good, or whether it be evil, we will obey the voice of the LORD our God, to whom we send thee; that it may be well with us, when we obey the voice of the LORD our God.

α.42.7 Kah n$nihyeup mahche piogkukquinogok, wuttinn8waonk Jehovah peyaónuk Jeremiah.
E.42.7 And it came to pass after ten days, that the word of the LORD came unto Jeremiah.

α.42.8 Neit wehkomau Johananoh wunnaumonuh Kareah, kah kenauwamee mugquompaog, neh weechayeumukqutcheh, kah wame missinninnuog wutch peississit pajeh masugkenuk.
E.42.8 Then called he Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the forces which were with him, and all the people from the least even to the greatest,

α.42.9 Kah nah wuttinuh, yeu wussin Lord um-Manitt8moh Israel, noh ánano8seógkup, kupponamunat k8wehquetumo8ongan8 [ú]t anaquabit.
E.42.9 And said unto them, Thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel, unto whom ye sent me to present your supplication before him;

α.42.10 Ash yeu pumappeóg ohkeit, neit k8wekikónunumw8, kah matta ken8kinin8mw8, kah kutohteuhkonunumw8, kah matta kuppohqunun8mw8, newutche nutáuskoiantam wutche machuk ne anhén[n]óg.
E.42.10 If ye will still abide in this land, then will I build you, and not pull you down, and I will plant you, and not pluck you up: for I repent me of the evil that I have done unto you.

α.42.11 Wabesuonúhteok Babylone ketass8t, noh quoshog, noh wabesuonúhteogk wussin Jehovah, newutche k8weetómunumw8 k8wadchanunaóont, kah kuppohquohwhununnaóont wutch wunnutcheganit.
E.42.11 Be not afraid of the king of Babylon, of whom ye are afraid; be not afraid of him, saith the LORD: for I am with you to save you, and to deliver you from his hand.

α.42.12 Kah kummonanumunumw8, onk woh kummonánumukou, onk woh kukqushkeáhik8 en nehenwonche kutohtkeout,
E.42.12 And I will shew mercies unto you, that he may have mercy upon you, and cause you to return to your own land.

α.42.13 Qut unn8waog matta n8tohtéumun yeu ohkeit, kah matta n8swehtam8mun 8wadtauatonkqussuonk Jehovah kum-Manitt8mw8.
E.42.13 But if ye say, We will not dwell in this land, neither obey the voice of the LORD your God,

α.42.14 N8waog, matchaog, qut nutômun ohkeit Egypt, uttoh mo adt naum8og mattompog, kah matta nunn8tam8mun mishont8wae trumpet, kah matta pish nukkodtitteam8mun petukquneg, kah na nutáyinnean.
E.42.14 Saying, No; but we will go into the land of Egypt, where we shall see no war, nor hear the sound of the trumpet, nor have hunger of bread; and there will we dwell:

α.42.15 Kah yeuyeu newutche n8tam8k wuttinn8waonk Jehovah, kenaau askqshéogish Judah, yeu wussin Jehovah ayeuteaunit um-Manitt8moh Israel, tohneit mamusse ponamok kuskesukooaṣh petukonat en Egypt na$ut keohteainneat.
E.42.15 And now therefore hear the word of the LORD, ye remnant of Judah; Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel; If ye wholly set your faces to enter into Egypt, and go to sojourn there;

α.42.16 Neit pish n$nih, togkodteg ne quohtamóg, ne pish kummattan[ú]kqunneau ut ohkeit Egypt, kah mahshagquodt ne quohtamóg, pish môsogque asuhkongquneau ut Egypt, kah na pish kuttit nuppuneau.
E.42.16 Then it shall come to pass, that the sword, which ye feared, shall overtake you there in the land of Egypt, and the famine, whereof ye were afraid, shall follow close after you there in Egypt; and there ye shall die.

α.42.17 Ne pish wuttinniinneau wame nag anaquohtunkeg wuskesuk88aṣh ônat Egypt, na ut kéohteáinneat, nag pish nupwog nashpe togkodteg, nashpe mahshagquodt, kah nashpe enninneaonk, kah matta howan nag pish wusseksqshoh, asuh pohquohhamóh machuk ne nóhkenumauog.
E.42.17 So shall it be with all the men that set their faces to go into Egypt to sojourn there; they shall die by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence: and none of them shall remain or escape from the evil that I will bring upon them.

α.42.18 Newutche yeu wussin Jehovah ayeuteaunit, um-Manitt8moh Israel, neane nummusquantamóonk kah nunnisquétuonk sókenumauoneau wadohkitcheg Jerusalem; ne ne nunnisquétuonk pish kussókenumonteaneau petutteaóg Egypt; kah kenaau pish kummattanumitteae utteamw8, kah kutchepshónitteamw8, kah kummatchenànumitteamw8 kah kutushpinanitteamw8, kah matta pish wonk yeu ayeuonk kenaum8uneau.
E.42.18 For thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel; As mine anger and my fury hath been poured forth upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem; so shall my fury be poured forth upon you, when ye shall enter into Egypt: and ye shall be an execration, and an astonishment, and a curse, and a reproach; and ye shall see this place no more.

α.42.19 Jehovah n8wau papaume kenaau, woi kenaau sekqshaógish Judah, onteógk Egypt, pahke wahteau8k, kukquosháe amaumunnumw8 yeu kesukok.
E.42.19 The LORD hath said concerning you, O ye remnant of Judah; Go ye not into Egypt: know certainly that I have admonished you this day.

α.42.20 Newutche kuteiantoge ussemw8 kuttahh8wout án8néóg en Lord kum-Manitt8m8wóut, an8waog, peantamwanshinnean en Lordut núm-Manitt8munónut, kah neaunak wame ne Jehovah an8wadt, ne ne w[e]ahteauwáhinan, kah mos nutussenan.
E.42.20 For ye dissembled in your hearts, when ye sent me unto the LORD your God, saying, Pray for us unto the LORD our God; and according unto all that the LORD our God shall say, so declare unto us, and we will do it.

α.42.21 Kah yeuyeu yeu kesukok k8wahteauwáhenuneau, qut matta ken8swehtamomw8 8wadtauatonkqussuonk Jehovah kum-Manitt8mw8, asuh ne teag ne ann8sit en kuhhogkaóut.
E.42.21 And now I have this day declared it to you; but ye have not obeyed the voice of the LORD your God, nor any thing for the which he hath sent me unto you.

α.42.22 Newutche yeuyeu pahke wahteau8k, pish kenup[m]w8 nashpe togkodteg, nashpe mahashagquodt, kah nashpe enninneaonk, ut ne ayeuonganit ne an kodtantamóg penuwohteainneat.
E.42.22 Now therefore know certainly that ye shall die by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence, in the place whither ye desire to go and to sojourn.

α.43.1 KAh n$nih, Jeremiah mahche ken8nont wame missinninnùh, wame ukkutt8wongaṣh Jehovah um-Manitt8m8uh, wutche nish Jehovah um-Manitt8m8uh an8teamwutcheh nah en, wame yeush kutt8wongaṣh
E.43.1 And it came to pass, that when Jeremiah had made an end of speaking unto all the people all the words of the LORD their God, for which the LORD their God had sent him to them, even all these words,

α.43.2 Neit Azariah wunnaumonuh Hoshajah, kah Johanan wunnaumonuh Kareah, kah wame pahtuánumwutcheg, nag keket8kaog unnáog Jeremiahoh, kuppann8wayim: Jehovah num$Manitt8mun, matta kutann8nuk8h n8wonat, onteógk Egypt na$ut kéohteaineat.
E.43.2 Then spake Azariah the son of Hoshaiah, and Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the proud men, saying unto Jeremiah, Thou speakest falsely: the LORD our God hath not sent thee to say, Go not into Egypt to sojourn there:

α.43.3 Qut Baruch wunnaumonuh Neriah kenushquáh en kutáyeuuhkónukqunnanónut, ummagunat kuhhogkaunonash en wunnutchegan8óut Caldeansog, onk woh nag kenushikqunnónog kah kummissinóhkonukqunnanonut en Babylon.
E.43.3 But Baruch the son of Neriah setteth thee on against us, for to deliver us into the hand of the Chaldeans, that they might put us to death, and carry us away captives into Babylon.

α.43.4 Neit Johanan wunnaumonuh Kareah kah wame kenauwamee mugquompaog, kah wame missinninnúog matta n8swehtamóog 8wadtauatonkqussuonk Jehovah, wutohkinneat Judae ohkeit.
E.43.4 So Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the forces, and all the people, obeyed not the voice of the LORD, to dwell in the land of Judah.

α.43.5 Qut Johanan wunnaumonuh Kareah, kah wame kenauwamee mugquompaog, nag neemunáog wame askqushóncheg ut Judah, kah neg quashkécheg wutch wame wutohtimóinneat uttoh ann8kauut, ayinneat Judae ohkeit.
E.43.5 But Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the forces, took all the remnant of Judah, that were returned from all nations, whither they had been driven, to dwell in the land of Judah;

α.43.6 Wosketompaog, kah mittamwussissog, kah peississog, kah ketass8t wuttaunoh, kah nishnoh howan, neg Nebuzaradan askuhwheteáe mugquomp sequnnumauoncheh Gedaliahoh wunnaumonuh Ahikam, wunnaumonuh Shaphan, kah Jeremiah quoshodtumwaen, kah Baruch wunnaumonuh Neriah.
E.43.6 Even men, and women, and children, and the king's daughters, and every person that Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard had left with Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the son of Shaphan, and Jeremiah the prophet, and Baruch the son of Neriah.

α.43.7 Neit peyaog ohkeit Egypt, newutche matta n8swehtam8og 8wadtauatonkqussuonk Jehovah: neit peyaog Taphnes.
E.43.7 So they came into the land of Egypt: for they obeyed not the voice of the LORD: thus came they even to Tahpanhes.

α.43.8 Neit wuttinn8waonk Jehovah peyaonuk Jeremiah ut Taphnes, n8wau,
E.43.8 Then came the word of the LORD unto Jeremiah in Tahpanhes, saying,

α.43.9 Nemunush mogke qussukquanash ut kenutcheganit, kah niṣh adtahtaaṣh ut man8skut ut ahhutchikkoswut bricksog, ne ahhut petutteamuk Pharaoh wek ut Taphnes, ut anaquabhettit Judae wosketompaog:
E.43.9 Take great stones in thine hand, and hide them in the clay in the brickkiln, which is at the entry of Pharaoh's house in Tahpanhes, in the sight of the men of Judah;

α.43.10 Kah nag us, yeu wussin Jehovah ayeuteaunit um$Manitt8moh Israel, kusseh, nutann8team, kah nunneemun Nebuchadnezzar Babylone ketass8t, nuttinneum, kah nukquenahtóh wutappuonk ut woskeche yeush qussukquanaṣh nish adtahtauoniṣh, kah ne woskeche piṣh wuttit sepágenumun wussontimóe kommuk.
E.43.10 And say unto them, Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel; Behold, I will send and take Nebuchadrezzar the king of Babylon, my servant, and will set his throne upon these stones that I have hid; and he shall spread his royal pavilion over them.

α.43.11 Kah peyont piṣh togkodtam Egypte ohke: neg woh napukeg en nuppunnat, neg woh masinácheg en missinnáinneat, neg woh wutch togkodteg en togkodteganit.
E.43.11 And when he cometh, he shall smite the land of Egypt, and deliver such as are for death to death; and such as are for captivity to captivity; and such as are for the sword to the sword.

α.43.12 Kah nunn[a]shqunánum n8teau en wekuóut Egypte manitt8og, kah niṣh piṣh wutchikkossumunaṣh, kah piṣh ummissinóhkonuh, kah pish hogk8 Egypte ohke, onatuh nanaushepsaen ágqut wuthogk8onk, kah na 8ch piṣh wunohteáe sohhamun.
E.43.12 And I will kindle a fire in the houses of the gods of Egypt; and he shall burn them, and carry them away captives: and he shall array himself with the land of Egypt, as a shepherd putteth on his garment; and he shall go forth from thence in peace.

α.43.13 Kah piṣh wonk pokshanáog Bethshemeshe unneukontunkanog, ne ohtag Egypte ohkeit, kah wek8óash um-manitt8m8uh Egyptiansog pish wutchikkossumunaṣh n8taut.
E.43.13 He shall break also the images of Bethshemesh, that is in the land of Egypt; and the houses of the gods of the Egyptians shall he burn with fire.

α.44.1 WUttinn8waonk ne pauhonukqut Jeremiah papaume wame Jewsog neg wadohkitcheg Egypte ohke, neg wadohkitcheg Migdol, kah Tahpanhes, kah Noph, kah ut wutohkeit Pathros, n8wau,
E.44.1 The word that came to Jeremiah concerning all the Jews which dwell in the land of Egypt, which dwell at Migdol, and at Tahpanhes, and at Noph, and in the country of Pathros, saying,

α.44.2 Yeu wussin Jehovah ayeuteaunit um-Manitt8moh Israel, kenaumw8 wame machuk ne án nuhkinnumauog Jerusalem, kah wame Judae keitotanéhtu: kah kusseh yeu kesukok touushin, kah matta howan na 8tohkéin.
E.44.2 Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel; Ye have seen all the evil that I have brought upon Jerusalem, and upon all the cities of Judah; and, behold, this day they are a desolation, and no man dwelleth therein,

α.44.3 Newutche ummatcheseonganooash niṣh asehettichish, numm8m8sqhikqunnaóut, newutche chikossumauópanneg weetemungquok wuttinneumuhkauónat onkatogig manitt8og, neh matta waheáhettegeh matta nag, asuh kenaau, asuh k8sh8woog.
E.44.3 Because of their wickedness which they have committed to provoke me to anger, in that they went to burn incense, and to serve other gods, whom they knew not, neither they, ye, nor your fathers.

α.44.4 Qut nutann8nomp en kuhho[g]kaóut wame quoshodtumwae nuttinneumog, nompoae omohkeon, kah ann8nog, nussip, ussehteogk ne nishkeneunkquok ne sekeneam.
E.44.4 Howbeit I sent unto you all my servants the prophets, rising early and sending them, saying, Oh, do not this abominable thing that I hate.

α.44.5 Qut nag matta n8tamoog, kah matta ahchusittam8og, quinnuppenat wutch ummatcheseongan8óut, matta chikohsumauónat weetemungquok onkatogig manittoog.
E.44.5 But they hearkened not, nor inclined their ear to turn from their wickedness, to burn no incense unto other gods.

α.44.6 Newaj nunnishquetuonk kah nummusquantamoonk sohkenumomp kah nasqunop ut Judae keitotanáhtu, kah Jerusalem[e] toumáogquehtu, kah niṣh mohchim8ash kah touishineash neane yeu kesukok.
E.44.6 Wherefore my fury and mine anger was poured forth, and was kindled in the cities of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem; and they are wasted and desolate, as at this day.

α.44.7 Newutche yeuyeu yeu wussin Jehovah um-Manitt8m8oh ayeuteáog, um-Manitt8m8oh Israel, tohwaj yeu unayeúhkone matchenéheog kukketeahogkôn8, tummehtahwhonat wutche kuhhogkaout wosketomp kah mittamwossis, mukkies kah n8nuk wutch Judah, matta kussequnitteaunnaóut.
E.44.7 Therefore now thus saith the LORD, the God of hosts, the God of Israel; Wherefore commit ye this great evil against your souls, to cut off from you man and woman, child and suckling, out of Judah, to leave you none to remain;

α.44.8 Newutche kumm8m8sqhimw8, nashpe kenutchegane anakausuwonganooash, châgossumauog weetemungkquok onkatogig manitt8og, ut ohkeit Egypt, uttoh a[ó]og kutayeinneaóut, onk woh kuttummetahwhomw8 kuhhogkaoog, onk woh kummattanumitteamw8, kah kukkehkômitteamw8 ut kenugke wame ohkee wutohtimóneáhtu.
E.44.8 In that ye provoke me unto wrath with the works of your hands, burning incense unto other gods in the land of Egypt, whither ye be gone to dwell, that ye might cut yourselves off, and that ye might be a curse and a reproach among all the nations of the earth?

α.44.9 Sun k8wananittamw8 ummatchetowongan8 k8sh8[ô]og, kah ummatchetowongan8 Judae ketass8tamwog kah ummittamwuss8uh ummatchetowongan8, kah nehenwonche kummatchetowongan8, kah kummittamwuss8oog ummatchetowongan8, niṣh aséhetticheh ut Judae ohkit, kah ut Jerusaleme toumáogquehtu.
E.44.9 Have ye forgotten the wickedness of your fathers, and the wickedness of the kings of Judah, and the wickedness of their wives, and your own wickedness, and the wickedness of your wives, which they have committed in the land of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem?

α.44.10 Nag matta pohqueteahá8og pajeh yeu kesukok, kah matta wabeséog, kah matta pomushaóntam8og nuttinnaumatuonk, kah nukkuhk8waongash niṣh ponamónish anaquabeóg kah anaqu[a]hettit k8sh8óog.
E.44.10 They are not humbled even unto this day, neither have they feared, nor walked in my law, nor in my statutes, that I set before you and before your fathers.

α.44.11 Newutche yeu wussin Jehovah ayeuhteaunit um-Manitt8moh Israel, kusseh, kutayeuuhkonittue ponamauonumw8 nuskesuk wutche machuk, kah tummetahwhonat wame Judah.
E.44.11 Therefore thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel; Behold, I will set my face against you for evil, and to cut off all Judah.

α.44.12 Kah nunneemun ashqshoncheg ut Judah, neg anaquoushácheg Egypt na$ut penuwohteáinneat, kah nag piṣh wame mohtuppaéog, kah penushaog ut ohkit Egypt: nag piṣh mahchim8og nashpe togkodteg, kah nashpe mahshagquodt, kah nag piṣh nupwog wutch peississut pajeh masugkenut, nashpe togkodteg kah nashpe mahshagquodt kah nag piṣh mattanittuonk, chepshaonk, kah matánum8[utt]uonk, kah ushpunadtuonk.
E.44.12 And I will take the remnant of Judah, that have set their faces to go into the land of Egypt to sojourn there, and they shall all be consumed, and fall in the land of Egypt; they shall even be consumed by the sword and by the famine: they shall die, from the least even unto the greatest, by the sword and by the famine: and they shall be an execration, and an astonishment, and a curse, and a reproach.

α.44.13 Newutche nag nussasamatahwhóog wadohkiitcheg Egypte ohkeit, neane sasamatahwhogkup Jerusalem nashpe togkodteg, nashpe mahshagquodt kah nashpe enninneaonk.
E.44.13 For I will punish them that dwell in the land of Egypt, as I have punished Jerusalem, by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence:

α.44.14 Newaj matta howan ashqshoncheg ut Judah neg aóncheg Egypte ohkeit, na$ut n8sausinneat, piṣh pohquohhamm8 asuh sekqshó[o]u, woh nag qushkenóont en Judae ohkeit, ne kodtantamw[é]hettit, en qushkénat, na ayinneat newutch matta piṣh howan qushkeu, qut neg pohquohhogig.
E.44.14 So that none of the remnant of Judah, which are gone into the land of Egypt to sojourn there, shall escape or remain, that they should return into the land of Judah, to the which they have a desire to return to dwell there: for none shall return but such as shall escape.

α.44.15 Neit wame wosketompaog neg wáheoncheg ummittamwuss8oh chikossumau[á]og weetemungquok onkatogeh manitt8h, kah wame mittamwussissog neg na kishke neepauticheg, mattaánukeg, wame missinninnúog neg wadohkitcheg Egypt, ut Pathros, nag namp8hamauâog Jeremiahoh, n8wau,
E.44.15 Then all the men which knew that their wives had burned incense unto other gods, and all the women that stood by, a great multitude, even all the people that dwelt in the land of Egypt, in Pathros, answered Jeremiah, saying,

α.44.16 Kutt8onk ne áseog ut 8wesuonganit Jehovah, matta kukkuhkeitauunómun.
E.44.16 As for the word that thou hast spoken unto us in the name of the LORD, we will not hearken unto thee.

α.44.17 Qut wunnamuhkut pish nutussenan uttoh án sohham8m8uk wutch nutt8nunónut chikkohsumauónat weetemungquok kesukque kehchissonkusq, kah sókenumauónat wuttattamoe sephausuongaṣh, ne mahche usséog, nenawun kah n8shunónog: nukketass8timómunónog kah nussontimomunonog ut Judae keitotanahtu, kah Jerusaleme toumaogquehtu: newutche neit nummishe meechumumunónup kah n8niimunónup, kah matta naum8mun machuk.
E.44.17 But we will certainly do whatsoever thing goeth forth out of our own mouth, to burn incense unto the queen of heaven, and to pour out drink offerings unto her, as we have done, we, and our fathers, our kings, and our princes, in the cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem: for then had we plenty of victuals, and were well, and saw no evil.

α.44.18 Qut nádteuh ahque chikossumauogkut weetemungquok kesukque kehchissonkusq, kah sókenumauonat wuttattamwe mag8ongaṣh, nukquenauhikkumun wame teanteaquassinish, kah nummahche mohchimumun nashpe togkodteg, kah nashpe mahshagquodt.
E.44.18 But since we left off to burn incense to the queen of heaven, and to pour out drink offerings unto her, we have wanted all things, and have been consumed by the sword and by the famine.

α.44.19 Kah chôgossumauógut weetemungquok kesukque kuhchi[s]sonkusq, kah sokenumauogkut wuttattamoe mag8ongash, sun nuttáyimauóunónus petukqunegaṣh wowussumónat, kah sun nussokanumauóunónus wuttattamoe mag8ongash ne toh ut matta násukôunonog?
E.44.19 And when we burned incense to the queen of heaven, and poured out drink offerings unto her, did we make her cakes to worship her, and pour out drink offerings unto her, without our men?

α.44.20 Neit Jeremiah unnau wame missinninnúh, wosketompuh, kah mittamwossissoh, kah wame missinnúh neh namp8hamunutcheh, n8wau,
E.44.20 Then Jeremiah said unto all the people, to the men, and to the women, and to all the people which had given him that answer, saying,

α.44.21 Weetemungquok ne chôgossumogkup, ut Judae keitotanahtu, kah ut Jerusaleme toumaogquehtu kenaau, kah kussontim8m8oog, kah ohkee missinninnúog, sunnummatta Jehovah ummequanumuh, kah sunnummatta peyomunóus ut wuttenantam8onganit?
E.44.21 The incense that ye burned in the cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem, ye, and your fathers, your kings, and your princes, and the people of the land, did not the LORD remember them, and came it not into his mind?

α.44.22 Newaj Jehovah matta sepe kehchithog, wutche machuk kutusseongan8, kah wutche ne unkquánumukquok ne aséog: newaj touushik kutohtu, kah chepshaonganu8, kah matanittuonganu8, matta wutohkéin, neane yeu kesukok.
E.44.22 So that the LORD could no longer bear, because of the evil of your doings, and because of the abominations which ye have committed; therefore is your land a desolation, and an astonishment, and a curse, without an inhabitant, as at this day.

α.44.23 Newutche kutchikkossumw8 weetemungquok, newutche kummatcheneheomw8 Jehovah, kah matta ken8swetamomw8 8wadtauatonkqussuonk Jehovah, kah matta kuppomushomw8 wuttinna[u]matuonganit, kah matta ukkuhk8waonganit, asuh 8wauwaonganit, newaj yeu machuk peyaonukqueóg, neane yeu kesukok.
E.44.23 Because ye have burned incense, and because ye have sinned against the LORD, and have not obeyed the voice of the LORD, nor walked in his law, nor in his statutes, nor in his testimonies; therefore this evil is happened unto you, as at this day.

α.44.24 Nano Jeremiah unnau wame missinninnúh, kah wame mittamwussissoh: n8tam8k wuttinn8waonk Jehovah, wame Judah neg apitcheg ohkeit Egypt.
E.44.24 Moreover Jeremiah said unto all the people, and to all the women, Hear the word of the LORD, all Judah that are in the land of Egypt:

α.44.25 Yeu wussin Jehovah ayeuhteaunit um-Manitt8moh Israel, n8wau, kenaau kah kummittamwuss8oog, naneeswe kussimw8 nashpe kutton8wout, kah kummahche usseneau nashpe kenutchegan8, kussimw8: wunnamuhkut nutussenan nukquoshomuwaonganunonaṣh, niṣh quoshoáogiṣh, chikohsumauonat wetemungquok kesukque kehchissonkusq, kah sokanumauónat wuttattamoe mag8ongaṣh: wunnamuhkut piṣh kuppahkodchehteomw8 kukquoshomuwaongan8oaṣh, kah wunnamuhkut piṣh kutussemw8 kukquoshomuonganooaṣh.
E.44.25 Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel, saying; Ye and your wives have both spoken with your mouths, and fulfilled with your hand, saying, We will surely perform our vows that we have vowed, to burn incense to the queen of heaven, and to pour out drink offerings unto her: ye will surely accomplish your vows, and surely perform your vows.

α.44.26 Newutche n8tam8k wuttinn8waonk Jehovah, wame Judah neg wadohkitcheg Egypt ohkeit, kusseh, nutchadchekéyeuop nashpe nummishe wesuonk, wussin Lord, n8wesuonk matta piṣh wonk missohham8un ut wutt8nut, howae Judae wosketomp ut wame Egypte ohkeit, unn8wadt Jehovah Manit pomantam.
E.44.26 Therefore hear ye the word of the LORD, all Judah that dwell in the land of Egypt; Behold, I have sworn by my great name, saith the LORD, that my name shall no more be named in the mouth of any man of Judah in all the land of Egypt, saying, The Lord GOD liveth.

α.44.27 Kusseh, nag nutaskwhonóog wutche machuk, qut matta wanegik, kah wame Judae wosketompaog ut ohkeit Egypt, nag piṣh mahchim8og nashpe togkodteg, kah nashpe mahshagquodt, nô pajeh 8wohkukquossinunaóont[.]
E.44.27 Behold, I will watch over them for evil, and not for good: and all the men of Judah that are in the land of Egypt shall be consumed by the sword and by the famine, until there be an end of them.

α.44.28 Qut ogguhsikeg neg pohquohhogig togkodteg, nag pish qushkeog wut-Egypte ohkeit en Judae ohkeit: kah wame ashqshoncheg Judah neg aoncheg Egypt na$ut n8sausinneat, nag pish wa[h]teauog howan ukkutt8onk manuhkohtag, nukkutt8onk asuh nagumau.
E.44.28 Yet a small number that escape the sword shall return out of the land of Egypt into the land of Judah, and all the remnant of Judah, that are gone into the land of Egypt to sojourn there, shall know whose words shall stand, mine, or their's.

α.44.29 Kah yeu pish kukkehkinneasuongan8, wussin Jehovah, kussasamatahwhush yeu$ut ayeuonganit, onk woh k8wahteomw8, wunnamuhkut pish nuttinn8waonk, kummenuhtikkompauwehtunkquneau wutche machuk
E.44.29 And this shall be a sign unto you, saith the LORD, that I will punish you in this place, that ye may know that my words shall surely stand against you for evil:

α.44.30 Yeu wussin Jehovah kusseh, Pharoh-Hophra Egypte ketass8t nuppon wunnutchegan8wout ummatwomoh, kah en wunnutchegan8out neg kodnushoncheg, neane mag8omp Zedechiah Judae ketass8t en wunnutcheganit Nebuchadnezzer Babylone ketass8t ummatwomoh noh kodnushomp.
E.44.30 Thus saith the LORD; Behold, I will give Pharaohhophra king of Egypt into the hand of his enemies, and into the hand of them that seek his life; as I gave Zedekiah king of Judah into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, his enemy, and that sought his life.

α.45.1 WUttinn8waonk ne JEremiah quoshodtumwaen anont Baruchoh wunnaumonuh Neriah, mahche wâsukkuhh8k ut B8kut yeush wuttinn8waongash, wutch wutt8nut Jeremiah, ut weyaue kodtum8mut Jehojakim wunnaumonuh Josiah Judae ketass8t, n8wau,
E.45.1 The word that Jeremiah the prophet spake unto Baruch the son of Neriah, when he had written these words in a book at the mouth of Jeremiah, in the fourth year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah, saying,

α.45.2 Jehovah um-Manitt8muh Israel yeu kuttugqun, woi Baruch.
E.45.2 Thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel, unto thee, O Baruch:

α.45.3 Kussip, yeuyeu missi nutonkapunaonk, newutche Lord k8tnehtau neuantam8onk en nutonkquanum8onganit, nussauunumup mahshanomweon, kah matta nunnampteo8 anwôsin8onk.
E.45.3 Thou didst say, Woe is me now! for the LORD hath added grief to my sorrow; I fainted in my sighing, and I find no rest.

α.45.4 Yeu woh kuttinnon, yeu wussin Lord, kusseh, ne ayimomp nuppohquenumun, kah ne ahketeaomp nuppohqunumun, yeu mamusse ohke.
E.45.4 Thus shalt thou say unto him, The LORD saith thus; Behold, that which I have built will I break down, and that which I have planted I will pluck up, even this whole land.

α.45.5 Kah kenatinneaham magogish? wutch kuhhog natiñeham8hkon: newutche kusseh, nunnuhkenumau machuk wame weyaus wussin J[é]hovah, qut kuppomantamoonk kuttinnumauunun wutch kuttohqunnumoonk ut wame ayeuonganéhtu uttoh aoan.
E.45.5 And seekest thou great things for thyself? seek them not: for, behold, I will bring evil upon all flesh, saith the LORD: but thy life will I give unto thee for a prey in all places whither thou goest.

α.46.1 WUttinn8waonk Jehovah, ne peyaonuk Jeremiah quoshodtumwaen ayeuuhkonittue penuwohteaog.
E.46.1 The word of the LORD which came to Jeremiah the prophet against the Gentiles;

α.46.2 Ayeuuhkonittue Egypt ayeuuhkone ukkenauwameonk Pharoh$Necho Egypte ketass8t, noh ayeup kishke Euphratese sepuut, ut Carcemish, ne Nebuchadnezzar Babylone ketass8t togkodtogkup ut weyaue kodtum8mut Jehojakim wunnaumonuh Josiah Judae ketass8t.
E.46.2 Against Egypt, against the army of Pharaohnecho king of Egypt, which was by the river Euphrates in Carchemish, which Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon smote in the fourth year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah.

α.46.3 Wunohto8k bukler kah ogqunneg, kah pas8tshagk ayeuwuttinneat.
E.46.3 Order ye the buckler and shield, and draw near to battle.

α.46.4 Wunneheuk horsesog, kuhkuhquegk naiyeumutteaogish, kah neepauwehtam8k nashpe kuppuhkukk8out ahohtagish, wunnehteogk qunuhtugquash, kah hogk8k brigandinsash.
E.46.4 Harness the horses; and get up, ye horsemen, and stand forth with your helmets; furbish the spears, and put on the brigandines.

α.46.5 Tohwutch nag nauog wutchepshonaoont, kah qushkeog? kah ummissugken8m8uh n8ketahwhoninneuh, kah kenuppe puhh8waog, kah matta ompamuhquaeog, newutche wabesuonk quinuppohtop, wussin Jehovah.
E.46.5 Wherefore have I seen them dismayed and turned away back? and their mighty ones are beaten down, and are fled apace, and look not back: for fear was round about, saith the LORD.

α.46.6 Neg kakenupshoncheg, wusseemohettekitch, kah mas[ú]gkenuk, pohquohhogitch, nag pish togkussittassunwog, kah penushaog nogque nanummiyeu, kishke Euphrates.
E.46.6 Let not the swift flee away, nor the mighty man escape; they shall stumble, and fall toward the north by the river Euphrates.

α.46.7 Howan yeuoh ogque kuhkuhquit tomogkonit noh wunnuppeash agque mamonchem88g sepuut?
E.46.7 Who is this that cometh up as a flood, whose waters are moved as the rivers?

α.46.8 Egypt ohque waapem8 tommogkonit, kah wunnuppemash ogque mamonchem8ash sepuut, kah n8wau, nukkuhkuhquem, nunnuhkuhkom ohke, nuppagwatoh keitotan kah wame neg na wadohkitcheg.
E.46.8 Egypt riseth up like a flood, and his waters are moved like the rivers; and he saith, I will go up, and will cover the earth; I will destroy the city and the inhabitants thereof.

α.46.9 Kuhkuhquegk kenaau horsesog, kah mishont8wag kenaau chariotsash, kah manuhkesitcheg sohhamwehettich, Ethiopiansog kah Lybiansog, neg nohtonukeg ogqunneg, kah Lydiansog neg nahtuhtunkig, kah p8tunkanoncheg ohtompeh.
E.46.9 Come up, ye horses; and rage, ye chariots; and let the mighty men come forth; the Ethiopians and the Libyans, that handle the shield; and the Lydians, that handle and bend the bow.

α.46.10 Newutche yeu ukkesukkodtum Lord Jehovah ayeuhteaunit, ann8tôadtue kesukod onk woh ann8tauau ayeuuhkonukqutcheh: kah togkodteg pish mahchipp8m8, kah pish wamep8h[,] kah kogkeissippam8 nag 8sqheongan8: newutche Lord JEhovah ayeuteaunit sephausuonk ohtoou ut nanum ohkeit, ut kishke Euphratise sepuut.
E.46.10 For this is the day of the Lord GOD of hosts, a day of vengeance, that he may avenge him of his adversaries: and the sword shall devour, and it shall be satiate and made drunk with their blood: for the Lord GOD of hosts hath a sacrifice in the north country by the river Euphrates.

α.46.11 Kuhkuhquegk en Gilead, kah neemunuṣh balme woi penomp Egypte wuttaunin: tahn8che piṣh kutauwóhteam iyánaskéhtuaṣh: newutche matta piṣh keneetskesu.
E.46.11 Go up into Gilead, and take balm, O virgin, the daughter of Egypt: in vain shalt thou use many medicines; for thou shalt not be cured.

α.46.12 Wutohtimóneunk n8tamwog kutakodchuonk, kah kummauonk numwohtau ohkeit: newutche menuhkesuen ayeuuhkonittue togkussittassum8óneau masugkenutcheh, kah nag neeswe moeu kepshaog.
E.46.12 The nations have heard of thy shame, and thy cry hath filled the land: for the mighty man hath stumbled against the mighty, and they are fallen both together.

α.46.13 Wuttinn8waonk ne Jehovah ánont Jeremiahoh quoshodtumwaenúh, uttoh an piṣh Nebuchadnezzar Babylone ketass8t peyont, kah togkodteg Egypte ohke.
E.46.13 The word that the LORD spake to Jeremiah the prophet, how Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon should come and smite the land of Egypt.

α.46.14 Wahteauwáhuwagk ut Egypt, kah n8tamwahuw[a]gk ut Migdol, kah n8tamwahuwag ut Noph, kah ut Taphnes, n8wagk, menehtikkompauṣh, kah nanashwiṣh, newutche tokkodteg piṣh mahchipp8 ut k8wohkôiyeumut.
E.46.14 Declare ye in Egypt, and publish in Migdol, and publish in Noph and in Tahpanhes: say ye, Stand fast, and prepare thee; for the sword shall devour round about thee.

α.46.15 Tohwaj kummenuhkesuenúmog chékuhwhut? matta neepau8og, newutche wutáma8hkauópuh Jehovah.
E.46.15 Why are thy valiant men swept away? they stood not, because the LORD did drive them.

α.46.16 Monaoh penusháheau, nux, papenush[a]ónittuog, kah n8waog, omohkek, kah wonk óntuh nehenwonche kummissinninnumunónut, kah ut keneetue ohkéunnonut wutch sunukkutchoh8wae togkodteganit.
E.46.16 He made many to fall, yea, one fell upon another: and they said, Arise, and let us go again to our own people, and to the land of our nativity, from the oppressing sword.

α.46.17 Nag na wuttit mauunáop, Pharaoh Egypte ketass8t noh webe wuttauatonkqussuonk, noh paumuhkom kuhquttum8e ahquompi.
E.46.17 They did cry there, Pharaoh king of Egypt is but a noise; he hath passed the time appointed.

α.46.18 Pomantamon, wussin ketass8t noh ás8wesit Jehovah ayeuteaunit, wunnamuhkut neane Tabor ut kenugke wadchuuhkontu, kah neane Carmel kishke ketahhannit, ne piṣh wuttinne peyon.
E.46.18 As I live, saith the King, whose name is the LORD of hosts, Surely as Tabor is among the mountains, and as Carmel by the sea, so shall he come.

α.46.19 Woi ken wuttaunin áyean Egypt, tâpauwamish en missinnainneat, newutche Noph piṣh mahchim8, kah touwushin, matta wutohkéinneat.
E.46.19 O thou daughter dwelling in Egypt, furnish thyself to go into captivity: for Noph shall be waste and desolate without an inhabitant.

α.46.20 Egypt tatuppeyeu8og wunnetue heifer$ut, qut paguanuonk peyau: 8m88 nanummiyeu.
E.46.20 Egypt is like a very fair heifer, but destruction cometh; it cometh out of the north.

α.46.21 Kah wonk ann8nutcheg ut wunnashómut, nag tatuppeyeu8og wunnogque oxenat, newutche nag wonk qushkeog, kah m[ó]eu wussem8og, nag matta neepau8og, newutche uppaguanúe kesukkodtum8 nuhkuhkongquog, kah natauwahaongane ahquompi.
E.46.21 Also her hired men are in the midst of her like fatted bullocks; for they also are turned back, and are fled away together: they did not stand, because the day of their calamity was come upon them, and the time of their visitation.

α.46.22 Ne wuttauatonkqussuonk piṣh ohque monchem8 ask8kut: newutche nag piṣh moncheog weeche kenauwameonk, kah piṣh wutayeuuhkonittue uppeyaun[ó]uh nashpe togungaṣh, kah pogkomshaenúog.
E.46.22 The voice thereof shall go like a serpent; for they shall march with an army, and come against her with axes, as hewers of wood.

α.46.23 Nag piṣh tummehtamwog wuttouohkomuk8 wussin Jehovah, tohkônogque woh mo pannuppadtinneuhkóntam8un, newutche nag ánuánwog onk neg chantsampsog, kah ahantanwog.
E.46.23 They shall cut down her forest, saith the LORD, though it cannot be searched; because they are more than the grasshoppers, and are innumerable.

α.46.24 Egypte wuttaunin piṣh chepshau, noh piṣh ponau ut wunnutchegan8out nanummiyeue missinninnuog.
E.46.24 The daughter of Egypt shall be confounded; she shall be delivered into the hand of the people of the north.

α.46.25 Jehovah ayeuteaunit um-Manitt8moh Israel, n8wau, kusseh, nussasamatoh mataánukeg No, kah Pharaoh, kah Egypt, weeche um-manitt8m8uh, kah ukketass8tam8m8uh, Pharaoh kah wame neh pabuhtanumukqutche.
E.46.25 The LORD of hosts, the God of Israel, saith; Behold, I will punish the multitude of No, and Pharaoh, and Egypt, with their gods, and their kings; even Pharaoh, and all them that trust in him:

α.46.26 Kah nag nummagunununk ut wunnutchegan8out neg kodnushoncheg, kah ut wunnutcheganit Nebuchadnezzar Babylone ketass8t, kah ut wunnutchegan8out wuttinneumoh, kah ompetak piṣh wutohkim, neane nôadt wussin Jehovah.
E.46.26 And I will deliver them into the hand of those that seek their lives, and into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, and into the hand of his servants: and afterward it shall be inhabited, as in the days of old, saith the LORD.

α.46.27 Qut wabeséhkon, ken woi nuttinneum Jakob, kah chepshuhkon woi Israel, newutche kusseh, k8wadchāsh wutche n8adtit, kah k8skannem wutch ummissinnáe ohkéyeuóut, kah Jakob piṣh qushkeu, kah piṣh anwôsin, kah mánunniyeu, kah matta piṣh howan 8wabesuwaheuh.
E.46.27 But fear not thou, O my servant Jacob, and be not dismayed, O Israel: for, behold, I will save thee from afar off, and thy seed from the land of their captivity; and Jacob shall return, and be in rest and at ease, and none shall make him afraid.

α.46.28 Wabesehkon, woi Jakob nuttinneum wussin Jehovah, newutche k8weetomsh, newutche n8wohkukquossum wame wutohtimoneash uttoh ann8hkauun, qut matta ken kuppapaquanne wohkukquossumunn8, qut quttuh[h]am8e kussasamatoush onch matta kummamusse mat sasamatahwhun8.
E.46.28 Fear thou not, O Jacob my servant, saith the LORD: for I am with thee; for I will make a full end of all the nations whither I have driven thee: but I will not make a full end of thee, but correct thee in measure; yet will I not leave thee wholly unpunished.

α.47.1 WUttinn8waonk Jehovah ne pauhonukqut Jeremiah quoshodtumwaen, ayeuuhkonittue Philistiansog, asquam Pharaoh togkomunk Gaza.
E.47.1 The word of the LORD that came to Jeremiah the prophet against the Philistines, before that Pharaoh smote Gaza.

α.47.2 Yeu wussin Lord, kusseh, nippeash waapém8aṣh wutch nanummiyeu, kah niṣh piṣh anúchuwáne tommogkon, kah piṣh anúchuan ohke, kah wame na na ohtag keitotan kah neg na wadohkitcheg: neit piṣh wosketompaog mauog, kah wadohkitcheg ohkeit pish 8n8og.
E.47.2 Thus saith the LORD; Behold, waters rise up out of the north, and shall be an overflowing flood, and shall overflow the land, and all that is therein; the city, and them that dwell therein: then the men shall cry, and all the inhabitants of the land shall howl.

α.47.3 Wadtauatongqussinit wúhkass8oh menuhke wut-horsesumoh, kah kogunkshik wut-chariotsumash, kah téqunum8m8uk 8wheelumash, wut8shimau matta piṣh ompamuhquaéhtauau wunneechanuh wutche n8chumwiyeuut wunnutchegaṣh.
E.47.3 At the noise of the stamping of the hoofs of his strong horses, at the rushing of his chariots, and at the rumbling of his wheels, the fathers shall not look back to their children for feebleness of hands;

α.47.4 Newutche kesukod peyaum8 matcheheonaoont wame Philistiansog, kah tummehtahwhonat wutch Tyrus, kah Zidon, nish$noh anninnohsuen noh sekqshont: newutche Jehovah pish matcheheau Philistiansoh, wutusk[q]shaongan8 Caphtore wutohtimoin.
E.47.4 Because of the day that cometh to spoil all the Philistines, and to cut off from Tyrus and Zidon every helper that remaineth: for the LORD will spoil the Philistines, the remnant of the country of Caphtor.

α.47.5 M8sontuppaonk nuhkuhkom Gaza: Ashkalon tummetahwhou, weeche 8nouhkoiyeue askqshonutcheh: toh utt8ch pish kuttummetah kuhhog?
E.47.5 Baldness is come upon Gaza; Ashkelon is cut off with the remnant of their valley: how long wilt thou cut thyself?

α.47.6 Woi ken wuttogkodtegoh Jehovah, toh utt8che pish kutchonchequnap? pechish pechehquogkunganit, anwôsish kah chequnapsh.
E.47.6 O thou sword of the LORD, how long will it be ere thou be quiet? put up thyself into thy scabbard, rest, and be still.

α.47.7 Uttoh woh en chequnohteau, newutche Jehovah ummechumuhkontamun ayeuuhkone Ashkelon, kah ayeuuhkone ketahhanne unnunohkomuk? na wuttit kukquttumun.
E.47.7 How can it be quiet, seeing the LORD hath given it a charge against Ashkelon, and against the sea shore? there hath he appointed it.

α.48.1 AYeuuhkone Moab yeu wussin Jehovah ayeuteaunit, um-Manitt8moh Israel missi wutonkapunaonk Nebo newutche matchehteauun: Kirjathaim chepshaum8, kah sohkomun: Misgab chepshaum8 kah quequena[u]onum8m8.
E.48.1 Against Moab thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel; Woe unto Nebo! for it is spoiled: Kiriathaim is confounded and taken: Misgab is confounded and dismayed.

α.48.2 Matta pish wonk waeenomoun Moab, ut Heshbon wutayeuuhkonittue natwontammontamunneau machuk: peyunk tummehthamuttuh, matta wutohtimoinneayeu8 ut ken wonk pish kuttummetahwhit, woi Madmen, togkoteg pish k8naumatuhkunk.
E.48.2 There shall be no more praise of Moab: in Heshbon they have devised evil against it; come, and let us cut it off from being a nation. Also thou shalt be cut down, O Madmen; the sword shall pursue thee.

α.48.3 Maue wadtauatonkqussuonk wtuch Horonaim, mukk8kinnuwaonk, kah mishe pagwanuonk.
E.48.3 A voice of crying shall be from Horonaim, spoiling and great destruction.

α.48.4 Moab pagwanau, uppeissesumoh n8tamwahuwon ummauongan8.
E.48.4 Moab is destroyed; her little ones have caused a cry to be heard.

α.48.5 Newutche ahhut kuhkuhquemuk Luhith maue mauonk kuhkuhquem8: newutche ahhut w8mussimuk Horonaim, matwaog n8tamwog pagwunue mauonk.
E.48.5 For in the going up of Luhith continual weeping shall go up; for in the going down of Horonaim the enemies have heard a cry of destruction.

α.48.6 Wusseem8k, pohquohwuttau8k kuppomantam8ongan8, ogqueneunkqussek poskissuwontugqut tou$ohkomukqut.
E.48.6 Flee, save your lives, and be like the heath in the wilderness.

α.48.7 Newutche newaj pabuhtantaman kutanakausuongash, kah kenompak8unash, ken wonk pish kuttogquinit, Chemosh pish sohham en missinnainneat weeche wussephausueneumoh, kah wussontimomoh moeu.
E.48.7 For because thou hast trusted in thy works and in thy treasures, thou shalt also be taken: and Chemosh shall go forth into captivity with his priests and his princes together.

α.48.8 Kah woskehuwaenin piṣh nuhkuhkom nishnoh keitotan, kah matta otan piṣh pohquohham8mun8; 8nóuhkôi wonk piṣh paguanum8, kah mukoshqut piṣh pagwatauun, ne an8wop Jehovah.
E.48.8 And the spoiler shall come upon every city, and no city shall escape: the valley also shall perish, and the plain shall be destroyed, as the LORD hath spoken.

α.48.9 Wunnuppawhunuhkok Moab onk woh pt8wu, kah monchasseau, newutche ukkeitotanaṣh piṣh touishinneash, matta howan wutayeineat.
E.48.9 Give wings unto Moab, that it may flee and get away: for the cities thereof shall be desolate, without any to dwell therein.

α.48.10 Matánumunach noh mehshane usseit wutanakausuonk Jehovah: kah matan[ú]munach noh kohkôunuk wuttogkodteg wutch wusqueheonganit.
E.48.10 Cursed be he that doeth the work of the LORD deceitfully, and cursed be he that keepeth back his sword from blood.

α.48.11 Moab manunaiyeup wutch wuskenúuneat, áhtoteapáshitteau wul-leesum, kah matta wuttuhhòntsu sequnnum8un en wishquadt, kah matta missinoou, newaj wuttishpukqussuonk ash pumohtunk, kah wuttussumunkqussuonk matta ôs8wemun8.
E.48.11 Moab hath been at ease from his youth, and he hath settled on his lees, and hath not been emptied from vessel to vessel, neither hath he gone into captivity: therefore his taste remained in him, and his scent is not changed.

α.48.12 Newutche kusseh, kesukodtash peyom8 wussin Lord, negonshhúam en wuhhogkat kogkeompoh, nag piṣh ukkogkéompohéouh, kah nag piṣh sequnnumwog 8wishquaṣh, kah piṣh soquttahhamwog 8wishquaṣh.
E.48.12 Therefore, behold, the days come, saith the LORD, that I will send unto him wanderers, that shall cause him to wander, and shall empty his vessels, and break their bottles.

α.48.13 Kah Moab akodchuwonau Chemoṣh, neane Israelle wek akodchuwontogkup Bethel uppabahtantamoonk.
E.48.13 And Moab shall be ashamed of Chemosh, as the house of Israel was ashamed of Bethel their confidence.

α.48.14 Tohwaj n8waog, nenawun nummissugkénimun kah nummenuhkesimun en ayeú[h]konat.
E.48.14 How say ye, We are mighty and strong men for the war?

α.48.15 Moab matcheheau, kah kuhkuhqueu wutch ukkeitotanáhtu, kah uppepénamwe wuskeneumoh womsuog en pagwanittiñeat, n8wau ketass8t, noh [á]s8wesit, Jehovah ayeuhteaunit.
E.48.15 Moab is spoiled, and gone up out of her cities, and his chosen young men are gone down to the slaughter, saith the King, whose name is the LORD of hosts.

α.48.16 Wutunkquanumoonk Moab pas8cheyeu8, kah wutonkapunaonk kenupshaum8.
E.48.16 The calamity of Moab is near to come, and his affliction hasteth fast.

α.48.17 Wame kenaau weenuhkauógiṣh mauunitteaunshúk, kah wame kenaau wahteauógiṣh 8wesuonk, n8wak, uttoh en menuhke anwohhou poksheau, kah wunnegenne pogkommunk.
E.48.17 All ye that are about him, bemoan him; and all ye that know his name, say, How is the strong staff broken, and the beautiful rod!

α.48.18 Ken wuttaunin áyean Dibon womsish wutch kussohsum8onganit, kah kunkutt8n8e appish: newutch noh matcheneheont Moaboh piṣh kenuhkuhkunk, kah noh piṣh pagwatau k8wonkon8sinaṣh.
E.48.18 Thou daughter that dost inhabit Dibon, come down from thy glory, and sit in thirst; for the spoiler of Moab shall come upon thee, and he shall destroy thy strong holds.

α.48.19 Woi ken wadohkean Aroer, neepaush kishke mayut, kah askuhwheteaṣh, nat8tomau noh waseemuk, kah noh pohquohhuk, toh mahche n$nih?
E.48.19 O inhabitant of Aroer, stand by the way, and espy; ask him that fleeth, and her that escapeth, and say, What is done?

α.48.20 Moab quequenauánum8 newutche pohquetahwhôu; 8n8k kah mau8k, unnok ut Arnon, Moab matcheheau.
E.48.20 Moab is confounded; for it is broken down: howl and cry; tell ye it in Arnon, that Moab is spoiled,

α.48.21 Kah wussittumoonk nuhkuhkom mukoshqutáe wutohtimóin, ut Holon, kah ut Jahazah, kah ut Mephaath,
E.48.21 And judgment is come upon the plain country; upon Holon, and upon Jahazah, and upon Mephaath,

α.48.22 Kah ut Dibon, kah ut Nebo, kah ut Beth$diblithaim.
E.48.22 And upon Dibon, and upon Nebo, and upon Bethdiblathaim,

α.48.23 Kah ut Kirjathaim, kah ut Beth[-]gamul, kah ut Beth-meon,
E.48.23 And upon Kiriathaim, and upon Bethgamul, and upon Bethmeon,

α.48.24 Kah ut Kirjoth, kah ut Bozrah, kah ut wame Moabe keitotanahtu, noóhkish kah pás8giṣh
E.48.24 And upon Kerioth, and upon Bozrah, and upon all the cities of the land of Moab, far or near.

α.48.25 Wutaskonoh Moab tummetahwhôu, kah 8hpit pohquetahhamun wussin Jehovah.
E.48.25 The horn of Moab is cut off, and his arm is broken, saith the LORD.

α.48.26 Kogkeissippamwéheúk, newutche mishehheau wuhhogkuh ayeuhkonónat Jehovah; Moab wonk piṣh ôômeu ummenádtam8onk, kah noh wonk piṣh ahanehtauôu.
E.48.26 Make ye him drunken: for he magnified himself against the LORD: Moab also shall wallow in his vomit, and he also shall be in derision.

α.48.27 Newutche sunnummatta Israel kutáhanehtauómus? sun noh nameheous kenugke komm8towanúut? newutche nadteuh weadtimadt, kukquequeshomp wutche wekontam8onk.
E.48.27 For was not Israel a derision unto thee? was he found among thieves?  for since thou spakest of him, thou skippedst for joy.

α.48.28 Woi kenaau wadohkéogiṣh Moab, nukkodtum8k keitotanaṣh, kah ayégk qussukquannéhtu, kah ogqueneunkqussek wuskuhwhununáut, noh ádtanadsháteadt sussippôeu wônogquehtu.
E.48.28 O ye that dwell in Moab, leave the cities, and dwell in the rock, and be like the dove that maketh her nest in the sides of the hole's mouth.

α.48.29 Nunn8tamumun[ó]nup uppehtuanum[o]onk Moab (noh mishe pittuánum8) ukqunnunkquanumoonk ummish[á]numoonk, kah uppehtuánumoonk, kah ukqunuhqutteaháonk.
E.48.29 We have heard the pride of Moab, (he is exceeding proud) his loftiness, and his arrogancy, and his pride, and the haughtiness of his heart.

α.48.30 N8wahteoh ummusquanittam8onk wussin Lord, qut ne matta piṣh nano uppann8waongaṣh matta piṣh ussémun8.
E.48.30 I know his wrath, saith the LORD; but it shall not be so; his lies shall not so effect it.

α.48.31 Newaj 8n8wanshok Moab, kah nummishont8wam wutche wame Moab, nuttah mauunnitteauwánshau Kir-hereze wosketompaog.
E.48.31 Therefore will I howl for Moab, and I will cry out for all Moab; mine heart shall mourn for the men of Kirheres.

α.48.32 Woi Sibmahhe weenomwussippog, kummauunitteauwanshish nashpe Jazere mauonk: niṣh adtannegikish kuhhogkat naish qushkodteam8aṣh kehtahhannit, nash weeksqhineash Jazere kehtahhannit, matchehuwaen penushadtam keneepunne meechummuongaṣh, kah ut k8wenominne kepenum8onganit.
E.48.32 O vine of Sibmah, I will weep for thee with the weeping of Jazer: thy plants are gone over the sea, they reach even to the sea of Jazer: the spoiler is fallen upon thy summer fruits and upon thy vintage.

α.48.33 Kah weekontam8onk kah muskouantam8onk amaunumun wutch missegunne ohteuhkonit, kah wutch Moabe ohkeit, kah wine monteagwunnuóhtauóuun wutch wine-pressut, matta howan mishont8wae wuttahtaskuhkom8un, ummishont8ongan8 matta piṣh mishont8womun8.
E.48.33 And joy and gladness is taken from the plentiful field, and from the land of Moab, and I have caused wine to fail from the winepresses: none shall tread with shouting; their shouting shall be no shouting.

α.48.34 Wutch ummauonganit Heshbon wehque Elealeh, kah wehque Jahaz, mishont8waog wutch Zoar wehque Horonaim, ogque heifer nashwe kodtumwohkog: newutche wunnippem8aṣh Nimrim piṣh touishinneash.
E.48.34 From the cry of Heshbon even unto Elealeh, and even unto Jahaz, have they uttered their voice, from Zoar even unto Horonaim, as an heifer of three years old: for the waters also of Nimrim shall be desolate.

α.48.35 Nano, n8wohkukquossum ut Moab, wussin Jehovah, noh sephausit ut qunuhqui ayeuongan[e]htu, kah noh chôgossumauont weetemungquok, ummanitt8moh.
E.48.35 Moreover I will cause to cease in Moab, saith the LORD, him that offereth in the high places, and him that burneth incense to his gods.

α.48.36 Newaj piṣh nuttah ogque mishont8wag puhpekquónit, wutche Moab: kah nuttah piṣh ogque mishont8wau puhpequonit, wutche Kir-hereze wosketompahtu: newutch 8weenauwetuongash niṣh ohtunkish mahtshaaṣh.
E.48.36 Therefore mine heart shall sound for Moab like pipes, and mine heart shall sound like pipes for the men of Kirheres: because the riches that he hath gotten are perished.

α.48.37 Newutche nishnoh muhpuhkuk piṣh mukukki, kah nishnoh weeshitt8n m8sumun; ut wame menutcheganéhtu piṣh tannogkussim8onganú8, kah ut wame musseganit man8tionakinnú8.
E.48.37 For every head shall be bald, and every beard clipped: upon all the hands shall be cuttings, and upon the loins sackcloth.

α.48.38 Pish maumuttam8onganú8 mamusseu wame woskéche kommukquehtu Moab, kah ut toumaogquehtu: newutche nutogque pohquttoh Moab wishquadt, uttoh adt matta weekontam8onganin8k, wussin Jehovah.
E.48.38 There shall be lamentation generally upon all the housetops of Moab, and in the streets thereof: for I have broken Moab like a vessel wherein is no pleasure, saith the LORD.

α.48.39 Nag piṣh 8n8wog, uttoh en pohquetahhamun? uttoh en Moab uppisk ukquinnuppinnumun en akodchuonganit: nein pish Moab ahanéhtauon kah chepshaonou wame neg quánuppuhkauoncheg
E.48.39 They shall howl, saying, How is it broken down! how hath Moab turned the back with shame! so shall Moab be a derision and a dismaying to all them about him.

α.48.40 Newutche yeu wussin Jehovah, kusseh, noh piṣh ogque pt8wu wompesikkuhquait, kah piṣh anue sephagkenau wunnuppewhunoh ut Moab.
E.48.40 For thus saith the LORD; Behold, he shall fly as an eagle, and shall spread his wings over Moab.

α.48.41 Kirjoth sohkomun, kah wonkon8sinash sohkomunaṣh: kah wuttahhou Moabe menuhkesuenuog piṣh tatuppeyeu8 mittamwussis wuttahhut, ut wutonkquommom8onganit.
E.48.41 Kerioth is taken, and the strong holds are surprised, and the mighty men's hearts in Moab at that day shall be as the heart of a woman in her pangs.

α.48.42 Kah Moab pish paguanau matta ummissinninnueneat, newutche noh ayeuuhkonittue misheheau wuhhogkuh Jehovah$ut.
E.48.42 And Moab shall be destroyed from being a people, because he hath magnified himself against the LORD.

α.48.43 Wabesuonk, kah passohtheg, kah ahpeh pish kenuhkuhkunk, woi wadohkean Moab wussin Jehovah.
E.48.43 Fear, and the pit, and the snare, shall be upon thee, O inhabitant of Moab, saith the LORD.

α.48.44 Noh wasemwut wutche wabesuonk petshau pass[o]theganit, kah noh kájeit wutch passohtheganit, pish puttahwho[u] ut appehhannit, newutche nunnuhkinnuamau, Moab natauwahae ukkodtum8m8 wussin Jehovah.
E.48.44 He that fleeth from the fear shall fall into the pit; and he that getteth up out of the pit shall be taken in the snare: for I will bring upon it, even upon Moab, the year of their visitation, saith the LORD.

α.48.45 Neg wasemwutcheg nepoog ut agwe Heshbonne onkauohtaut, newutche chekee usseonk, qut n8tau pish sohham8m8 wutch Heshbon, kah n8n8nau wutch nashaue Sihon, kah pish mahchipp8m8 wunnashinneum Moab, kah ukkodtantupp[ô]un8 wogkouitcheg.
E.48.45 They that fled stood under the shadow of Heshbon because of the force: but a fire shall come forth out of Heshbon, and a flame from the midst of Sihon, and shall devour the corner of Moab, and the crown of the head of the tumultuous ones.

α.48.46 Missi kutonkapunaonk woi Moab, ummissinninnumoh Chemosh pagwanuog: kah kenaumonuh missinohkonunk kah kuttaunog missinoowog.
E.48.46 Woe be unto thee, O Moab! the people of Chemosh perisheth: for thy sons are taken captives, and thy daughters captives.

α.48.47 Qut wonk nukquehchuwuttoh ummissinooonk Moab ut ogkomae kesuko[k]tut wussin Lord yeu sohke wussumon Moab.
E.48.47 Yet will I bring again the captivity of Moab in the latter days, saith the LORD. Thus far is the judgment of Moab.

α.49.1 PApaume Ammonitsog yeu wussin Jehovah, Israel sun mo wunnaumoniyeu? sun mo howane nompenukkou? tohwhuech neit ukketass8tamom8uh nompenumunit Gad, kah ummissinninnumoh ayeuoh wutotanahtu?
E.49.1 Concerning the Ammonites, thus saith the LORD; Hath Israel no sons?  hath he no heir? why then doth their king inherit Gad, and his people dwell in his cities?

α.49.2 Newutche kusseh, kesukodtash peyaum8 wussin Jehovah n8tamwahuwam mattompagwe wadtauatonkqussuonk ut Rahab ut Ammonitsut, kah ne pish touushinne numwunkquau, kah wuttaunoh pish chikkossuoh ut n8taut: neit pish Israel nompenau neh nompinukqutcheh wussin Jehovah.
E.49.2 Therefore, behold, the days come, saith the LORD, that I will cause an alarm of war to be heard in Rabbah of the Ammonites; and it shall be a desolate heap, and her daughters shall be burned with fire: then shall Israel be heir unto them that were his heirs, saith the LORD.

α.49.3 OOnsh woi Heshnon, newutche Ai matchitteauun, mau8k kenaau wuttaun8oh Rabbah, puttukquobpissuwontam8k man8tionak: maumuttam8k, kah ahahsukqueu ussishunk pum̃enutunkanehtu: newutche ukketass8tam8m8uh pish missino8oh, wussephausueneumoh kah wussontimomoh moeu.
E.49.3 Howl, O Heshbon, for Ai is spoiled: cry, ye daughters of Rabbah, gird you with sackcloth; lament, and run to and fro by the hedges; for their king shall go into captivity, and his priests and his princes together.

α.49.4 Tohwutch waeenowaan ut 8nouhkôiyeutu, kuttommogkonne 8nouhkoiyeum, woi as8epósue wuttaunin: noh pabahta[n]tog wunnompak8unash, n8wau, howan woh pauhausit?
E.49.4 Wherefore gloriest thou in the valleys, thy flowing valley, O backsliding daughter? that trusted in her treasures, saying, Who shall come unto me?

α.49.5 Kusseh, kenuhkenumoush wabesuonk wussin Lord Jehovah ayeuteaunit, wutch wame yeug weenuhkongqueaneg, kah pish kenaau kussohh8konteamw8, nish$noh pasuk, piuhsuke, kah matta howan pish ummuhkinuh neh naswaiyinitch[e]h.
E.49.5 Behold, I will bring a fear upon thee, saith the Lord GOD of hosts, from all those that be about thee; and ye shall be driven out every man right forth; and none shall gather up him that wandereth.

α.49.6 Kah ompetagk pish wonk nukqushkinnum ummissin8onk wunnaumonuh Ammon, wussin Jehvoah.
E.49.6 And afterward I will bring again the captivity of the children of Ammon, saith the LORD.

α.49.7 Papaume Edom, yeu wusin Jehovah ayeuteaunit sun waantamoonk matta wonk ohtano ut Teman? ukkogahqutteam8onk sun mahchem8 wutch waantamwehtu, sun mahtshaau 8waantam8ongan8?
E.49.7 Concerning Edom, thus saith the LORD of hosts; Is wisdom no more in Teman? is counsel perished from the prudent? is their wisdom vanished?

α.49.8 Wussem8k, qushken, ayek monaiyeuut wói wadohkeogish Dedan: neuwtche nunnuhkenumau wutonkquanum8onk Esau, ahquompi ne adt n8tauwaheog.
E.49.8 Flee ye, turn back, dwell deep, O inhabitants of Dedan; for I will bring the calamity of Esau upon him, the time that I will visit him.

α.49.9 Mainneacheg weenominneash peogqueog, sunnummatta sequnnum8og mukkupashquaeu weenomineash komm8towaenuog nukkonaeu, nag mukk8kinnuwaog nô pajeh wamepwunneaoont.
E.49.9 If grapegatherers come to thee, would they not leave some gleaning grapes? if thieves by night, they will destroy till they have enough.

α.49.10 Qut Esau nupp8skissuah, nupposkinum ukkôussuongash, kah noh matt apish tapenum8 upputtogquenat: 8skannem match[é]hteanun, kah weematoh, kah weetatteamungoh, kah noh matta appu.
E.49.10 But I have made Esau bare, I have uncovered his secret places, and he shall not be able to hide himself: his seed is spoiled, and his brethren, and his neighbours, and he is not.

α.49.11 Nukkodtumah kuttouiesumog, nuppomantamwahheoog: kah kussekous[q]omog pabahtanumehettich.
E.49.11 Leave thy fatherless children, I will preserve them alive; and let thy widows trust in me.

α.49.12 Newutche yeu wussin Jehovah kusseh, nag wásumitcheg matta wuttattam8unat wuttattamwaitch, wunnamuhkut wuttattamwog, kah sun ken woh matta sasamatahwhont, qut wunnamuhkut pish k8tattamun.
E.49.12 For thus saith the LORD; Behold, they whose judgment was not to drink of the cup have assuredly drunken; and art thou he that shall altogether go unpunished? thou shalt not go unpunished, but thou shalt surely drink of it.

α.49.13 Newutche nashpe nen nehenwonche nutchadchekeyeuwam wussin Jehovah, Bozra pish touwushin, kekontuonk mahchumm8onk, matanittuonk, kah wame ukkeitotaneumash, pish michemohtae touishinneash.
E.49.13 For I have sworn by myself, saith the LORD, that Bozrah shall become a desolation, a reproach, a waste, and a curse; and all the cities thereof shall be perpetual wastes.

α.49.14 Nunn8tamup wadtauatonkqussuonk wutch Lordut, kah ann8naenin ann8nau en pen8wohteaut, n8wau, miyaek, ayeuuhkon8k, kah waabpek en ayeuwuttinneat.
E.49.14 I have heard a rumour from the LORD, and an ambassador is sent unto the heathen, saying, Gather ye together, and come against her, and rise up to the battle.

α.49.15 Newutche kusseh, kuppéhesh ut kenugke penuwohteaut, kah kutjishanumukqush ut kenugke wosketompaog.
E.49.15 For, lo, I will make thee small among the heathen, and despised among men.

α.49.16 Kutunkqueneunkqussuonk kuppûhch8unuk, kuppetuánumwutteaháonk woi ken wadohkean, passipskodtut,, ken wadchanumon koduhkôag, t[ó]konogque ogque qunuhqueu wadjishóhteáan wompsikukquaut, nâ k8ch n8kinunin, wussin Lord.
E.49.16 Thy terribleness hath deceived thee, and the pride of thine heart, O thou that dwellest in the clefts of the rock, that holdest the height of the hill: though thou shouldest make thy nest as high as the eagle, I will bring thee down from thence, saith the LORD.

α.49.17 Edom wonk pish touwushin: nishnoh pasuk nâ kishke paumushadt piṣh chepshau, kah piṣh quequssumau wáme enninneaongash na$ut.
E.49.17 Also Edom shall be a desolation: every one that goeth by it shall be astonished, and shall hiss at all the plagues thereof.

α.49.18 Neane képuhteamukup Sodom kah Gomorrah, kah weene keitotanash, wussin Jehovah: matta howan na piṣh wutappein, kah matta wosketompae wunnaumonain piṣh 8tohkein.
E.49.18 As in the overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah and the neighbour cities thereof, saith the LORD, no man shall abide there, neither shall a son of man dwell in it.

α.49.19 Kusse[h], piṣh ogque kuhkuhqueu qunnónouut, wutch ummogquesuonk Jordan, ayeuuhkonittue wutáyeuongan8 manuhkesitcheg: qut nukkenuppe wussémowah wutch nahoh, kah howan pepenaue wosketomp, onk woh nah nanawunnumwahéonuh? newutche howan yâninneunkqusseh? kah howan woh kohquttumiit ahquompi? howan noh nanaushepsaen woh neepauit anaquabeh?
E.49.19 Behold, he shall come up like a lion from the swelling of Jordan against the habitation of the strong: but I will suddenly make him run away from her: and who is a chosen man, that I may appoint over her? for who is like me? and who will appoint me the time? and who is that shepherd that will stand before me?

α.49.20 Newutche n8tamok ukkogáhqutteám8onk Jehovah, ne ayeuuhkonittue nemunum Edom, kah uppogkodtantam8onk ne pagkodtantog ayeuuhkonittue wadohkinitcheh Teman: wunnamuhkut peississit ut flockut, piṣh nah ukkódtinuh: wunnamuhkut piṣh touwushitteau wutáyeuongan8 weeche nahoh.
E.49.20 Therefore hear the counsel of the LORD, that he hath taken against Edom; and his purposes, that he hath purposed against the inhabitants of Teman: Surely the least of the flock shall draw them out: surely he shall make their habitations desolate with them.

α.49.21 Ohke ontohteau panusháhettit: mauuhhettit, ne wadtauatonkqussuonk wuttussittamun mishque ketahhanit.
E.49.21 The earth is moved at the noise of their fall, at the cry the noise thereof was heard in the Red sea.

α.49.22 Kusseh, noh piṣh kuhkuhqueu, kah pt8wu onatuh wompsikukquáut, kah piṣh woskeche sepagenau umméqunuh Bozrah: kah n[è] kesukok wuttahhou Edome menuhkesuenuog, piṣh ogqutteahaog mittumwossis onkquonomit.
E.49.22 Behold, he shall come up and fly as the eagle, and spread his wings over Bozrah: and at that day shall the heart of the mighty men of Edom be as the heart of a woman in her pangs.

α.49.23 Papaume Damaskus, Hamath chepshau kah Arpad: kah newutche nag n8tamwog matchissetonkquot, nag sohqutteaháog, onkquanumoonk ohteau ketahhannit, matta woh chequnohtan8.
E.49.23 Concerning Damascus. Hamath is confounded, and Arpad: for they have heard evil tidings: they are fainthearted; there is sorrow on the sea; it cannot be quiet.

α.49.24 Damaskus nano n8chumwesu, quinnuppinnum wuhhog wussémunneat, kah wabesuonk nuhkuhkunk; onkquanum8onk kah onkquommom8ongaṣh wutogque tohqunukqun[a]ṣh mittamwossis neechadt.
E.49.24 Damascus is waxed feeble, and turneth herself to flee, and fear hath seized on her: anguish and sorrows have taken her, as a woman in travail.

α.49.25 Uttoh en waeenomae keitotan matta nukkodtum8un, n8weekontam8e keitotan?
E.49.25 How is the city of praise not left, the city of my joy!

α.49.26 Newaj piṣh 8skeneumoh penushonit ut toumaogquehtu, kah wame ayeuteaenuog piṣh tummetahwhôog ne kesukok, wussin Lord ayeuhte[a]unit.
E.49.26 Therefore her young men shall fall in her streets, and all the men of war shall be cut off in that day, saith the LORD of hosts.

α.49.27 Kah nunnashqunánum n8teau, ut Damaskusse hassunnútunkanit; kah piṣh mahchikkussum8m8 ummishe kommuk8maṣh Benhadad.
E.49.27 And I will kindle a fire in the wall of Damascus, and it shall consume the palaces of Benhadad.

α.49.28 Papaume Kedar, kah papaume Hazore ass8tam8ongaṣh, niṣh Nebuchadnezzar Babylone ketass8t piṣh tôkodtogiṣh, yeu wussin Jehovah: omohkek, kuhkuhquek en Kedar, kah mukk8kin8k wutcheksue wosketompaog.
E.49.28 Concerning Kedar, and concerning the kingdoms of Hazor, which Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon shall smite, thus saith the LORD; Arise ye, go up to Kedar, and spoil the men of the east.

α.49.29 Week8oaṣh kah uf-flocksum8oaṣ nag piṣh amaunáog, nag piṣh nemunumoog wutonkwhongan8, kah wame 8wishqua8ash, kah Camelsum8uh, kah nag ummishont8wánumauóuh, wabesuonk quinnuppeyeu8.
E.49.29 Their tents and their flocks shall they take away: they shall take to themselves their curtains, and all their vessels, and their camels; and they shall cry unto them, Fear is on every side.

α.49.30 Wusseem8k, nôadtut onkq, m8nôiyeuut ayék, woi wadohkéógiṣh Hazor wussin Jehovah: newutche Nebuchadnezzar Babylone ketass8t ayeuuhkonittue k8weadtimuk8, kah missantam pogkodtantamoonk ayeuuhkonittue kenaau.
E.49.30 Flee, get you far off, dwell deep, O ye inhabitants of Hazor, saith the LORD; for Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon hath taken counsel against you, and hath conceived a purpose against you.

α.49.31 Neepok kuhkuhquek wenauwetue wutohtimoineat[,] neg matta nan[a]uw[ó]ntamwe ayitcheg, wussin Jehovah, neg matta ohto8gig squontamash asuh barsash, neg nâsiitcheg.
E.49.31 Arise, get you up unto the wealthy nation, that dwelleth without care, saith the LORD, which have neither gates nor bars, which dwell alone.

α.49.32 Kah uk-Camelsum8uh piṣh tohqunnum8onganú8oh kah mataánukeg uppuppinashim8m8uh piṣh mukk8kinittuonganu8, kah nag nusseahwhôog ut wame wabanéhtu, neg aongkoue adt nashik, kah nuppaudto, wutonkquanum8ongan8 wutch waeenu, wussin Lord.
E.49.32 And their camels shall be a booty, and the multitude of their cattle a spoil: and I will scatter into all winds them that are in the utmost corners; and I will bring their calamity from all sides thereof, saith the LORD.

α.49.33 Kah Hazor piṣh wutáyeuongan8 dragonsog, kah micheme touwushin, matta na piṣh howan wutappein, kah matta wosketompae wunnumoniin piṣh 8tohkéin.
E.49.33 And Hazor shall be a dwelling for dragons, and a desolation for ever: there shall no man abide there, nor any son of man dwell in it.

α.49.34 Wuttinn8waonk Jehovah uppeyaonukqun Jeremiah quoshodtumwaen, ayeuuhkonittue Elam; n8che nanauwunnuadt Zedechiah Judae ketass8t, n8wau,
E.49.34 The word of the LORD that came to Jeremiah the prophet against Elam in the beginning of the reign of Zedekiah king of Judah, saying,

α.49.35 Yeu wussin Jehovah ayeuteaunit, kusseh, nuppohqun wutahtompeh Elam, kehche ummenuhkesueneúm8uh.
E.49.35 Thus saith the LORD of hosts; Behold, I will break the bow of Elam, the chief of their might.

α.49.36 Kah nunnúhkinumau Elam yauoh wuttinoh, wutch yaue kesukque chippiyeuut, kah nag nusseahwhôog nogque wame yeuh wabanehtu, kah na piṣh mat wutohtimoinneaèn8, uttoh en pogkénitcheg wutch Elam matta piṣh peyôuneau.
E.49.36 And upon Elam will I bring the four winds from the four quarters of heaven, and will scatter them toward all those winds; and there shall be no nation whither the outcasts of Elam shall not come.

α.49.37 Newutche nutchepsháheaog Elam ut anaquabenit ummatwom8oh, kah ut anaquabinit kodnushikqutcheh: kah nunnuhkinnumauóog machuk, nummishe musquantamoonk wussin Lord, kah nag n8suhqunóog togkodteg, nô pajeh nummohtupponónaóont.
E.49.37 For I will cause Elam to be dismayed before their enemies, and before them that seek their life: and I will bring evil upon them, even my fierce anger, saith the LORD; and I will send the sword after them, till I have consumed them:

α.49.38 Kah nupponam nutappuonk ut Elam, kah na n8ch paguanon ketass8t kah sontimóog, wussin Jehovah.
E.49.38 And I will set my throne in Elam, and will destroy from thence the king and the princes, saith the LORD.

α.49.39 Qut piṣh n$nih, ut majish kesukodtásh, piṣh wonk nukquehchuwutto ummissinóonk Elam, wussin Jehovah.
E.49.39 But it shall come to pass in the latter days, that I will bring again the captivity of Elam, saith the LORD.

α.50.1 KUtt8onk ne ayeuuhkonittue Babylonut unn8wadt Jehovah, kah ayeuuhkonittue wutohtuout Caldeansog, nashpe Jeremiah quoshodtumwaen.
E.50.1 The word that the LORD spake against Babylon and against the land of the Chaldeans by Jeremiah the prophet.

α.50.2 Wahteauwahu8k ut kenugke wutohtimôineat, kah n8tamwahuwagk, kah nepatto8k muttaagk, n8tamwahuwagk, kah attáhta8hkon; n8wagk, Babylon sohkomun, Bel chepshau, Merodach sokqshau, wuttinneukontunkoh chepsháoh, wuttinneukontunkanouh sokqsháoh.
E.50.2 Declare ye among the nations, and publish, and set up a standard; publish, and conceal not: say, Babylon is taken, Bel is confounded, Merodach is broken in pieces; her idols are confounded, her images are broken in pieces.

α.50.3 Newutche wutch nanummiyeu ayeuuhkonittue kuhkuhquehtunk wutohtim[ô]in, nah piṣh touishitte[a]uohteauinit wutohke, kah matta howan na piṣh wutaiin: nag piṣh ontappuog, nag piṣh amaéog naneeswe wosketomp kah puppinashim.
E.50.3 For out of the north there cometh up a nation against her, which shall make her land desolate, and none shall dwell therein: they shall remove, they shall depart, both man and beast.

α.50.4 Yeush ut kesukodtaṣh, kah na ahquompak wussin Jehovah, wunneechanoh Israel piṣh peyaoh, nag kah wunneechanoh Judah moeu, monchehettit, kah mauhettit, nag piṣh moncheog kah natinnewhaog Jehovah um-Manitt8m8uh.
E.50.4 In those days, and in that time, saith the LORD, the children of Israel shall come, they and the children of Judah together, going and weeping: they shall go, and seek the LORD their God.

α.50.5 Nag pish nat8tamuhteaog may ánshik Zion, ne nogque anaquosháhettit, n8wahettit, peyonk, weech8whuttitteuh en Jehovahut nashpe michemohtae wunn8waonk, ne matta wanhuwómun8g.
E.50.5 They shall ask the way to Zion with their faces thitherward, saying, Come, and let us join ourselves to the LORD in a perpetual covenant that shall not be forgotten.

α.50.6 Nummissinninnúmog mahche wunneheáog shepsoh, wunnanaushepsaéneum8oh nanwushahukquog, nah wuttinn8hkauóuh wadchuuhkontu nag ahóntsadchuwâusháog, nag wanantamwog wutanwôsin8e ayeuongan8.
E.50.6 My people hath been lost sheep: their shepherds have caused them to go astray, they have turned them away on the mountains: they have gone from mountain to hill, they have forgotten their restingplace.

α.50.7 Wame neh nahnamheoncheg ummahchipwunneaóuh, kah a8kqhetticheh n8waoh matta nummatcheseumun: newutche nag matcheneheaog Jehovah, wutáyeuonk sampweusseonk, Jehovah wutannoósuongan8 8sh8oh.
E.50.7 All that found them have devoured them: and their adversaries said, We offend not, because they have sinned against the LORD, the habitation of justice, even the LORD, the hope of their fathers.

α.50.8 Ontappek wutch nashauwe Babylon, kah sohham8k wutch wutohtuóut Caldeansog, kah tatuppéyeuk nomposhimwut ut anaquohtag flock.
E.50.8 Remove out of the midst of Babylon, and go forth out of the land of the Chaldeans, and be as the he goats before the flocks.

α.50.9 Newutche kusseh, n8waábeh kah nukkuhkuhqueáh ayeuuhkonittue Babylon, mishe wutohtimóinne mukkinneunk, wutch nanumohkeit, kah nag piṣh, wutayeuuhkonittue wunappehtauóuh, nâ wutch piṣh amaunou: nag ukkôuhquodt8aṣh piṣh tatuppeyeu8aṣh noh pagwohteadt, matta piṣh tahn8che qushkemu8.
E.50.9 For, lo, I will raise and cause to come up against Babylon an assembly of great nations from the north country: and they shall set themselves in array against her; from thence she shall be taken: their arrows shall be as of a mighty expert man; none shall return in vain.

α.50.10 Kah Caldea piṣh matchehteauonganu8, wame neg magk8kinoncheg piṣh wamep8og, wussin Jehovah.
E.50.10 And Chaldea shall be a spoil: all that spoil her shall be satisfied, saith the LORD.

α.50.11 Newutche k8wekontamumwop, newutch kummuskouantamumwop, woi kenaau pagwatauógish wutohtóonk, newutche nano konohkumw8, onatuh heiferut maskuhkuhkontu, kah kutogque chequttumumw8 nomposhimwut.
E.50.11 Because ye were glad, because ye rejoiced, O ye destroyers of mine heritage, because ye are grown fat as the heifer at grass, and bellow as bulls;

α.50.12 K8kás8 piṣh mishe chepshau, noh nekhikqueóg piṣh akodchu, kusseh, aongkoue wutohtimoin piṣh touohkomuk88, kunkohteâadteáe ohke, kah touishinne ohke.
E.50.12 Your mother shall be sore confounded; she that bare you shall be ashamed: behold, the hindermost of the nations shall be a wilderness, a dry land, and a desert.

α.50.13 Newutche ummusquanittam8onk Jehovah matta piṣh ayeuonganinn8, qut piṣh mamusse touwushin: nishnoh pasuk noh kezqush[a]dt Babylon piṣh chepshau, kah pish quequssumau wame wuttininneaongoh.
E.50.13 Because of the wrath of the LORD it shall not be inhabited, but it shall be wholly desolate: every one that goeth by Babylon shall be astonished, and hiss at all her plagues.

α.50.14 Ayeuuhkonittue wunappéhtók Babylon waeenu: wame kenaau wonki[n]ógish ohtomp, pumók, wohquánittadteohk kounkquodtash, newutche matcheneheau Jehovahoh.
E.50.14 Put yourselves in array against Babylon round about: all ye that bend the bow, shoot at her, spare no arrows: for she hath sinned against the LORD.

α.50.15 Mishont8wak waéenu: noh magou wunnutcheg, ukquenohtagómash penushaash, ukqussukqunneutunkaṣh penushaash: newutche ne wutann8taonk Jehovah; ann8tók, ne ásit, ne unnéheuk.
E.50.15 Shout against her round about: she hath given her hand: her foundations are fallen, her walls are thrown down: for it is the vengeance of the LORD: take vengeance upon her; as she hath done, do unto her.

α.50.16 Tummehtoh8k ohkehteaénin wutch Babylon, kah noh nohtónuk sickle, kepenumuk: newutche wabesuóntamwog sunukkutchóh8wae togkodteg, nag piṣh quinnuppeog nishnoh pasuk en ummussinninnúmut, kah nag piṣh ushpuhh8waog nishnoh pasuk en nehenwonche wutohtuóut.
E.50.16 Cut off the sower from Babylon, and him that handleth the sickle in the time of harvest: for fear of the oppressing sword they shall turn every one to his people, and they shall flee every one to his own land.

α.50.17 Israel naswáiyeue sheep, qunnon8og wutama8hkauóuh: negonne Assyriae ketass8t ummahchipwunneàpuh kah maumachish noh Nebuchadnezzar Babylone ketass8t uppohquétahhamauoh wuskonaṣh.
E.50.17 Israel is a scattered sheep; the lions have driven him away: first the king of Assyria hath devoured him; and last this Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon hath broken his bones.

α.50.18 Newajeh yeu n8wadt Jehovah ayeuteaunit um-Manitt8moh Israel, kusseh, nussasametah Babilone ketass8t & wutohke, neane sasamatahwhogkup Assyriae ketass8t.
E.50.18 Therefore thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel; Behold, I will punish the king of Babylon and his land, as I have punished the king of Assyria.

α.50.19 Kah wonk nuppas8 Israel ut wutáyeuonganit, kah noh piṣh nadtupp8wongam Carmel kah Bashan, kah ukketeahogkounoh piṣh taphéoneuh ut Ephraimme kah Gileade wadchuut.
E.50.19 And I will bring Israel again to his habitation, and he shall feed on Carmel and Bashan, and his soul shall be satisfied upon mount Ephraim and Gilead.

α.50.20 Ut yeush kesukkodtash, kah na ahquompag, wussin Jehovah, ummatcheseonk Israel piṣh natinnehamun, kah piṣh wannehenn8: kah ummatcheseongash Judah, kah matta piṣh namehteauouunash; newutche nutahquontamauoog neg wadchanogeg.
E.50.20 In those days, and in that time, saith the LORD, the iniquity of Israel shall be sought for, and there shall be none; and the sins of Judah, and they shall not be found: for I will pardon them whom I reserve.

α.50.21 Ayeuuhkonittue kuhkuhquéhtam8k wutohke Merathaim, ayeuuhkontamunat, kah ayeuuhkonittue wadohkitcheg Pekod, mahtupán8k kah papaquanne paguan8k asuhk8e nag, wussin Jehovah, kah ussish wame neanann8nun.
E.50.21 Go up against the land of Merathaim, even against it, and against the inhabitants of Pekod: waste and utterly destroy after them, saith the LORD, and do according to all that I have commanded thee.

α.50.22 Mishont8wae mattompog ut ohkeit, kah mishe pagu[a]nuonk.
E.50.22 A sound of battle is in the land, and of great destruction.

α.50.23 Uttoh en wut-hammerum mamusse ohke poskehthamun, kah pohquenumun? uttoh en Babilon tauishitteauun ut kenugke wutohtimóneat.
E.50.23 How is the hammer of the whole earth cut asunder and broken! how is Babylon become a desolation among the nations!

α.50.24 Kupponamoush ahpeh, kah kuppitham woi Babilon, kah matta k8wâun, kenamhetteap kah wonk kuppitham, newutche kutáyeuuhkon Jehovah.
E.50.24 I have laid a snare for thee, and thou art also taken, O Babylon, and thou wast not aware: thou art found, and also caught, because thou hast striven against the LORD.

α.50.25 Jehovah pohquánum ukkenauwameekommuk, kah sohh8wuttau ummusquanittam8e auwohteaongash, newutche yeu wutanakausuonk Lord Jehovah ayeuhteaunit, ut wutohtuóut Caldeansog.
E.50.25 The LORD hath opened his armoury, and hath brought forth the weapons of his indignation: for this is the work of the Lord GOD of hosts in the land of the Chaldeans.

α.50.26 Ayeuuhkon8k wutch aongkoue s[ù]ssippoiyeuut, wôshinum8k ummaumachiekommukquash; ogque unnúhteagk nomwunkquag; kah papaquanne paguanok: ahque teag sequnnum[ó]k.
E.50.26 Come against her from the utmost border, open her storehouses: cast her up as heaps, and destroy her utterly: let nothing of her be left.

α.50.27 Nehtók wame wutoxinumoh: womussehettich en ahhut nushit: missi wutonkapunnaongan8 newutche ukkesukkodtum peyom8, natauwaháe wutaquompiyeum8.
E.50.27 Slay all her bullocks; let them go down to the slaughter: woe unto them! for their day is come, the time of their visitation.

α.50.28 OOwadtauatonkqussuongan8 neg wasemwutcheg wutch Babilone ohkeit: wahteauwáhuónat ut Zion wuttann8taonk Jehovah num-Manitt8mun, wut-Templumme [á]nn8taonk.
E.50.28 The voice of them that flee and escape out of the land of Babylon, to declare in Zion the vengeance of the LORD our God, the vengeance of his temple.

α.50.29 Miyáe wehkomok pepummuwaenuog ayeuuhkonittue Babilon: wame kenaau w[o]o[n]kinogish ahtomp, weenuhkók: howán pohquohhogitch: ununkquodtok neaunak wutanakausuonk: neaunak wame wutusseonk ne unnéhúk: newutche noh pehtuanum8óneau Jehovah, ayeuuhkonittue 8neetupanatam8moh Israel.
E.50.29 Call together the archers against Babylon: all ye that bend the bow, camp against it round about; let none thereof escape: recompense her according to her work; according to all that she hath done, do unto her: for she hath been proud against the LORD, against the Holy One of Israel.

α.50.30 Newaj piṣh 8skeneumoh penushónit ut mayit, kah wame wutayeúhteaenéumoh piṣh tummehtahwhóninneuh ne kesukok, wussin Jehovah.
E.50.30 Therefore shall her young men fall in the streets, and all her men of war shall be cut off in that day, saith the LORD.

α.50.31 Kusseh, kutayeuuhkonsh woi ken mahshe pittuanumweon wussin Lord Jehovah ayeuhteaunit: newutche kukkesukodtum peyom8, ahquompi neadt nátauwáhhun.
E.50.31 Behold, I am against thee, O thou most proud, saith the Lord GOD of hosts: for thy day is come, the time that I will visit thee.

α.50.32 Kah mahshe pittuanumwit piṣh togkussittassun kah penushau, kah matta piṣh howan wutomohkinuh: kah piṣh nunnashqunnanum n8tau ut ukkeitotanahtu, kah piṣh mahchikussum8m8 wame waeenu.
E.50.32 And the most proud shall stumble and fall, and none shall raise him up: and I will kindle a fire in his cities, and it shall devour all round about him.

α.50.33 Yeu wussin Jehovah ayeuteaunit, wunnaumonuh Israel, kah wunnaumonuh Judah, moeu sunnukkutchahwhoog, kah wame neg masinóuhteacheg, ummenuhkinóuh, sekenamwog ummoncheáhónaóont.
E.50.33 Thus saith the LORD of hosts; The children of Israel and the children of Judah were oppressed together: and all that took them captives held them fast; they refused to let them go.

α.50.34 Uppohquohwussuaéneumoh menuhkesuoh, Jehovah ayeuhteaunit ussowesu, noh piṣh papannuppe ukken8tamwanshuh onk woh wutanwôhsiteauunat ohke, kah woh 8wogkouwéhheonat wadohkinitche Babilon.
E.50.34 Their Redeemer is strong; the LORD of hosts is his name: he shall throughly plead their cause, that he may give rest to the land, and disquiet the inhabitants of Babylon.

α.50.35 Togkodteg nuhkuhkongquog Caldeansog, wussin Jehôvah, kah wadohkitcheg Babilon, ut wussontimomut kah 8waantam8mut.
E.50.35 A sword is upon the Chaldeans, saith the LORD, and upon the inhabitants of Babylon, and upon her princes, and upon her wise men.

α.50.36 Togkodteg nuhkuhkongquog pann8waenuog, kah nag piṣh as8ke usseog, togkodteg nuhkuhkauau ummenuhkesueneumoh, kah nag piṣh chepshaog.
E.50.36 A sword is upon the liars; and they shall dote: a sword is upon her mighty men; and they shall be dismayed.

α.50.37 Togkodteg nuhkuhkauau wut$horsesumoh[,] kah wut[-]chariotumash, kah ut wame kenukshae missinninnùut ut wunnash[ó]mut, kah nag piṣh tatuppeyeu8og mittamwossisut: togkodteg nuhkuhkom8m8 wunnompekouunash, kah piṣh mukk8kinnuwontamunash.
E.50.37 A sword is upon their horses, and upon their chariots, and upon all the mingled people that are in the midst of her; and they shall become as women: a sword is upon her treasures; and they shall be robbed.

α.50.38 Nunohteau ut wunnippemut, kah niṣh piṣh nunnohtaash, newutche ne nunneukontunkanne ohke, kah nag kogkee ahchuánumaog wuttinneukontunkanóuh.
E.50.38 A drought is upon her waters; and they shall be dried up: for it is the land of graven images, and they are mad upon their idols.

α.50.39 Newaj piṣh touohkomukque puppinashimwog kah munnahhanne puppinashimwog na pish 8tohkinneau, kah k8k8kh[â]usog na piṣh 8tohkinneau: & matta pish wonk wutohkei[n] micheme, kah matta piṣh wutohkein wutch pometuonganit onk yaan pometuonganit.
E.50.39 Therefore the wild beasts of the desert with the wild beasts of the islands shall dwell there, and the owls shall dwell therein: and it shall be no more inhabited for ever; neither shall it be dwelt in from generation to generation.

α.50.40 Neane God kepuhteop Sodom kah Gomorrah kah weetatteamunguh, wussin Lord? ne ne matta pish howan wutappein kah matta wosketompae wunnaumoniin pish 8tohkein[.]
E.50.40 As God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah and the neighbour cities thereof, saith the LORD; so shall no man abide there, neither shall any son of man dwell therein.

α.50.41 Kusseh, missinninnuog pish 8mwog nannumiyeu, kah mishe wutohimoin, kah monaog ketass8tamwog pish tahshinon, wutch sussippoi ohkeit.
E.50.41 Behold, a people shall come from the north, and a great nation, and many kings shall be raised up from the coasts of the earth.

α.50.42 Nag pish kogkôunnaog ohtompe, kah qunuhtug, nag onkapunuhteaenu8og, kah matta monanetea8og: 8wadtauatonkqussuongan8 pish ogque mishont8wom8 keitahhannit, kah nag pish nayeumukquog horsesoh nish$noh pasuk ogquhhausu ayeuittimuk, ayeuuhkonittue ken woi Babylone wuttaunin.
E.50.42 They shall hold the bow and the lance: they are cruel, and will not shew mercy: their voice shall roar like the sea, and they shall ride upon horses, every one put in array, like a man to the battle, against thee, O daughter of Babylon.

α.50.43 Babylone ketass8t n8tam unaunchem8wonaongan8, kah wunnutchegash n8chumwiyeuash onkquommom8onk wuttohqunuh, kah ogque onkquommom8 mittamwossis neechadt.
E.50.43 The king of Babylon hath heard the report of them, and his hands waxed feeble: anguish took hold of him, and pangs as of a woman in travail.

α.50.44 Kusseh noh pish ogque kuhkuhqueu qunnon8ut wutch ummogquesuonganit Jordan, ut wut[a]yeuong[a]nit manuhkesit: qut nag teanuk n8semowaheaog: kah howan noh pepenaue wosketomp onk woh nah nanawunnumwaheonuh, newutche howan aniit, kah howan kohquttumiit ahquompi, kah howan noh nanaushipseaen noh neepauit anaquabeh?
E.50.44 Behold, he shall come up like a lion from the swelling of Jordan unto the habitation of the strong: but I will make them suddenly run away from her: and who is a chosen man, that I may appoint over her? for who is like me? and who will appoint me the time? and who is that shepherd that will stand before me?

α.50.45 Newut[c]he n8tam8k ukkogahqutteam8onk Jehovah, ne nemunuk ayeuuhkonittue Babylon, kah ukkesantam8ongash nish ayeuuhkonittue kesantogish wutohke Caldeansog: wunnamuhkut noh peississit ut flockut pish wussohwhunuh, wunnamuhkut pish touwishittea8 wutayeuonk weeche nahoh.
E.50.45 Therefore hear ye the counsel of the LORD, that he hath taken against Babylon; and his purposes, that he hath purposed against the land of the Chaldeans: Surely the least of the flock shall draw them out: surely he shall make their habitation desolate with them.

α.50.46 Ut 8wadtauatonkqussuonganit Babylone tohqunnumunat, ohke ontohteau, kah mauonk n8tunkquadt ut kenugke wutohtimoneat.
E.50.46 At the noise of the taking of Babylon the earth is moved, and the cry is heard among the nations.

α.51.1 YEu wussin Lord, kusseh nutayéuuhkonittue waabenumau Babylon, kah nag nashaue ayitcheg, neg waabehtunkqueâneg, pagwohteae waban.
E.51.1 Thus saith the LORD; Behold, I will raise up against Babylon, and against them that dwell in the midst of them that rise up against me, a destroying wind;

α.51.2 Kah nutann8n fanonuhsuenuog en Babylon nah pish fa[u]nonahetticheh, kah pish sequnnumwog wutohke: newutche wuttamehpunae kesukodtut pish waeenu wutayeuuhkonouh.
E.51.2 And will send unto Babylon fanners, that shall fan her, and shall empty her land: for in the day of trouble they shall be against her round about.

α.51.3 Ayeuuhkonittue noh wadtu[u]kinont ahtompe, pepummuwaenin wuttunkinonch wutohtompeh: kah ayeuuhkonittue noh waapinuk up-brigandineum: wohquanumuhkon 8skeneumoh, papaquane pagwohteau wame ukkenauwameumoh.
E.51.3 Against him that bendeth let the archer bend his bow, and against him that lifteth himself up in his brigandine: and spare ye not her young men; destroy ye utterly all her host.

α.51.4 Yeu pish wuttinne penushoneau nashitcheg ut wutohtuout C[a]ldeansog, kah neg pannuppetawhutcheg ut wuttaumaogk8mut.
E.51.4 Thus the slain shall fall in the land of the Chaldeans, and they that are thrust through in her streets.

α.51.5 Newutche Israel matta ohquanumau[,] kah Judah um-Manitt8moh, kah nashpe Jehovaoh ayeuteaunittoh tohkonogque wutohk8 numwohteau ummatcheketeaongan8 8neetup[a]natam8moh Israel
E.51.5 For Israel hath not been forsaken, nor Judah of his God, of the LORD of hosts; though their land was filled with sin against the Holy One of Israel.

α.51.6 Wusseemok wutch nashauwe Babylon, kah pohquohwhunonch, nishnoh pasuk ukketeahogkôunoh, tummetawhutteateok ut ummatcheseonganit: newutche yeu ahquompi wutann8táonk Jehovah; neh piṣh wutonkquatauoh.
E.51.6 Flee out of the midst of Babylon, and deliver every man his soul: be not cut off in her iniquity; for this is the time of the LORD's vengeance; he will render unto her a recompence.

α.51.7 Bablyon ne golde wuttattamwaitch ut wunnutcheganit Jehovah, ne kogkeissippamwáheont wame ohke: wutohtimoinneunk wuttattamwog 8wineum, newaj wutohtimoineash kogkey[ô]m8uk.
E.51.7 Babylon hath been a golden cup in the LORD's hand, that made all the earth drunken: the nations have drunken of her wine; therefore the nations are mad.

α.51.8 Babylon kenuppe penusheau, kah paguatauun: 8n8wansh8k, neemunum8k balme wutch wutonkquommom8onk, tohneit woh neetskéhit.
E.51.8 Babylon is suddenly fallen and destroyed: howl for her; take balm for her pain, if so be she may be healed.

α.51.9 Nukkodneetskéheómun Babylon, qut noh matta neetskeheuh: ohquanumok, kah ontuh nishnoh pasuk wutohkit: newutche wussumáonk mussishin kesukqut, kah tohshinnumun wehque pohkuhqut.
E.51.9 We would have healed Babylon, but she is not healed: forsake her, and let us go every one into his own country: for her judgment reacheth unto heaven, and is lifted up even to the skies.

α.51.10 Jehovah sohh8wuttau nussampweusseonganun: peyunk kah wahteauwáhuwadtuh ut Zion wutusseonk Jehovah um-Manitt8m.
E.51.10 The LORD hath brought forth our righteousness: come, and let us declare in Zion the work of the LORD our God.

α.51.11 Wôóhsuppánumok kôuhquodtaṣh: moenum8k ogqunnegash Jehovah tahshinau wuttahh8uh Medse ketass8tamwog: newutche ukkesantam8onk ayeuhkontam8m8 Babylon pagwatauunat, newutche ne wutann8taonk Jehovah, wut-templumme ann8taonk.
E.51.11 Make bright the arrows; gather the shields: the LORD hath raised up the spirit of the kings of the Medes: for his device is against Babylon, to destroy it; because it is the vengeance of the LORD, the vengeance of his temple.

α.51.12 Neepattau8k muttaag ut Babylone hassunneutunkanit, menehketeau8k askuhwheteaonk: wunash8k askuhwheteaénin: quagwashwehtam8k tummushkôsuongash, newutche Lord kesantam kah mahche ussen, ne ayeuhkonittue [à]nomp Babylon.
E.51.12 Set up the standard upon the walls of Babylon, make the watch strong, set up the watchmen, prepare the ambushes: for the LORD hath both devised and done that which he spake against the inhabitants of Babylon.

α.51.13 Woi ken wadohkéan eiyáne nippekontu, monatash kenompak8unash, k8wohkukquossin8onk peyom8, kah numwohtae kutaháhchuwontam8onk.
E.51.13 O thou that dwellest upon many waters, abundant in treasures, thine end is come, and the measure of thy covetousness.

α.51.14 Lord ayeuhteaunit chadchekeyeuau nashpe nehenwonche nagum, n8wau, wunnamuhkut kutogque numwohtoush wosketompaog m8paut, kah nag piṣh kussáshquónukquog.
E.51.14 The LORD of hosts hath sworn by himself, saying, Surely I will fill thee with men, as with caterpillers; and they shall lift up a shout against thee.

α.51.15 Ayimup ohke nashpe ummenuhkesuonk, menehketeauop ohke nashpe 8waantamoonk, noh sepágenumup kesukquaṣh nashpe 8wohwohtam8onk.
E.51.15 He hath made the earth by his power, he hath established the world by his wisdom, and hath stretched out the heaven by his understanding.

α.51.16 Mishant8adt, móneau nippeash ut kesukqut, waabehteau ouwan, wutch weekqshik ohke, ukkutshámunáhteau nashpe sokanon, sohh8wunau wabanoh wutch wunnompak8unéhtu.
E.51.16 When he uttereth his voice, there is a multitude of waters in the heavens; and he causeth the vapours to ascend from the ends of the earth: he maketh lightnings with rain, and bringeth forth the wind out of his treasures.

α.51.17 Nishnoh pasuk puppinashimweyeu8 ut wohwohtam8onganit: nishnoh pasuk noh sabahsausit chepshau nashpe wuttinneukontungok, newutche wussabassumwe wuttinneukontunkoh, pann8waongannù8oh, kah matta wunnashaonganéog.
E.51.17 Every man is brutish by his knowledge; every founder is confounded by the graven image: for his molten image is falsehood, and there is no breath in them.

α.51.18 Nag tahn8cheyeu8og, pann8wáe usseonk, natauwáhit piṣh pagwan[ù]og.
E.51.18 They are vanity, the work of errors: in the time of their visitation they shall perish.

α.51.19 Wuchippiyeum Jakob matta tatuppéi[n]8, newutche noh kahkénauwéhteunk wame, kah Israel uppogkomungane ohtoonk: Jehovah ayeuhteaunit ne 8wesuonk.
E.51.19 The portion of Jacob is not like them; for he is the former of all things: and Israel is the rod of his inheritance: the LORD of hosts is his name.

α.51.20 Ken nummattompágwe togkunk, kah nummattompagwe auwohteaonk, newutche nashpe ken nuppohquetahham wutohtimóneash, kah nashpe ken nuppagwadtoh ass8tam8ongash.
E.51.20 Thou art my battle axe and weapons of war: for with thee will I break in pieces the nations, and with thee will I destroy kingdoms;

α.51.21 Kah nashpe ken nussukquttoh horses kah neh na8moncheh, kah nashpe ken nuppohquttahham chariotsash, kah neh na8mukqut.
E.51.21 And with thee will I break in pieces the horse and his rider; and with thee will I break in pieces the chariot and his rider;

α.51.22 Nashpe ken wonk nussukquttoh wosketomp kah mittamwossis, kah n[a]shpe ken nussukquttoh kutchis kah wusken, kah nashpe ken nussukqutt[o]h wusken, kah|peaomp.
E.51.22 With thee also will I break in pieces man and woman; and with thee will I break in pieces old and young; and with thee will I break in pieces the young man and the maid;

α.51.23 Nashpe ken wonk nussukquttoh nanáushepsaen kah uf-flockum, kah nashpe ken nussukquttoh ohkehteaen, kah we-yoke oxinumoh, kah nashpe ken nussoquetoh mugquompaog, kah nananuwaénuoh.
E.51.23 I will also break in pieces with thee the shepherd and his flock; and with thee will I break in pieces the husbandman and his yoke of oxen; and with thee will I break in pieces captains and rulers.

α.51.24 Kah nutonkquttau Babylon, kah wadohkitcheg Caldea, wame machuk ne asehettit ut Zion, anaquabeóg wussin Jehovah.
E.51.24 And I will render unto Babylon and to all the inhabitants of Chaldea all their evil that they have done in Zion in your sight, saith the LORD.

α.51.25 Kusseh, kutayeuhkonsh woi ken pagwohteae wadchu, wussin Lord, ken pagwatauan wame ohke, kah nussumagkinum nuhpit ut kuhhogkat, kah k8w8mhenuṣh wutch qussukquanóhtu, kah kutchikohtaé wadchukonsh.
E.51.25 Behold, I am against thee, O destroying mountain, saith the LORD, which destroyest all the earth: and I will stretch out mine hand upon thee, and roll thee down from the rocks, and will make thee a burnt mountain.

α.51.26 Kah nag matta piṣh neemunumóog náshine qussuk wutch ken, asuh quenohtagane qussuk, qut piṣh kummicheme touwushin wussin Jehovah.
E.51.26 And they shall not take of thee a stone for a corner, nor a stone for foundations; but thou shalt be desolate for ever, saith the LORD.

α.51.27 Neepatto8k muttaagk ut ohkeit, p8tantam8k monopuhpegk ut kenugke wutohtimóineash: ayeuhkonittue nanashwunnumok wutohtimóneash, ayeuhkonittue moeu wehquetumok Araratte ketass8tamwog, Minni kah Ashkenaz; ayeuhkonittue kukquttumok mugquompuh: 
E.51.27 Set ye up a standard in the land, blow the trumpet among the nations, prepare the nations against her, call together against her the kingdoms of Ararat, Minni, and Ashchenaz; appoint a captain against her; cause the horses to come up as the rough caterpillers.

α.51.28 Ayeuhkonittue nanashwunnumok wutohtimóneash, weeche Medse ketass8tamwog, umummugquompomuh, kah wunnanauwunnuaéneumoh, kah wame wunnanauwunnumóe ohkeit.
E.51.28 Prepare against her the nations with the kings of the Medes, the captains thereof, and all the rulers thereof, and all the land of his dominion.

α.51.29 Kah ohke piṣh nunnuksheau, kah neuantam: newutch nishnoh ukkesantam8onk Lord piṣh wutussen ayeuhkonittue Babylon, touishitteauunat Babylone ohke, matta wutohkeéinneat.
E.51.29 And the land shall tremble and sorrow: for every purpose of the LORD shall be performed against Babylon, to make the land of Babylon a desolation without an inhabitant.

α.51.30 Babylone menuhkésuenuog ahquiyeuhteáog: nag appuog 8wonkon8sinn8óut: ummenuhkesuongan8 mahtsheau, tatuppeyeu8og mittamwussisut, nag chikossumwog wutáyeuongan8, up-barsumash pokqshaash.
E.51.30 The mighty men of Babylon have forborn to fight, they have remained in their holds: their might hath failed; they became as women: they have burned her dwellingplaces; her bars are broken.

α.51.31 Pasuk quogqueaenin pish quogqueu nogkishkauonat onkatogeh, kah pasuk ann8naen nogkushkauonat onkatuk, nahtinonat Babylone ketass8t, ukkeitotan sohkomun ut nequtchippaiyeuut.
E.51.31 One post shall run to meet another, and one messenger to meet another, to shew the king of Babylon that his city is taken at one end,

α.51.32 Kah pomushaongash kuppuhhausuash, kah weekinaskquash chikohtaash n8taut, & ayeuhteaenuog t8weshaog.
E.51.32 And that the passages are stopped, and the reeds they have burned with fire, and the men of war are affrighted.

α.51.33 Newutche yeu wussin Jehovah áyeuteaunit um-Manitt8moh Israel, wuttaunoh Babylon tatuppeyu8oh tanuppogguhham8onganit, utt8cheyeu8 ne adt woh pogguhwhut, qut pasweyeu8 kah kepenumwae ahquompi peyaum8.
E.51.33 For thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel; The daughter of Babylon is like a threshingfloor, it is time to thresh her: yet a little while, and the time of her harvest shall come.

α.51.34 Nebuchàdnezar Babylone ketass8t, nummahchipuk nussunukkuhhuk, nummachishquohkonuk: nutogque misheashquonuk dragonsut, wameechummehteau wunnogkus n8nummeechumash, nussohwhuhkonuk.
E.51.34 Nebuchadrezzar the king of Babylon hath devoured me, he hath crushed me, he hath made me an empty vessel, he hath swallowed me up like a dragon, he hath filled his belly with my delicates, he hath cast me out.

α.51.35 Chekee unnehettuonk, kah ut neyausut nuhkuhkaj Babylon, wadohkitcheg Zion ne pish n8waog; kah n8sqheonk nuhkuhkonkqhettich wadohkitcheg Caldea, ne Jerusalem n8wau.
E.51.35 The violence done to me and to my flesh be upon Babylon, shall the inhabitant of Zion say; and my blood upon the inhabitants of Chaldea, shall Jerusalem say.

α.51.36 Newutche yeu wussin Jehovah, kusseh nukken8tamwontam kuttinniyeuonk, kutann8tauwanshush, kah nunnanassum ukkethann8m, kah nunnunassum wuttuhkekomeumash.
E.51.36 Therefore thus saith the LORD; Behold, I will plead thy cause, and take vengeance for thee; and I will dry up her sea, and make her springs dry.

α.51.37 Kah Babylon pish numwonkquaenu8, wutayeuongan8 Dragonsog, chepshaonk, kah quekqs[u]ontam8onk, matta ayeinat.
E.51.37 And Babylon shall become heaps, a dwellingplace for dragons, an astonishment, and an hissing, without an inhabitant.

α.51.38 Nag pish moae ogque chequttumwog qunnon8ut, kah pish ogque 8nwog qunnonuemesit.
E.51.38 They shall roar together like lions: they shall yell as lions' whelps.

α.51.39 Kósobpishettit, nummishadtup, kah nukkogkeissippamwaheaog, onk woh weekontámwog, kah woh micheme koueog, kah matta t8hkeog, wussin Jehovah.
E.51.39 In their heat I will make their feasts, and I will make them drunken, that they may rejoice, and sleep a perpetual sleep, and not wake, saith the LORD.

α.51.40 Nag nutogque womussuunoog Lambsut nushonaout, onatuh ramsog weeche nomposhimwe goatsut.
E.51.40 I will bring them down like lambs to the slaughter, like rams with he goats.

α.51.41 Uttoh en Sheshak tohqunau? kah uttoh en mamusse ohkee waéenoaonk sohkomun? uttoh en Babylon chépshontamun ut kenugke wutohtimoineat.
E.51.41 How is Sheshach taken! and how is the praise of the whole earth surprised! how is Babylon become an astonishment among the nations!

α.51.42 Keitoh kuhkuhquemo Babylon: noh puttogguhkunk nashpe monacheg tuhk8oh.
E.51.42 The sea is come up upon Babylon: she is covered with the multitude of the waves thereof.

α.51.43 Ukkeitotan8mash touishineash, nunohtae ohke, kah touohkomuk, ohke ne matta howan ayek, kah matta wosketompae wunnaumoniin na pomushaun.
E.51.43 Her cities are a desolation, a dry land, and a wilderness, a land wherein no man dwelleth, neither doth any son of man pass thereby.

α.51.44 Kah nussasamatah Bel ut Babylon, kah nussohh8wauttau wutch wutt8nut, ne mase[a]shqut, kah wutohtimoinneash matta pish wonk moae miyaehtunk8h, nux Babylone hassunneutu[u]k pish penusheau.
E.51.44 And I will punish Bel in Babylon, and I will bring forth out of his mouth that which he hath swallowed up: and the nations shall not flow together any more unto him: yea, the wall of Babylon shall fall.

α.51.45 Nummissinninnúmog sohham8k wutch wunnashómut, kah pohquohwhunok nishnoh ukketeahogkôunoh wutch ummishe musquantam8onganit Jehovah.
E.51.45 My people, go ye out of the midst of her, and deliver ye every man his soul from the fierce anger of the LORD.

α.51.46 Kah ishkont kuttahhou nupp8m8, kah kukquehtamumw8 nashpe wadtaúatonkquodt ne piṣh n8tamuk ut ohkeit: wadtauatonkquodt piṣh peyaum8 nequt kodtumwae, kah ompetak onkatog kodtumm8 piṣh peyaum8 wadtauatonkquodt, kah chekeeusseonk ut ohkeit, nanawunnuwaén ayeuuhkóne nanawunnuaènúh.
E.51.46 And lest your heart faint, and ye fear for the rumour that shall be heard in the land; a rumour shall both come one year, and after that in another year shall come a rumour, and violence in the land, ruler against ruler.

α.51.47 Newutche kusseh, kesukodtaṣh peyaum8, n8sum kogoksumwe nunneukontunkanog ut Babylon, kah mamusse wutohke piṣh chepshaog, kah wame neh náhtaúutcheh piṣh penushauh ut wunnashómut.
E.51.47 Therefore, behold, the days come, that I will do judgment upon the graven images of Babylon: and her whole land shall be confounded, and all her slain shall fall in the midst of her.

α.51.48 Neit kesuk kah ohke, kah wame ne na ohtag piṣh ket8hamwóntamwog Babylon: newutche neg magk8kinoncheg piṣh uppeyaóunouh wutch nanummiyeu, wussin Jehovah.
E.51.48 Then the heaven and the earth, and all that is therein, shall sing for Babylon: for the spoilers shall come unto her from the north, saith the LORD.

α.51.49 Neane Babylon penusháheont adt nushitcheg Israel: ne piṣh wuttinne ut Babylon penushoneau nashitcheg ut wame ohkeit.
E.51.49 As Babylon hath caused the slain of Israel to fall, so at Babylon shall fall the slain of all the earth.

α.51.50 Kenaau pohquohhamógish togkodteg, monchegk, neepo8k, nôadtit en ne mehquánumok Lord, kah Jerusalem peyom8utch kummequontam8ongan8óut.
E.51.50 Ye that have escaped the sword, go away, stand not still: remember the LORD afar off, and let Jerusalem come into your mind.

α.51.51 Nutchepshámun newutche n8tamumun kekont8onk, akodchuonk nukkuhkom nuskesukqunónash, newutche penuwohteaog petutteaog ut wunneetupanatamwe ayeuonganéhtu Jehovah wekit.
E.51.51 We are confounded, because we have heard reproach: shame hath covered our faces: for strangers are come into the sanctuaries of the LORD's house.

α.51.52 Newutche kusseh, kesukodtaṣh peyom8, wussin Jehovah, piṣh n8sum ukkogoksumwe nunnúkontunkoh, kah pannuppe wame wutohkeit n8chumwéhtahhamauitcheh piṣh ha[u]uhhóm8oh.
E.51.52 Wherefore, behold, the days come, saith the LORD, that I will do judgment upon her graven images: and through all her land the wounded shall groan.

α.51.53 Tôkonoguqe Babylo[n] woh kuhkuhquem8ut en kesukqut, kah tôkô piṣh unogque ummenuhkehteauun ukqunuhqui menuhkesuonk, onch wutch nuhhogkat woskehuaénúh piṣh peyaónuk wussin Jehovah.
E.51.53 Though Babylon should mount up to heaven, and though she should fortify the height of her strength, yet from me shall spoilers come unto her, saith the LORD.

α.51.54 Maue wadtauatonkqussuonk 8m88 Babylon, kah mishe pagwanuonk wutch wutohtuout Caldeansog.
E.51.54 A sound of a cry cometh from Babylon, and great destruction from the land of the Chaldeans:

α.51.55 Newutche Jehovah matchehteo Babylon, kah pagwodtau mishe wadtauatonkqussuonk wutch wuhhogkat, wuttukk8moh agque mishont8ánit mishe nippéit, mishont8wae 8wadtauatonkqussuongan8 sohwhunumun.
E.51.55 Because the LORD hath spoiled Babylon, and destroyed out of her the great voice; when her waves do roar like great waters, a noise of their voice is uttered:

α.51.56 Newutche woskehuwaen wunnuhkuhkauuh, ut Bablyon, kah ummenuhkesuéneumoh tohqunóneuh, nishnoh pasuk wutohtompeh pohquésuoh, newutche Jehovah ôadtehteáe Manit, piṣh wunnamuhkut wutonkquatauoh.
E.51.56 Because the spoiler is come upon her, even upon Babylon, and her mighty men are taken, every one of their bows is broken: for the LORD God of recompences shall surely requite.

α.51.57 Kah nukkogkeissippamwáh wussontimomoh, kah 8waantam8moh, ummugquompomo[h], kah w[u]nnanawunn[u]énúh, kah ummenuhkesuénúmoh: kah nag piṣh micheme kouéog, kah matta t8hkeog, wussin ketass8t noh as8wénit Lord ut ayeuteaunit.
E.51.57 And I will make drunk her princes, and her wise men, her captains, and her rulers, and her mighty men: and they shall sleep a perpetual sleep, and not wake, saith the King, whose name is the LORD of hosts.

α.51.58 Yeu wussin Jehovah ayeuteaunit, Babylone mishe kishkinneutongash piṣh pokshaash kah ukqunuhkqui squontamash piṣh chikohtaash n8taut, kah missinninnúog piṣh tahn8tanakausuog, kah auwâog n8taut, kah piṣh sauunumwog.
E.51.58 Thus saith the LORD of hosts; The broad walls of Babylon shall be utterly broken, and her high gates shall be burned with fire; and the people shall labour in vain, and the folk in the fire, and they shall be weary.

α.51.59 Wuttinn8waonk ne Jeremiah quoshodtumwaen ann8nau Serajahoh wunnaumonuh Neriah, wunnaumonuh Maasejah, weechauont Zedechiahoh, Judae ketass8toh en Babylon, yaue kodtumwae nanauwinnuwadt, kah yeuoh Serajah manunnissue Sontimó8.
E.51.59 The word which Jeremiah the prophet commanded Seraiah the son of Neriah, the son of Maaseiah, when he went with Zedekiah the king of Judah into Babylon in the fourth year of his reign. And this Seraiah was a quiet prince.

α.51.60 Neit Jeremiah wussukhum ut b8kut wame machuk ne piṣh nohkuhkom8m8uk Babylon: wame yeush kutt8wongash nish wasukkuhwhosikish ayeuhkonittue Babylon.
E.51.60 So Jeremiah wrote in a book all the evil that should come upon Babylon, even all these words that are written against Babylon.

α.51.61 Kah Jeremiah unnau Serajahoh, pey[o]an Babylon, kah nauman, kah ogketaman wame yeush kutt8wongash.
E.51.61 And Jeremiah said to Seraiah, When thou comest to Babylon, and shalt see, and shalt read all these words;

α.51.62 Neit pish kussim, woi Jehovah, yeu kutayeuhkonittue ken8tamun ayeuonk, tummehthamunat, onk woh mo howan wutappein, wosketomp asuh puppinashim, kah ne piṣh touwushin micheme.
E.51.62 Then shalt thou say, O LORD, thou hast spoken against this place, to cut it off, that none shall remain in it, neither man nor beast, but that it shall be desolate for ever.

α.51.63 Kah piṣh nnih mahche ogketaman yeu b8k, piṣh k8wéenadtippinun qussuk, kah kuttinuhkon nashaue Euphrates.
E.51.63 And it shall be, when thou hast made an end of reading this book, that thou shalt bind a stone to it, and cast it into the midst of Euphrates:

α.51.64 Kah piṣh kussim, yeu pish wuttinne quttauwushun Babylon, kah matta piṣh omohku wutch machuk ne piṣh nohkinnumauog, kah nag pish sauunumwog, yeu wéhque ukkutt8wongaṣh Jeremiah.
E.51.64 And thou shalt say, Thus shall Babylon sink, and shall not rise from the evil that I will bring upon her: and they shall be weary. Thus far are the words of Jeremiah.

α.52.1 ZEdechiah neesneechage kah nequtta kodtumwohkomup n8che nanauwunn[u]wadt, kah nabo nequtta kodtumwaeu nanawunnuau ut Jerusalem, kah ohkasoh ussowesuoh Hamutall wuttaunoh Jeremiah wul[-]Libnah.
E.52.1 Zedekiah was one and twenty years old when he began to reign, and he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Hamutal the daughter of Jeremiah of Libnah.

α.52.2 Kah ussu ne machuk ut wuskesukqut Jehovah, neaunak wame wutusseonk Jehojakim.
E.52.2 And he did that which was evil in the eyes of the LORD, according to all that Jehoiakim had done.

α.52.3 Newutche nashpe ummusquantam8onk Jehovah n$niyeup ut Jerusalem, kah ut Judah, nô pajeh uppogkenónat wutch anaquabit, Zedechiah cheketauau Babylone ketass8toh.
E.52.3 For through the anger of the LORD it came to pass in Jerusalem and Judah, till he had cast them out from his presence, that Zedekiah rebelled against the king of Babylon.

α.52.4 Kah n$niyeup pasuk8gun adtahshe kodtumwae nanawunnuadt, piogqussit nepauz, piogquequinohhog nepauz, Nebuchadnezzar Babylone ketass8t peyau, nagum kah wame ukkenauwammúmoh, ayeuhkontamunat Jerusalem, kah ayeuuhkonittue wutappehtamun, kah 8wonkon8sinuhkontamun waéenu.
E.52.4 And it came to pass in the ninth year of his reign, in the tenth month, in the tenth day of the month, that Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon came, he and all his army, against Jerusalem, and pitched against it, and built forts against it round about.

α.52.5 Neit keitotan wéenuhkomunáh, nô pajeh nabowunnukqutte kodtum8mit Zedechiah.
E.52.5 So the city was besieged unto the eleventh year of king Zedekiah.

α.52.6 Kah ut yaue nepauzsaut, pasuk8gun adtahshikqunúhhog nepauz, mahshagquodt unkqueneunkquodt ut otanat, newaj matta petukqunneganinn8g wutche ohkee missinninnuog.
E.52.6 And in the fourth month, in the ninth day of the month, the famine was sore in the city, so that there was no bread for the people of the land.

α.52.7 Neit keitotan sohqshau, kah wame ayeuhteaenuog wussem8og, kah sohhamwog wutch otanat nuhkonaeu, squontame mayut nashaue neutunkanit, ne kishkohtag ketass8t wuttittanohketeaonganit (kah Caldeansog weenuhkomog otan) kah auog mukoshquttae mayut.
E.52.7 Then the city was broken up, and all the men of war fled, and went forth out of the city by night by the way of the gate between the two walls, which was by the king's garden; (now the Chaldeans were by the city round about:) and they went by the way of the plain.

α.52.8 Qut Caldeanse kenauwameonk n8swetahwhaog ketas8toh, kah mattanaog Zedechiahoh ut Jerichoe mukoshquttaut, kah wame ukkenauwamumoh seahsh[á]uh.
E.52.8 But the army of the Chaldeans pursued after the king, and overtook Zedekiah in the plains of Jericho; and all his army was scattered from him.

α.52.9 Neit tohqunaog ketass8t, kah wutuss8unouh en Babylone ketass8tamwut ut Riblah ut Hamathe ohkeit: uttoh ad wussumup.
E.52.9 Then they took the king, and carried him up unto the king of Babylon to Riblah in the land of Hamath; where he gave judgment upon him.

α.52.10 Kah Babylone ketass8t, nushau wunnaumonuh Zedechiah ut anaquabenit: nushau wonk wame Judae Sontimuh ut Riblah
E.52.10 And the king of Babylon slew the sons of Zedekiah before his eyes: he slew also all the princes of Judah in Riblah.

α.52.11 Neit kajkesukquanau Zedechiahoh, kah Babylone ketass8t wuttattogkuppinuh chainsash wutuss8unuh Babylon, kah ukkupshagkinuh, nó pajeh wunnupinat.
E.52.11 Then he put out the eyes of Zedekiah; and the king of Babylon bound him in chains, and carried him to Babylon, and put him in prison till the day of his death.

α.52.12 Kah napanna tahshe nepauz piogquequinohhog nepauz (ne nabo pasuk8gun tahshe ukkodtum8m Nebuchadnezzar Babylone ketass8t) Nebuzarradan askuhwheteae mugquomp, noh wadtininneumuhkauont Babylone ketass8t, petutteau Jerusalem.
E.52.12 Now in the fifth month, in the tenth day of the month, which was the nineteenth year of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, came Nebuzaradan, captain of the guard, which served the king of Babylon, into Jerusalem,

α.52.13 Kah chikkossum wek Jehovah, kah ketass8t wek, kah wame Jerusalemme wetuomash, kah wame wekuoash masugkenukeg chikossumunash ut n8taut.
E.52.13 And burned the house of the LORD, and the king's house; and all the houses of Jerusalem, and all the houses of the great men, burned he with fire:

α.52.14 Kah wame Caldeanse kenauwameog, neg weetomoncheg askuhwheteae mugquompoh nag pohqshadtauog Jerusaleme hassunneutongash waeenu.
E.52.14 And all the army of the Chaldeans, that were with the captain of the guard, brake down all the walls of Jerusalem round about.

α.52.15 Neit Nebuzarradan askuhwhetae mugquomp, missinohteau matchekuoh, kah askqshoncheg missinninnuog neg apitcheg otanat kah neg amashoncheg en Babylone ketass8tamut, kah sekqshoncheg monacheg.
E.52.15 Then Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard carried away captive certain of the poor of the people, and the residue of the people that remained in the city, and those that fell away, that fell to the king of Babylon, and the rest of the multitude.

α.52.16 Qut Nebuzarradan askuhwhetae mugquomp sequnau machekinitcheh ut ne ohkeit, wanteunkeg weenominneash kah ohkehteaenuog.
E.52.16 But Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard left certain of the poor of the land for vinedressers and for husbandmen.

α.52.17 Wonk brasse pillarsash wonk nish ohtagish wekit Jehovah, kah basesash kah brasse keitoh, nish ohtagish wekit Jehovah Caldeansog sohquttahhamunaash kah monchadtoog wame brasse en Babylon.
E.52.17 Also the pillars of brass that were in the house of the LORD, and the bases, and the brasen sea that was in the house of the LORD, the Chaldeans brake, and carried all the brass of them to Babylon.

α.52.18 Cauldronsash wonk, kah shovelsash, kah snuffersash, kah wunnonkanash, kah kenamoog, kah brasse auwohteaongash, nish nashpe wowussumahetticheh, nash wunnemunnumunaoash.
E.52.18 The caldrons also, and the shovels, and the snuffers, and the bowls, and the spoons, and all the vessels of brass wherewith they ministered, took they away.

α.52.19 Kah bas[i]nsash, kah n8taeponsash kah wu[sin]onkanash kah cauldronsash, kah wequananteganuhtugquash, kah kenamog, kah cupsash, nish goldu8hish, ut goldut, nish silvereu8gish, ut silverut, askuhwheteae mugquomp wutamaunumussash. 
E.52.19 And the basons, and the firepans, and the bowls, and the caldrons, and the candlesticks, and the spoons, and the cups; that which was of gold in gold, and that which was of silver in silver, took the captain of the guard away.

α.52.20 Neenash pillersash, pasuk keitoh, nabo nees8og brasse bulsog, neg agwapehcheg basesut, nish ketass8t Solomon ayikupash ut wekit Jehovah, ne brasse ut wame yeu auwohteaonganit, matta quttuhwhosin8.
E.52.20 The two pillars, one sea, and twelve brasen bulls that were under the bases, which king Solomon had made in the house of the LORD: the brass of all these vessels was without weight.

α.52.21 Kah papaume pillarsash ne sohkunkqussit pasuk pillar nabo swosuk tashishquanogkut, kah pemuneat nabo neesihquanogog weenompósu, ne an8ke kishkag yauunash muttinwhunutcheash: puhpuhtiyeup.
E.52.21 And concerning the pillars, the height of one pillar was eighteen cubits; and a fillet of twelve cubits did compass it; and the thickness thereof was four fingers: it was hollow.

α.52.22 Brasse muhpuhkuk quenahtop nesohkunkquok pasuk muhpuhkuk napanna tashishquanogok, hashabanakausuonk, kah pomgranatsash quenohtopash muhpuhkukqut waeenu, wame wompohshag: kah nahohtoeu wonk pillar, & pomgranatsash, neyaneyeu8.
E.52.22 And a chapiter of brass was upon it; and the height of one chapiter was five cubits, with network and pomegranates upon the chapiters round about, all of brass. The second pillar also and the pomegranates were like unto these.

α.52.23 Kah pask8gun tahshinchagkodtash kah nequtta pomgranatsash sussippoeu, kah wame Pomgranatsash ut hashabpae anakausuongánit nequt pasuk88ash quinnuppu.
E.52.23 And there were ninety and six pomegranates on a side; and all the pomegranates upon the network were an hundred round about.

α.52.24 Kah askuhwhetae Mugquomp tohqunau Serajah kehche sephausuenuh, kah Zephaniah nahohtôeu sephausuen, kah nishuog nanawehteunkig ushsquont.
E.52.24 And the captain of the guard took Seraiah the chief priest, and Zephaniah the second priest, and the three keepers of the door:

α.52.25 Amaunau wonk wutch otanat Eunuch, noh nanawunont ayeuhteaenutcheh, kah nesausuk tahsuog neg kishkappehtauoncheg ketass8toh, neg namhetcheg ut keitotanat, kah kehche kenauwamee Scribe, maiyapheont ohkee missinninnuog, kah nequtta tahshinchagkodtog ohkee missinninnuog, neg namhetcheg ut nashaue otanat.
E.52.25 He took also out of the city an eunuch, which had the charge of the men of war; and seven men of them that were near the king's person, which were found in the city; and the principal scribe of the host, who mustered the people of the land; and threescore men of the people of the land, that were found in the midst of the city.

α.52.26 Neit Nebuzaradan askuhwheteae mugquomp nah wunneemunuh, kah nah uppas8uh ut Babylone ketass8tamwut ut Riblah.
E.52.26 So Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard took them, and brought them to the king of Babylon to Riblah.

α.52.27 Kah Bablyone ketass8t nah wutt[o]gkomuh, kah wunnush[u]h ut Riblah, ut Hamathe ohkeit, yeu unne Judah missinohkonuh wutch nehenwonche wutohkeit.
E.52.27 And the king of Babylon smote them, and put them to death in Riblah in the land of Hamath. Thus Judah was carried away captive out of his own land.

α.52.28 Yeug missinninnuog Nebuchadnezzar masinóhteapah ut nesausuk tahshe kodtum8ut, nishwudt muttannonganog kussuog Jewsog, kah neesneechagkodtog kah shuog.
E.52.28 This is the people whom Nebuchadrezzar carried away captive: in the seventh year three thousand Jews and three and twenty:

α.52.29 Nabo shwosuk wutteashe kodtum8mut Nebuchadnezzar, missinóhteauup wutch Jerusalem shwosuk tahshe pasuk88oh, shwinchagkodtoh kah neesuoh.
E.52.29 In the eighteenth year of Nebuchadrezzar he carried away captive from Jerusalem eight hundred thirty and two persons:

α.52.30 Neesneechage kah nishwe kodtum8mut[,] Nebuchadnezzar, Nebuzaradan askuhwheteae mugquomp missinóhteau Jewsoh, nesausuk tahshe pasuk88oh yauunchag, kah napanna tahsuoh, wame missinninnúog yauut muttannonganog kussuog kah nequtta tahshit pasuk88og.
E.52.30 In the three and twentieth year of Nebuchadrezzar Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard carried away captive of the Jews seven hundred forty and five persons: all the persons were four thousand and six hundred.

α.52.31 Kah n$nihyeup, shwinchage kah enatuh tahshe kodtum8 ummissinnoóonk Jehojakim Judae ketass8t, ut naboneese nepauzsaut, naboneesnechage kah napanna adtahshikquinok, Evil$merodach Babylone ketass8t, negonne kodtum8e nanawunnuadt, tahshinum uppuhkuk Jehojakim Judae ketass8t, kah wussohh8wunuh wutch kuppishagkinittuonganit.
E.52.31 And it came to pass in the seven and thirtieth year of the captivity of Jehoiachin king of Judah, in the twelfth month, in the five and twentieth day of the month, that Evilmerodach king of Babylon in the first year of his reign lifted up the head of Jehoiachin king of Judah, and brought him forth out of prison.

α.52.32 Kah 8womoausuont8wanumauoh, kah wut[á]nuwonkquottauoh wutappuonk, wuttappuongan8 ketass8tamwog, neh weetomukqutcheh ut Babylon.
E.52.32 And spake kindly unto him, and set his throne above the throne of the kings that were with him in Babylon,

α.52.33 Kah ôs8wunum ukkuppishagkinae hogk8ongash: kah nagwutteae meechwoh petukqununk ut anaquabit, nisohke pomantog.
E.52.33 And changed his prison garments: and he did continually eat bread before him all the days of his life.

α.52.34 Kah wutch ummeetsuonk, nagwutteae wutchippiyeum aninnumauau nashpe Babylone ketass8t, pajeh kesukodte wunnupp8onganit, tohsohkepomantog.
E.52.34 And for his diet, there was a continual diet given him of the king of Babylon, every day a portion until the day of his death, all the days of his life.