
α.Jdg.1.1 ONK mahche nuppuk Joshua, n$nih, wunnaumonuh Israel nanumpassumaog Lord, n8waog, howan woh kuhkuhk8a[n]shhikqueog ayeuuhkonittue Cananitsog, negonnu nag ayeuuhkononat.
E.Jdg.1.1: Now after the death of Joshua it came to pass, that the children of Israel asked the LORD, saying, Who shall go up for us against the Canaanites first, to fight against them?

α.Jdg.1.2 Kah Jehovah n8wau: Judah pish kuhkuhqueu, kusseh, nuppondam ut wunnutcheganit ohke.
E.Jdg.1.2: And the LORD said, Judah shall go up: behold, I have delivered the land into his hand.

α.Jdg.1.3 Kah Judah unnau Simeonoh wematoh, weech kuhkuhk8meh, ut nutanohtôadtuonganit, onk woh kutayeuuhkonomun Cananitsog, kah nen wonk k8weechaush en kuttittanohtoadtuonganit, neit Simeon 8weechauuh.
E.Jdg.1.3: And Judah said unto Simeon his brother, Come up with me into my lot, that we may fight against the Canaanites; and I likewise will go with thee into thy lot. So Simeon went with him.

α.Jdg.1.4 Kah Judah kuhkuhqueu, kah Jehovah mag8 Cananitsoh, kah Perisitsoh ut wunnutcheganit, kah uppaguanouh ut Bezek piogqut muttannonganog kussuoh wosketompuh.
E.Jdg.1.4: And Judah went up; and the LORD delivered the Canaanites and the Perizzites into their hand: and they slew of them in Bezek ten thousand men.

α.Jdg.1.5 Kah nameheaog Adoni-Bezek, ut Bezek: kah wutayeuuhkonouh, kah pagua[na]og Cananitsoh kah Perizitsoh.
E.Jdg.1.5: And they found Adonibezek in Bezek: and they fought against him, and they slew the Canaanites and the Perizzites.

α.Jdg.1.6 Kah Adonibezek wussem8, kah wunn8suttahwhouh, kah wuttohqunouh, kah tattamussumwog ukkehtequánutcheash, kah ukkehtequaseetash.
E.Jdg.1.6: But Adonibezek fled; and they pursued after him, and caught him, and cut off his thumbs and his great toes.

α.Jdg.1.7 Kah Adoni-Bezek n8wau, nesausuk tahshincagkodtog ketass8tamwog, tamussumauwahetticheh ukkehtequanutcheoash, kah ukkehtequaseetoash, nag moenumwog meechum ut agwe ne ahhut meetseh, ne mahche ussee, ne God nuttinhukqun: kah nag uppas8ouh Jerusalem, kah na wuttit nuppun.
E.Jdg.1.7: And Adonibezek said, Threescore and ten kings, having their thumbs and their great toes cut off, gathered their meat under my table: as I have done, so God hath requited me. And they brought him to Jerusalem, and there he died.

α.Jdg.1.8 (Kah wunnaumonuh Judah ayeuhkontamwog Jeruselem, kah wussohkomuneau, kah wuttogkodtamuneau en kenag togkoteg, kah chikóhsumwag otan.)
E.Jdg.1.8: Now the children of Judah had fought against Jerusalem, and had taken it, and smitten it with the edge of the sword, and set the city on fire.

α.Jdg.1.9 Kah ompetak wunnaumonuh Judah w8msuog wutayeuuhkononanoont Cananitsoh, neg wadohkitcheg wadchuut, kah Sowaniyeu, kah 8nouhkoiyeuut.
E.Jdg.1.9: And afterward the children of Judah went down to fight against the Canaanites, that dwelt in the mountain, and in the south, and in the valley.

α.Jdg.1.10 Kah Judah ayeuuhkonau Cananitsoh, neh wadohkitnitcheh Hebron, (ussowetamunah Hebron negonne Kirjath$Arba) kah nag nushaog Sheshai, kah Ahiman & Talmai.
E.Jdg.1.10: And Judah went against the Canaanites that dwelt in Hebron: (now the name of Hebron before was Kirjatharba:) and they slew Sheshai, and Ahiman, and Talmai.

α.Jdg.1.11 Kah na$wutch ayeuuhkonittue sohwehtauau wadóhkinitche Debir (kah ussowetamunah Debir, negonae Kirjath-Sepher.
E.Jdg.1.11: And from thence he went against the inhabitants of Debir: and the name of Debir before was Kirjathsepher:

α.Jdg.1.12 Kah Caleb n8wau, noh togkodtog Kirjath$Sepher, kah sohkog, nuttinnumau Achsah nuttaunoh 8mittamwussissinneat.
E.Jdg.1.12: And Caleb said, He that smiteth Kirjathsepher, and taketh it, to him will I give Achsah my daughter to wife.

α.Jdg.1.13 Káh Othniel wunnaumonuh Kenaz, Caleb peississinitcheh weematoh, wussohkomun: kah wuttinnumau Achsah wuttaunoh 8mittamwussissinneat.
E.Jdg.1.13: And Othniel the son of Kenaz, Caleb's younger brother, took it: and he gave him Achsah his daughter to wife.

α.Jdg.1.14 Kah n$nih, paont, nanompassumuh 8wehquetumauonat 8shoh ohteuk, kah noh n8keu wutch wutassum, kah Caleb wuttinuh, teag kukkodtantam.
E.Jdg.1.14: And it came to pass, when she came to him, that she moved him to ask of her father a field: and she lighted from off her ass; and Caleb said unto her, What wilt thou?

α.Jdg.1.15 Kah noh wuttinuh aninnumah wunánittuonk: newutche kum̃achche aniñumah sowanohkomuk, aninnumah wonk tohkekomupogwosh, kah Caleb wuttinnumau kuhkuhqueeu tohkekommuash, kah agwee tohkekómuash.
E.Jdg.1.15: And she said unto him, Give me a blessing: for thou hast given me a south land; give me also springs of water. And Caleb gave her the upper springs and the nether springs.

α.Jdg.1.16 Kah wunnaumonuh Kenite Moses wasenumoncheh, kuhkuhqueog, palmuhtugque otanat, weeche wunnaumonuh Judah, en Judae touohkomukqut, ne sowaniyeu Arad kah moncheóg, kah kenugke ayeuog missinninnutu.
E.Jdg.1.16: And the children of the Kenite, Moses' father in law, went up out of the city of palm trees with the children of Judah into the wilderness of Judah, which lieth in the south of Arad; and they went and dwelt among the people.

α.Jdg.1.17 Kah Judah weechau Simeonoh wematoh kah paguanaog Cananitsoh, neg wadohkitcheg Z[e]phhath, kah papaquanne paguatauunneau, (kah ne keitotan hettamunah Hormah.)
E.Jdg.1.17: And Judah went with Simeon his brother, and they slew the Canaanites that inhabited Zephath, and utterly destroyed it. And the name of the city was called Hormah.

α.Jdg.1.18 Kah Judah sohkom Gaza, káh wussissepoiyeumash, kah Ashkelon k[a]h wussissepoiyeumash, kah Ekron, kah wussissepoiyeumásh.
E.Jdg.1.18: Also Judah took Gaza with the coast thereof, and Askelon with the coast thereof, and Ekron with the coast thereof.

α.Jdg.1.19 Kah Jehovah wetomáu Judah, kah ama8hkauau wadohkinitche wadchuekontu qut ônheau áma8hkauonat wadohkinitche 8nouhkoiyeuut, newutche ohtóog moôshogque cháriotsash.
E.Jdg.1.19: And the LORD was with Judah; and he drave out the inhabitants of the mountain; but could not drive out the inhabitants of the valley, because they had chariots of iron.

α.Jdg.1.20 Kah aninnumauog Hebron Caleboh, Moses ne an8wop, kah noh 8ch soh8hkauon nishnoh wunnaumonuh Anak.
E.Jdg.1.20: And they gave Hebron unto Caleb, as Moses said: and he expelled thence the three sons of Anak.

α.Jdg.1.21 Kah wunnaumonuh Benjamin matta ama8hkauwo8og Jebusitsoh, neg wadohkinitcheh Jerusalem, qut Jebusitsog chekeeu weetomaog wunnaumonuh Benjamin ut Jerusalem$ut, pajeh yeu kesukok.
E.Jdg.1.21: And the children of Benjamin did not drive out the Jebusites that inhabited Jerusalem; but the Jebusites dwell with the children of Benjamin in Jerusalem unto this day.

α.Jdg.1.22 Kah wek Joseph, nag wonk kuhkuhqehtamwog Bethel, kah Jehovah nah 8wetomuh.
E.Jdg.1.22: And the house of Joseph, they also went up against Bethel: and the LORD was with them.

α.Jdg.1.23 Kah wek Joseph ann8team8oh natinneakontamunat Bethel (kah ne otan negonne hettamunah Luz)
E.Jdg.1.23: And the house of Joseph sent to descry Bethel. (Now the name of the city before was Luz.)

α.Jdg.1.24 Kah natauwahoncheg nauwaog wosketompuh sohhamwoh wutch otanat, kah na wuttinouh nahtussinan k8wehquetumauunumun ut$toh adt petutteomuk otan kah kummonanumunumun.
E.Jdg.1.24: And the spies saw a man come forth out of the city, and they said unto him, Shew us, we pray thee, the entrance into the city, and we will shew thee mercy.

α.Jdg.1.25 Kah noh nohtinont ahhut petutteamuk otanat, togkodtamwog keitotan en kenag togkodteg, qut nah wuttenanumóuh wosketompuh, kah wame neh wekit, monchek.
E.Jdg.1.25: And when he shewed them the entrance into the city, they smote the city with the edge of the sword; but they let go the man and all his family.

α.Jdg.1.26 Kah wosketomp au wutohtuout Hittitsog, kah ayim keitotan, kah wuttissowetamun Luz ne as8wetamuk pajéh yeu kesukok.
E.Jdg.1.26: And the man went into the land of the Hittites, and built a city, and called the name thereof Luz: which is the name thereof unto this day.

α.Jdg.1.27 Kah Manasseh matta sohh8kauau wadohkinitcheh Bethshean, kah wutotanash, kah Taan[h]ch, wutotanash, asuh wadohkitcheg Dor, kah wutotanash, asuh wadohkitcheg Ibleam, kah wutótanash asuh wadohkitcheg Megiddo, káh wutótanash: qut Cananitsog chekéeu wutohtuog ohkeit.
E.Jdg.1.27: Neither did Manasseh drive out the inhabitants of Bethshean and her towns, nor Taanach and her towns, nor the inhabitants of Dor and her towns, nor the inhabitants of Ibleam and her towns, nor the inhabitants of Megiddo and her towns: but the Canaanites would dwell in that land.

α.Jdg.1.28 Kah n$nih, Israel manuhkesit, Cananitsoh ompwetéaheaog, kah matta uppapaquanne amá8hkauouh.
E.Jdg.1.28: And it came to pass, when Israel was strong, that they put the Canaanites to tribute, and did not utterly drive them out.

α.Jdg.1.29 Kah Ephraim matta ama8hkauòou Cananitsoh wadohkinitcheh Gezer, qut Cananitsog wutohtuog Gezer ut kenugke nahoh.
E.Jdg.1.29: Neither did Ephraim drive out the Canaanites that dwelt in Gezer; but the Canaanites dwelt in Gezer among them.

α.Jdg.1.30 Kah Zebulon matta ama8hkáuoou wadohkinitcheh Kitron, asuh wadohkinitcheh Nahalol: qut Cananitsog ukkinnukkiinneaúh, kah ompeteaenu8og.
E.Jdg.1.30: Neither did Zebulun drive out the inhabitants of Kitron, nor the inhabitants of Nahalol; but the Canaanites dwelt among them, and became tributaries.

α.Jdg.1.31 Kah Asher matta ama8hkauoou wadohkinitcheh Accho, asuh wadohkinitche Zidon, asuh Ahlab, asuh Achzib, asuh Helbath, asuh Aphik, asuh Rehob.
E.Jdg.1.31: Neither did Asher drive out the inhabitants of Accho, nor the inhabitants of Zidon, nor of Ahlab, nor of Achzib, nor of Helbah, nor of Aphik, nor of Rehob:

α.Jdg.1.32 Qut Asheritsog kenukayeuog Cananitsoh, wadohkinitche ohke: newutche matta wutama8hkauóuh.
E.Jdg.1.32: But the Asherites dwelt among the Canaanites, the inhabitants of the land: for they did not drive them out.

α.Jdg.1.33 Kah Naphthali matta ama8hkauouh neh wadohkinitcheh Bethshemesh, asuh wadohkinitcheh Bethanath, qut wutohtu kenugke Cananitsoh, wadohkinitcheh ne ohkeit qut wádohkitcheg Bethshemesh kah Bethanath wutompunuk8uh.
E.Jdg.1.33: Neither did Naphtali drive out the inhabitants of Bethshemesh, nor the inhabitants of Bethanath; but he dwelt among the Canaanites, the inhabitants of the land: nevertheless the inhabitants of Bethshemesh and of Bethanath became tributaries unto them.

α.Jdg.1.34 Kah Amoritsog wutcheksha[n]ouh wunnaumonuh Dan en wádchuuhkontu: newutche matta wuttinanumouh womussinneat en 8nouhkoiyeuut.
E.Jdg.1.34: And the Amorites forced the children of Dan into the mountain: for they would not suffer them to come down to the valley:

α.Jdg.1.35 Qut Amaritsog chekee wutohtuog wadchuut Heres ut Ajjalon, kah ut Shaalbim: qut wunnutcheg wek Joseph sohkossum8, newajeh ompet[é]aenuhettit.
E.Jdg.1.35: But the Amorites would dwell in mount Heres in Aijalon, and in Shaalbim: yet the hand of the house of Joseph prevailed, so that they became tributaries.

α.Jdg.1.36 Kah wussissepoiyeum8 Amoritsog, wutch kuhkuhquenát Akrabbem, wutch qussukquanit kah koduhkoag.
E.Jdg.1.36: And the coast of the Amorites was from the going up to Akrabbim, from the rock, and upward.

α.Jdg.2.1 KAh wutAngelumoh Jehovah kuhkuhqueu wutch Gilgal, en Bochim, kah n8wau, kukkuhkuhquehennumw8, wutch Egypt, kah kuppas8unnumw8 ohkeit né chahchekeimogkup k8sh8wóog, kah nussip, kuppohquenumauunomw8 n8n8waonk.
E.Jdg.2.1: And an angel of the LORD came up from Gilgal to Bochim, and said, I made you to go up out of Egypt, and have brought you unto the land which I sware unto your fathers; and I said, I will never break my covenant with you.

α.Jdg.2.2 Kah matta pish k8n8wom8 neg wadohkitcheg yeu ohkeit pish ken8konteamw8 wut-altarum8uh, qut matta ken8swehtam8mw8 n8wadtauatonkqussuonk? tohwutch yeu usseóg?
E.Jdg.2.2: And ye shall make no league with the inhabitants of this land; ye shall throw down their altars: but ye have not obeyed my voice: why have ye done this?

α.Jdg.2.3 Newajeh wonk n8wai, matta pish kussohh8kauóog wutch anaquabeog, qut nag pish onatuh assinnekôussog ut kuppohquatuhk8óut, kah ummanitt8m8uh, pish kuppithukk8óog.
E.Jdg.2.3: Wherefore I also said, I will not drive them out from before you; but they shall be as thorns in your sides, and their gods shall be a snare unto you.

α.Jdg.2.4 Kah nnih, wut-angelsumoh Jehvoah án8wadt yeush kutt8ongash, en wunnaumonat Isrel, missinninnuog mishont8waog kah mauog.
E.Jdg.2.4: And it came to pass, when the angel of the LORD spake these words unto all the children of Israel, that the people lifted up their voice, and wept.

α.Jdg.2.5 Kah wuttissowetamuneau ne ayeuonk Bochim: kah na$ut sephamauáog Jehov[a]h.
E.Jdg.2.5: And they called the name of that place Bochim: and they sacrificed there unto the LORD.

α.Jdg.2.6 Kah Joshua moncheaheont missinninnuh, wunnaumonuh Israel auoh nish$noh wosketomp ut wutohtoonganit wutohtauunáoont ohke.
E.Jdg.2.6: And when Joshua had let the people go, the children of Israel went every man unto his inheritance to possess the land.

α.Jdg.2.7 Kah missinninnuog waussumáog Jehovah wame ukkesukodtumash Joshua, kah wame ukkesukodtum8oash Eldersog neg [á]nue pomantam8moncheg Joshuáhoh, neg nagkuppanneg wame ummishanakausuongash Lord, ne anheomp Israeloh.
E.Jdg.2.7: And the people served the LORD all the days of Joshua, and all the days of the elders that outlived Joshua, who had seen all the great works of the LORD, that he did for Israel.

α.Jdg.2.8 Kah Joshua wunnaumonuh Nun, wuttinneumoh Jehovah nupp8, nogqut pasuk8e kodtumwohkog kah piuk.
E.Jdg.2.8: And Joshua the son of Nun, the servant of the LORD, died, being an hundred and ten years old.

α.Jdg.2.9 Kah upposekinóuh ut sussippoiyeu wutohtoonganit ut Timath-heres ut Ephraime wadchuut, nanumiyeu Gaashe wadchuut.
E.Jdg.2.9: And they buried him in the border of his inheritance in Timnathheres, in the mount of Ephraim, on the north side of the hill Gaash.

α.Jdg.2.10 Kah wonk wame ne pometuonk mukkineog en 8sh8óut: kah na onkatuk pometuonk ut waapem8 nahohtôeu nagok, neg matta waheunkig Jehovah, asuh wutanakausuongash nish anheoncheh Israeloh.
E.Jdg.2.10: And also all that generation were gathered unto their fathers: and there arose another generation after them, which knew not the LORD, nor yet the works which he had done for Israel.

α.Jdg.2.11 Kah wunnaumonuh Israel matcheseog ut anaquabit Jehovah, kah waussumaog Baalimoh.
E.Jdg.2.11: And the children of Israel did evil in the sight of the LORD, and served Baalim:

α.Jdg.2.12 Kah âhquânumáog Jehovah um-Manitt8m8uh 8sh8uh, noh sohh8wunomp wutch ohkit Egypt, kah nag asuhkauaog onkatogeh manitt8h, um-Manitt8m8oh missinninnuog neg wèenuhkauahetticheh, kah nah wuñauwaehtauouh, kah nag m8hm8sqheoog Jehovah musquantamunat.
E.Jdg.2.12: And they forsook the LORD God of their fathers, which brought them out of the land of Egypt, and followed other gods, of the gods of the people that were round about them, and bowed themselves unto them, and provoked the LORD to anger.

α.Jdg.2.13 Kah ohquanumaog Jeho[u]ah, kah [w]o wussumaog Baal kah Ashteroth.
E.Jdg.2.13: And they forsook the LORD, and served Baal and Ashtaroth.

α.Jdg.2.14 Kah ummusquanitteaonk Jehovah ayeuuhkonittue kussoppitteau wutch Israel kah nah upponuh ut wunnutchegan8out match[e]neheaenuog, neh nah machheahetticheh, kah ukkodtauwomp[i]sinneuh en wunnutchegán8out ummatwom8oh waéenu, nemehkuh matta sepekompauoog anaquabenit ummatwom8uh.
E.Jdg.2.14: And the anger of the LORD was hot against Israel, and he delivered them into the hands of spoilers that spoiled them, and he sold them into the hands of their enemies round about, so that they could not any longer stand before their enemies.

α.Jdg.2.15 Uttoh ane sohhamohettit, wunnutcheg Jehovah ayeuuhkonukquog wutche machuk Jehovah ne an8wop, káh neane Lord chadchekeimomp, & m8cheke quehquenauánum[ó]og.
E.Jdg.2.15: Whithersoever they went out, the hand of the LORD was against them for evil, as the LORD had said, and as the LORD had sworn unto them: and they were greatly distressed.

α.Jdg.2.16 Qut Jehóvah waápenau wussittamwaenuh, neg pohquohwhunoncheg wutch wunnutchegan8óut, yeug machheoncheg.
E.Jdg.2.16: Nevertheless the LORD raised up judges, which delivered them out of the hand of those that spoiled them.

α.Jdg.2.17 Qut onch matta kuhkehtauauoop 8sittumwaeneum8uh, qut n[a]g na[n]wun8dsquaausuog onkatogeh manitt8h, kah nah wunnauaehtauouh teanuk panneauog wutch mayut ne 8sh8oh paumushaneup n8sweehtaminit wuttinnaumatuongash Jehovah, qut nag matta wutusseineau.
E.Jdg.2.17: And yet they would not hearken unto their judges, but they went a whoring after other gods, and bowed themselves unto them: they turned quickly out of the way which their fathers walked in, obeying the commandments of the LORD; but they did not so.

α.Jdg.2.18 Kah Jehovah waápenumauont wussittumwaenúh, neit Jehovah weetomau wussittumwaenúh, kah uppohquohwhunnoh wutch wunnutchegan8óut ummatwom8uh nisáhkepomantog wussittumwaen (newutche aiuskóiantam Jehovah wutche wuttiohkont8ongan8oash, wutche neg ûhquánumheuncheg, kah m8m8sqheoncheg.)
E.Jdg.2.18: And when the LORD raised them up judges, then the LORD was with the judge, and delivered them out of the hand of their enemies all the days of the judge: for it repented the LORD because of their groanings by reason of them that oppressed them and vexed them.

α.Jdg.2.19 Kah n$nih, napuk wussittumwaen, nag quinnuppeog, kah annushéaog wuhhogkaôuh anue onk ne 8sh8oh, asuhkauónat onkatogeg Manitt8og, waussumónat, kah nag nauwaehtauónaóont, matta ahqueteau8og nehenwonche wutusseongan8ash, asuh wutchekehtamwe may8óash.
E.Jdg.2.19: And it came to pass, when the judge was dead, that they returned, and corrupted themselves more than their fathers, in following other gods to serve them, and to bow down unto them; they ceased not from their own doings, nor from their stubborn way.

α.Jdg.2.20 Kah ummusquantam8onk Jehovah ayeuuhkonittue kussopitteau wutch Israel, kah n8wau, newutche yeug missinninnúog pannesehtamwog n8n8waonk, ne ann8nogkup 8sh8oh, kah matta kuhkehtamóog n8wadtauatonkqussuonk.
E.Jdg.2.20: And the anger of the LORD was hot against Israel; and he said, Because that this people hath transgressed my covenant which I commanded their fathers, and have not hearkened unto my voice;

α.Jdg.2.21 Nen wonk yeu$wutch onk yaen, matta nutáma8hkom8h wutch anaquabhettit, howae wutohtimóneash nish Joshua asquehtahhogkupash, ne napuk.
E.Jdg.2.21: I also will not henceforth drive out any from before them of the nations which Joshua left when he died:

α.Jdg.2.22 Onk woh nish nashpe nukqutcheh Israel, uttoh wuttin nanawehteauunneau ummay Jehovah, ne pomushonat, neane 8sh8oh nanawehteauineup, asuh matta.
E.Jdg.2.22: That through them I may prove Israel, whether they will keep the way of the LORD to walk therein, as their fathers did keep it, or not.

α.Jdg.2.23 Newajeh Jehovah yeush nukkodtuk wutohtimóneash, matta kenuppe áma8hkauónaóont, asuh ponónat ut wunnutcheganit Joshuah.
E.Jdg.2.23: Therefore the LORD left those nations, without driving them out hastily; neither delivered he them into the hand of Joshua.

α.Jdg.3.1 ONK yeush wutohtimóneash nish JEhovah sequnukish nish nashpequtcheheont Israel (neadtahsehettit Israel, matta wahteauógig Cananne ayeuwuttuongash.
E.Jdg.3.1: Now these are the nations which the LORD left, to prove Israel by them, even as many of Israel as had not known all the wars of Canaan;

α.Jdg.3.2 Webe uppometuongan8oash wunnaumonuh Isr[â]el woh wahteauog, kuhk8tomauónat ayeuwuttuonk, nahnaunne, neg negonne mat teag wahteau8kuppanneg.)
E.Jdg.3.2: Only that the generations of the children of Israel might know, to teach them war, at the least such as before knew nothing thereof;

α.Jdg.3.3 Yeug masawhutcheg, napanna tahsuog Philistianse sontimóog, kah wame Cananitsog, kah Zidoniansog, kah Hivitsog, neg wodohkitcheg wadchuut Lebanon, wutch Baalle$Hermone wadchuut, ahhut petutteamuk Hamath,
E.Jdg.3.3: Namely, five lords of the Philistines, and all the Canaanites, and the Sidonians, and the Hivites that dwelt in mount Lebanon, from mount Baalhermon unto the entering in of Hamath.

α.Jdg.3.4 Kah nag appuog qutcheheonat Israel nag nashpe, wahteauunat, uttoh wuttinne kukkeihtamuneau wutan8teamowongash Jehovah, nish ann8nompash 8sh8oh nashpe wunnutcheganit Moses.
E.Jdg.3.4: And they were to prove Israel by them, to know whether they would hearken unto the commandments of the LORD, which he commanded their fathers by the hand of Moses.

α.Jdg.3.5 Kah wunnaumonuh Israel kenukkiyeuog Cananitsoh, Hittitsoh, kah Amoritsoh, kah Peri[s]itsoh kah Hivitsoh, kah Jebusitsoh.
E.Jdg.3.5: And the children of Israel dwelt among the Canaanites, Hittites, and Amorites, and Perizzites, and Hivites, and Jebusites:

α.Jdg.3.6 Kah nemunáog nag wutton8oh 8mittumwussissinneaóont, kah aninnumauáog wuttaun8oh wunnaumonâuh, kah wowussumáog um-Manitt8m8h.
E.Jdg.3.6: And they took their daughters to be their wives, and gave their daughters to their sons, and served their gods.

α.Jdg.3.7 Kah wunnaumonuh Israel matcheseog ut anaquabit Jehovah, kah wanánumáog Jehovah um-Manitt8muh, kah wowussumaog Baalim, kah kuppáhtu.
E.Jdg.3.7: And the children of Israel did evil in the sight of the LORD, and forgat the LORD their God, and served Baalim and the groves.

α.Jdg.3.8 Ne wajeh ummusquanitteáonk Jehovah ayeuuhkone kussopitteau wutch Israel, kah na ummagunuh ut wunnutcheganit Chusha Rishatháim Mesopotamie ketass8t, kah wunnaumonuh Israel wuttinneumohkauáog Chushan$Rishathaim shwosuk tahshe kodtumwae.
E.Jdg.3.8: Therefore the anger of the LORD was hot against Israel, and he sold them into the hand of Chushanrishathaim king of Mesopotamia: and the children of Israel served Chushanrishathaim eight years.

α.Jdg.3.9 Kah wunnaumonuh Israel mauunnitteahettit Jehoah, Jehovah waabéneau pohquohwuss[u]aenúh wutch Israel, noh nah pohquohwhunont, Othniel wunnaumonuh Kenez, Caleb peississinitche weematoh.
E.Jdg.3.9: And when the children of Israel cried unto the LORD, the LORD raised up a deliverer to the children of Israel, who delivered them, even Othniel the son of Kenaz, Caleb's younger brother.

α.Jdg.3.10 Kah wunnushauanitt8moh Jehovah nuhkuhkunk, kah noh wussumau Israelloh, kah sohham ayeukonat, kah Jehovah mag8 Chushan$Rishitháim Mesopotamie ketass8t ut wunnutcheganit, kah wunnutcheg sohkauau Chishanoh$Rishathaimoh.
E.Jdg.3.10: And the Spirit of the LORD came upon him, and he judged Israel, and went out to war: and the LORD delivered Chushanrishathaim king of Mesopotamia into his hand; and his hand prevailed against Chushanrishathaim.

α.Jdg.3.11 Kah ohke anwohshin yauunchage kodtumwae, kah Othniel wunnaumonuh Kenaz nupp8oh.
E.Jdg.3.11: And the land had rest forty years. And Othniel the son of Kenaz died.

α.Jdg.3.12 Kah wunnaumonuh Israel wonk matcheseog ut anaquabit Jeho[u]ah, kah Jehovah menuhheau Eglon Moabe ketass8timwoh, ayeuuhkonittue Israeloh, newutche matcheseog ut anaquabit Jehovah.
E.Jdg.3.12: And the children of Israel did evil again in the sight of the LORD: and the LORD strengthened Eglon the king of Moab against Israel, because they had done evil in the sight of the LORD.

α.Jdg.3.13 Kah ummóunnumauoh wunnaumonuh Ammon, kah Amalek, kah monchu, kah togkomau Israeloh, kah wutohtu palmehtugque keitotan.
E.Jdg.3.13: And he gathered unto him the children of Ammon and Amalek, and went and smote Israel, and possessed the city of palm trees.

α.Jdg.3.14 Neit wunnaumonuh Israel wuttinneumuhkauáog Eglon Moabe ketass8t nabo shwosuk tahshe kodtumwae.
E.Jdg.3.14: So the children of Israel served Eglon the king of Moab eighteen years.

α.Jdg.3.15 Qut wunnaumo[u]uh Israel mauunniteahettit Jehovah, Jehovah waabenumau pohquohwussuaenuh, Ehud wunnaumonuh Gera, up-Benjamit, menadchue wosketomp kah noh nashpe wunnaumonuh Israel negonshh8waog mag8onk en Eglon oabe ketass8t
E.Jdg.3.15: But when the children of Israel cried unto the LORD, the LORD raised them up a deliverer, Ehud the son of Gera, a Benjamite, a man lefthanded: and by him the children of Israel sent a present unto Eglon the king of Moab.

α.Jdg.3.16 Qut Ehud wutayimauoh togkodtedteam, ne éetaue kenag, nequtishquanogquod, kah ukkishpinauon agwe wuthógk8onk, ut wuttinohkoe wehquout.
E.Jdg.3.16: But Ehud made him a dagger which had two edges, of a cubit length; and he did gird it under his raiment upon his right thigh.

α.Jdg.3.17 Kah paudtauau Eglonoh Moabe ketass8toh mag8onk, kah Eglon mo ahche wunogk8.
E.Jdg.3.17: And he brought the present unto Eglon king of Moab: and Eglon was a very fat man.

α.Jdg.3.18 Kah mahche maguk mag8onk, moncheheau missinninnuh, neh kôonumunutche mag8onk.
E.Jdg.3.18: And when he had made an end to offer the present, he sent away the people that bare the present.

α.Jdg.3.19 Qut nagum wonk qushku, wutch kogohkussume qussukquanash nish kishke Gilgal[,] kah n8wau, nukkeme unnusham en kuhhogkat, woi ketass8t, noh an8wadt, chequnapsh, kah wame neg noh kishke neepauitcheg, wussohwehtunkquoh.
E.Jdg.3.19: But he himself turned again from the quarries that were by Gilgal, and said, I have a secret errand unto thee, O king: who said, Keep silence. And all that stood by him went out from him.

α.Jdg.3.20 Kah Ehud uppéyaonuh, kah noh appeup wunnepunne parlourut, ne noh appit: kah Ehud n8wau, nuttinnushaonk wutayeum8 Godut en kuhhogkat, kah neepau wutch wutappuonganit.
E.Jdg.3.20: And Ehud came unto him; and he was sitting in a summer parlour, which he had for himself alone. And Ehud said, I have a message from God unto thee. And he arose out of his seat.

α.Jdg.3.21 Kah Ehud summagunum ummenadchu, kah neemunum togkodtedteam, wutch wuttinohkounne wéhquout, kah ukkussukkunnumauon wunnogkusset.
E.Jdg.3.21: And Ehud put forth his left hand, and took the dagger from his right thigh, and thrust it into his belly:

α.Jdg.3.22 Kah wussetunk wonk pechem8 nahohtoeu nean kenag: kah wees yanehtam8m8 ne kenag, newaj o[n]teunk amaunumun togkodtedteam wutch wunnógkussit, kah m8i sohham8m8.
E.Jdg.3.22: And the haft also went in after the blade; and the fat closed upon the blade, so that he could not draw the dagger out of his belly; and the dirt came out.

α.Jdg.3.23 Neit Ehud sohham pannuppe wahwhutch petutteamuk; kah yanitanum parloure squont kah kupshadtikquomun.
E.Jdg.3.23: Then Ehud went forth through the porch, and shut the doors of the parlour upon him, and locked them.

α.Jdg.3.24 Sohhog, wuttinneumon peyaoh, kah naumohettit, kusseh, parlour squont, kah kupshadtikquósu, n8waog wunnamuhkut n8pagku ut wunnepunne parlourumut.
E.Jdg.3.24: When he was gone out, his servants came; and when they saw that, behold, the doors of the parlour were locked, they said, Surely he covereth his feet in his summer chamber.

α.Jdg.3.25 Kah nag pahtsuog n[ô] pajeh wutakodchinnaoont, kah kusseh matta woshinnum8 parlore squont, newajeh nemunnumohettit pohquoshadtikquo[n]tunk, kah wóshinnumunneau, kah kusseh, wussontimom8uh kepshauh nupp8oh ut ohkeit.
E.Jdg.3.25: And they tarried till they were ashamed: and, behold, he opened not the doors of the parlour; therefore they took a key, and opened them: and, behold, their lord was fallen down dead on the earth.

α.Jdg.3.26 Kah Ehud quo[n]shau nag pahtsehettit, kah paumuhkom kogóksumwe qussukquanash kah spuhh8wau en Seirath.
E.Jdg.3.26: And Ehud escaped while they tarried, and passed beyond the quarries, and escaped unto Seirath.

α.Jdg.3.27 Kah n$nih, noh paont, puhpequóhtau monopuhpeg ut Ephraime wadchuut, kah wunnaumonuh Israel, 8we[e]che w8mussumukquoh wutch wadchuut, kah nagum wunnegonuhkauoh.
E.Jdg.3.27: And it came to pass, when he was come, that he blew a trumpet in the mountain of Ephraim, and the children of Israel went down with him from the mount, and he before them.

α.Jdg.3.28 Kah nah wuttinuh ásuhkiek, newutche Jehovah mag8 kummatwom8uh Moabitsoh en kenutchegan8out, kah nag wutasukaue w8mseumouh, kah neemunnumwog Jordane pongquagish nogque Moabiyeu, kah matta unnanumau8og howane qushkodteush.
E.Jdg.3.28: And he said unto them, Follow after me: for the LORD hath delivered your enemies the Moabites into your hand. And they went down after him, and took the fords of Jordan toward Moab, and suffered not a man to pass over.

α.Jdg.3.29 Kah nushaog ne ahquompak Moabitsoh papaume piogque muttannunganog kussuoh wosketompoh, wame wunogqusketompuh, kah menuhkosketomuh, kah matta howan pohquohham8.
E.Jdg.3.29: And they slew of Moab at that time about ten thousand men, all lusty, and all men of valour; and there escaped not a man.

α.Jdg.3.30 Nemehkuh Moab sohkauau ne kesukok ut agwe wunnutcheganit Israel: kah ohke anwoshinip shwosuktahshinchage kodtumwáe.
E.Jdg.3.30: So Moab was subdued that day under the hand of Israel. And the land had rest fourscore years.

α.Jdg.3.31 Kah nahohtoeyeu8p nagum, Shamgar wunnaumonuh Anath, noh paguanont nequtta tahshe pasuk Philistianse wosketómpuh, nashpe oxinuhtugk, kah noh wonk pohquohwhunop Israeloh.
E.Jdg.3.31: And after him was Shamgar the son of Anath, which slew of the Philistines six hundred men with an ox goad: and he also delivered Israel.

α.Jdg.4.1 KAh wunnaumonuh Israel wonk matcheseog ut anquabit Jehovah, Ehud mahche napuk.
E.Jdg.4.1: And the children of Israel again did evil in the sight of the LORD, when Ehud was dead.

α.Jdg.4.2 Kah Lord ummagun ut wunnutcheganit Jabin Canaane ketass8t, noh nanawunuk ut Hazor: umummugquomp8moh ut wutayeuwehteaonganit, noh Sisera, noh wadohkit ut Harosheth ut Gentilsut.
E.Jdg.4.2: And the LORD sold them into the hand of Jabin king of Canaan, that reigned in Hazor; the captain of whose host was Sisera, which dwelt in Harosheth of the Gentiles.

α.Jdg.4.3 Kah wunnaumonuh Israel mauunitteauaog Jehovah: newutche ohto pasak8gun tahshe pasuk88ash mouhshogque chariotsash: kah neesneechage kodtumwae mishe onkquanumweheau wunnaumonuh Israel.
E.Jdg.4.3: And the children of Israel cried unto the LORD: for he had nine hundred chariots of iron; and twenty years he mightily oppressed the children of Israel.

α.Jdg.4.4 Kah Deborah mittumwossisse quóshodtumwaen, ummittamwussoh Lapidoth, wussumau Israelloh na ahquompak.
E.Jdg.4.4: And Deborah, a prophetess, the wife of Lapidoth, she judged Israel at that time.

α.Jdg.4.5 Kah noh ayeu ut agwe uppalmehtugqut Deborah, nashaue Ramah, kah Bethel Ephraimme wadchuut, k[a]h wunnaumonuh Israel uppeyaonouh wutche wussittumóonk.
E.Jdg.4.5: And she dwelt under the palm tree of Deborah between Ramah and Bethel in mount Ephraim: and the children of Israel came up to her for judgment.

α.Jdg.4.6 Kah noh ann8hteam8, kah wehkomau Barák wunnaumonuh Abinnoam wutch Kadesh$Naphthali, kah wuttinuh sunnummatta Jehovah ummanitt8moh Israel ann8team8us, âush nogque wadchuut Tabor, kah weechau piogque muttannonganog kussuog wunneechánun Naphthali, kah wunnaumonuh Zebulun?
E.Jdg.4.6: And she sent and called Barak the son of Abinoam out of Kedeshnaphtali, and said unto him, Hath not the LORD God of Israel commanded, saying, Go and draw toward mount Tabor, and take with thee ten thousand men of the children of Naphtali and of the children of Zebulun?

α.Jdg.4.7 Kah pish nuppeyaeh ut kuhhogkat ut Kithone sepuut, Sisera umumukquompomoh wutayeuwehteomoh Jabin, nashpe wutchariotsash, kah ummattaan8moh, kah nummagun ut kenutcheganit.
E.Jdg.4.7: And I will draw unto thee to the river Kishon Sisera, the captain of Jabin's army, with his chariots and his multitude; and I will deliver him into thine hand.

α.Jdg.4.8 Kah Barak wuttinnuh, weechaiean neit woh nummonchem, qut matta weechaiean, neit mattá nummonchuh.
E.Jdg.4.8: And Barak said unto her, If thou wilt go with me, then I will go: but if thou wilt not go with me, then I will not go.

α.Jdg.4.9 Kah noh n8wau, wunnamuhkut k8wechaush, qut ne kuppomushaonk ne paumusháuontaman, na matta pish k8quehtianumukqussen, newutche Jehovah pish magou Sisera ut mittumwossis wunnutcheganit, kah Deborah neepoh kah weechauau Barak en Kedesh.
E.Jdg.4.9: And she said, I will surely go with thee: notwithstanding the journey that thou takest shall not be for thine honour; for the LORD shall sell Sisera into the hand of a woman. And Deborah arose, and went with Barak to Kedesh.

α.Jdg.4.10 Kah Barak wehkomau Zebulunoh, kah Naphthali en Kadesh kah kuhkuhqueu piogque muttannonganog kussuoh weechogqutcheh ut wusseetut: kah Deborah weechau.
E.Jdg.4.10: And Barak called Zebulun and Naphtali to Kedesh; and he went up with ten thousand men at his feet: and Deborah went up with him.

α.Jdg.4.11 Onk Heber uk-Kenit, noh mo wutcheiyeu wunnaumonuh Hóbab, waseenumonche Moses, noh chippinnau wuhhogkuh wutch Kenitsut, kah ponam week ut mukoshquttáut Zaanaim, ne kishke Kedesh.
E.Jdg.4.11: Now Heber the Kenite, which was of the children of Hobab the father in law of Moses, had severed himself from the Kenites, and pitched his tent unto the plain of Zaanaim, which is by Kedesh.

α.Jdg.4.12 Kah wuttinnoneau Siserahoh, Barak wunnaumonuh Abinoam kuhkuhqueu en Tabore wadchuut.
E.Jdg.4.12: And they shewed Sisera that Barak the son of Abinoam was gone up to mount Tabor.

α.Jdg.4.13 Kah Sisera mukkinnum wame wutcharetsash, pasuk8gun tahshit pasuk88ash m8ôshogque charetsash, kah wame missinninnuh neh weechogqutcheh, Harosheth ut Gentilsut, wehque Kishone sepuut.
E.Jdg.4.13: And Sisera gathered together all his chariots, even nine hundred chariots of iron, and all the people that were with him, from Harosheth of the Gentiles unto the river of Kishon.

α.Jdg.4.14 Kah Deborah unn[á]u Barakoh, neepaush newutche yeu kesukok Jehovah mag8 Sisserahoh en kunutcheganit, sun mo Jehovah kenegonnekungk8? neit Barak w8msu wutch Tabore wadchuut, kah piukque muttannonganog kussuoh asugkongqutcheh
E.Jdg.4.14: And Deborah said unto Barak, Up; for this is the day in which the LORD hath delivered Sisera into thine hand: is not the LORD gone out before thee? So Barak went down from mount Tabor, and ten thousand men after him.

α.Jdg.4.15 Kah Jehovah sohkauau Siseraoh kah wame wutchariotsumash, kah wame wutayeuwehteomoh, nashpe an kenag togkodteg, ut anaquabit Barak, newaj Sissera n8kit wutch[o]h wutcharettumut, kah wussem8[,] ut wusseetut.
E.Jdg.4.15: And the LORD discomfited Sisera, and all his chariots, and all his host, with the edge of the sword before Barak; so that Sisera lighted down off his chariot, and fled away on his feet.

α.Jdg.4.16 Qut Barak asuhkom chariotsash, kah ayeuhteacheg, pajeh Harosheta ut Gentilsut, kah wame wutayeuwehteomoh Sis[e]ra penushadtamwog en kenag togkodteg, kah matta wosketomp sequttahwho[au].
E.Jdg.4.16: But Barak pursued after the chariots, and after the host, unto Harosheth of the Gentiles: and all the host of Sisera fell upon the edge of the sword; and there was not a man left.

α.Jdg.4.17 Qut Sisera wussem8 ut wusseetut, en wekit Ja[é]l ummittamwussoh Heber, utKenit: newutche na mo wunnonteaonganu8 nashaue Jabin Hazore ketass8t, kah w[e]ek Heber uk-Kenit.
E.Jdg.4.17: Howbeit Sisera fled away on his feet to the tent of Jael the wife of Heber the Kenite: for there was peace between Jabin the king of Hazor and the house of Heber the Kenite.

α.Jdg.4.18 Kah Jael sohham nogushkauónat Sisera, kah wuttinuh, petutteau[s]h nussontimom, petukah, ahque wabesish, kah noh petutteadt, wetuômut, upputag8huh hogk8onk.
E.Jdg.4.18: And Jael went out to meet Sisera, and said unto him, Turn in, my lord, turn in to me; fear not. And when he had turned in unto her into the tent, she covered him with a mantle.

α.Jdg.4.19 Kah wuttinuh wuttattamwéheh k8wehquetumoush nuppeé[m]es wuttattamunat, newutche nukkohkutt8n kah noh woshinum wishquie sogkodtunk, kah 8tattamheuh, kah upputtag8huh.
E.Jdg.4.19: And he said unto her, Give me, I pray thee, a little water to drink; for I am thirsty. And she opened a bottle of milk, and gave him drink, and covered him.

α.Jdg.4.20 Wonk wuttinuh, neepaush weetuóme squontamut, kah pish n$nih, howan peyont kah nat8mukqean, kah n8wadt, howan yeu wutappin, n8wash matta,
E.Jdg.4.20: Again he said unto her, Stand in the door of the tent, and it shall be, when any man doth come and enquire of thee, and say, Is there any man here? that thou shalt say, No.

α.Jdg.4.21 Neit Jael ummittamwossoh Heber, neemunum weetuóme kenuhtugquonk, kàh neemunum hammer ut wunnutchéganit, kah keme peyaonuh, kah kussukketahham kenuhtugquonk wutohtugquadt, kah ummenuhkehtauoh ut ohkeit, (newutche mo kussukkoueu, kah sauwunum) neit nupp8.
E.Jdg.4.21: Then Jael Heber's wife took a nail of the tent, and took an hammer in her hand, and went softly unto him, and smote the nail into his temples, and fastened it into the ground: for he was fast asleep and weary. So he died.

α.Jdg.4.22 Kah kusseh, Barak n8sukauont Siseraoh, Jael sohham wunnogskauoh, kah wuttinuh, peyaush, kah kenahtinush wosketomp noh natinneahwhadt, kah noh petutteadt, kusseh Sisera seepsin nupp8, káh kenuntequontunk ohteau wutohtugquadt.
E.Jdg.4.22: And, behold, as Barak pursued Sisera, Jael came out to meet him, and said unto him, Come, and I will shew thee the man whom thou seekest. And when he came into her tent, behold, Sisera lay dead, and the nail was in his temples.

α.Jdg.4.23 Nemehkuh God sohkauou ne kesukok, Jab[i]noh, Cananne ketass8t, ut anaquabhettit wunnaumonuh Israel.
E.Jdg.4.23: So God subdued on that day Jabin the king of Canaan before the children of Israel.

α.Jdg.4.24 Kah wunnutcheg wunnaumonuh Israel wuñiyeum8, kah sohkauau Jabinoh Canane ketass8toh, nô pajeh nushonat Jabin Canane ketass8t.
E.Jdg.4.24: And the hand of the children of Israel prospered, and prevailed against Jabin the king of Canaan, until they had destroyed Jabin king of Canaan.

α.Jdg.5.1 NEit ket8ham8 Deborah kah Barak wunnaumónuh Abinoam, ne kesukok, n8waog,
E.Jdg.5.1: Then sang Deborah and Barak the son of Abinoam on that day, saying,

α.Jdg.5.2 Waeenomók Jehovah, wutch ann8tauwanshaonk Israél, missinninnuog unnantamwe maghettit wuhhogkaóuh.
E.Jdg.5.2: Praise ye the LORD for the avenging of Israel, when the people willingly offered themselves.

α.Jdg.5.3 N8tam8k woi ketass8tamwog, kuhkeitam8k woi Sontimóog, nukkut8hamau Jehovah, nukkut8hamau Jehovah um-Manitt8moh Israel.
E.Jdg.5.3: Hear, O ye kings; give ear, O ye princes; I, even I, will sing unto the LORD; I will sing praise to the LORD God of Israel.

α.Jdg.5.4 Jehovah ân sohhaman Seir, kodtanéan wutch ohteakonit Edom, ohke quequanup, kah kesukquash padtippashinippash, káh mahtohqs nippéeu padtippashunip.
E.Jdg.5.4: LORD, when thou wentest out of Seir, when thou marchedst out of the field of Edom, the earth trembled, and the heavens dropped, the clouds also dropped water.

α.Jdg.5.5 Wadchuash mahtupáhtopash wutch anaquabit Jehovah, ne Sinai, wutch anaquabit Jehovah um-Manitt8moh Israel.
E.Jdg.5.5: The mountains melted from before the LORD, even that Sinai from before the LORD God of Israel.

α.Jdg.5.6 [Pa]montog Shamgar wunnaumonuh A[n]ath, pâmontog Jael, tauma[o]gwosh matta auw[ó]ht[eá]unapa[sh], kah pomushaenuog, pomusháog quinnuppekomwe mayut.
E.Jdg.5.6: In the days of Shamgar the son of Anath, in the days of Jael, the highways were unoccupied, and the travellers walked through byways.

α.Jdg.5.7 Wut8tanameseog wutahqueayinneau, ahqueayeuog Israellut, noh pajeh nen Deborah omohkéon, omohkéon ut wut8kasinneat ut Israel.
E.Jdg.5.7: The inhabitants of the villages ceased, they ceased in Israel, until that I Deborah arose, that I arose a mother in Israel.

α.Jdg.5.8 Pepenauwaog wuskeu Manitt8h neit ayeuwuttuongannú8k ut squontamehtu: ogqunneg asuh qunnontug sunnaumuná[s] ut kenugke yauunchage muttannonganog kussuut ut Israelut?
E.Jdg.5.8: They chose new gods; then was war in the gates: was there a shield or spear seen among forty thousand in Israel?

α.Jdg.5.9 Nuttah nogquohteau Israelle nananuwaenúut, neg wekontamwe magukeg wuhhogkauh ut kenugke missinniñútu: wunnanumok Jehovah.
E.Jdg.5.9: My heart is toward the governors of Israel, that offered themselves willingly among the people. Bless ye the LORD.

α.Jdg.5.10 Ken8nok, kenaau na8mukquéógish wompi assesog, apéogish wussittumwaonganit, kah paumush[á]ogish mayut.
E.Jdg.5.10: Speak, ye that ride on white asses, ye that sit in judgment, and walk by the way.

α.Jdg.5.11 Wutch woh mo waj n8tauómuk pépumwaenúog, ahhut wutt8hhuppaumuk, na pish wuttit nompéinneau wussampweusseongash J[é]hovah, sampweusseongash nogque en wut8tanamesut ut Israel: neit pish ummissinninneum[o]h Jehovah w8msuog en squontamehtu.
E.Jdg.5.11: They that are delivered from the noise of archers in the places of drawing water, there shall they rehearse the righteous acts of the LORD, even the righteous acts toward the inhabitants of his villages in Israel: then shall the people of the LORD go down to the gates.

α.Jdg.5.12 T8hkish, t8hkish Deborah, t8kish t8kish ann8hamush ket8homáonk, t8kish Barak, uss8us kummissinnomog missinnáianeat, ken wunnaumonuh Abinnoam.
E.Jdg.5.12: Awake, awake, Deborah: awake, awake, utter a song: arise, Barak, and lead thy captivity captive, thou son of Abinoam.

α.Jdg.5.13 Neit noh apit wunnanauwun[a]umwéheau sontimuh, ut kenugke missinninnutu, Jehovah nunnanawunnumwáhik matikkenutcheh.
E.Jdg.5.13: Then he made him that remaineth have dominion over the nobles among the people: the LORD made me have dominion over the mighty.

α.Jdg.5.14 Wutch Ephraimut, na mó 8wadchabuk8 ayeuuhkone Amalek, nahohtóeu ken Benjamin, ut kenugke kummissinninnumut: wutch Machirut nanaánuenuog w8msuog; kah wutch Zebulon neg mahmussinoncheg wussukwhósue pen[8]h.
E.Jdg.5.14: Out of Ephraim was there a root of them against Amalek; after thee, Benjamin, among thy people; out of Machir came down governors, and out of Zebulun they that handle the pen of the writer.

α.Jdg.5.15 Kah Issachare sontimóog weechauaog Deborahoh, noh Issachar, kah wonk Barak, noh mehtussittaeu moncheáheau en 8nouhkoiyeuut, papaume wutchadchabenum8ongash Reuben, mogkiyeuásh metahh8wae unnantam8ongash.
E.Jdg.5.15: And the princes of Issachar were with Deborah; even Issachar, and also Barak: he was sent on foot into the valley. For the divisions of Reuben there were great thoughts of heart.

α.Jdg.5.16 Tohwutch kenukshôan sheepekommukquehtu, n8tamunat flockse wadtauatonkqussuongash? papaume wutchadchaubenum8ongash Reuben mogkiyeuash metahh8wae natinneham8ongash.
E.Jdg.5.16: Why abodest thou among the sheepfolds, to hear the bleatings of the flocks? For the divisions of Reuben there were great searchings of heart.

α.Jdg.5.17 Gilead appeup ogkomuk Jordan: kah tohwhutch Dan appeup kuht8nogquehtu? Asher appeup kehchippam ketahhannit, kah appeup uppukquohteaiyeumut.
E.Jdg.5.17: Gilead abode beyond Jordan: and why did Dan remain in ships? Asher continued on the sea shore, and abode in his breaches.

α.Jdg.5.18 Zabulon kah N[á]phthali misinninnuog p[ô]godtantogig uppomantamôonkan8 en nuppunat ko[g]suhk[o]agish ut ohteakonit
E.Jdg.5.18: Zebulun and Naphtali were a people that jeoparded their lives unto the death in the high places of the field.

α.Jdg.5.19 Ketass8tamwog peyaog, kah ayéuteaog, neit Canaane ketass8tamwog ayeuteaog ut Taan[a]chut kishke Meggiddoe nippehtu, wanne neemunnum8og teaguée anuhamóadtuongash.
E.Jdg.5.19: The kings came and fought, then fought the kings of Canaan in Taanach by the waters of Megiddo; they took no gain of money.

α.Jdg.5.20 Ayeuteaog wutch kesukqut, annogqsog nean appéhettit ayeukon[â]og Sisera.
E.Jdg.5.20: They fought from heaven; the stars in their courses fought against Sisera.

α.Jdg.5.21 Kishone seip wutammápanuh, ne nukk[ó]ne seip, Kishone seip; woi nuk[k]eteah[ó]gkou kuttashkukkom menuhkesuonk.
E.Jdg.5.21: The river of Kishon swept them away, that ancient river, the river Kishon. O my soul, thou hast trodden down strength.

α.Jdg.5.22 Neit horsesek[o]ssog pokshaog nashpe ukkinnupwishaongan8óash, ukkinnupwishaongan8oash wutch ummissugkenóm8uh.
E.Jdg.5.22: Then were the horsehoofs broken by the means of the pransings, the pransings of their mighty ones.

α.Jdg.5.23 Matanum8k Meroz (wussin wutangelumoh Jehovah) weesogke matánum8k yeu wadohkitcheg: newutche matta peyau8og aninnumauónat Jehovah, aninnumauónat Jehovah ayeuuhkonittue matikkenugeg.
E.Jdg.5.23: Curse ye Meroz, said the angel of the LORD, curse ye bitterly the inhabitants thereof; because they came not to the help of the LORD, to the help of the LORD against the mighty.

α.Jdg.5.24 Jael ummittamwussoh Heber uk-Kenit pish anue wunnanumau onk mittamwussissoh, pish anue wunna[n]umau onk mittamwussissoh, ut weetuomut.
E.Jdg.5.24: Blessed above women shall Jael the wife of Heber the Kenite be, blessed shall she be above women in the tent.

α.Jdg.5.25 Wehquetum nippe, wuttinumauoh sogkodtunk, sohwuttau butter, ut sontimoéchuut.
E.Jdg.5.25: He asked water, and she gave him milk; she brought forth butter in a lordly dish.

α.Jdg.5.26 Ponam wunnutcheganit kenontukquontunk, kah wuttinohkôunit anakausuen wut-hammerumut, kah nashpe hammer togkomau Siserahoh, tummehtham uppuhkuk, mahche konnukketahwhont, kah pashpetahhamauont wuttahtukquosh.
E.Jdg.5.26: She put her hand to the nail, and her right hand to the workmen's hammer; and with the hammer she smote Sisera, she smote off his head, when she had pierced and stricken through his temples.

α.Jdg.5.27 Ut wusseetut nauwaeu, penushau, seepsin, ut wusseetut nanwaeu, penushau, ne adt nauwait, ne wuttit penushau nuppunat.
E.Jdg.5.27: At her feet he bowed, he fell, he lay down: at her feet he bowed, he fell: where he bowed, there he fell down dead.

α.Jdg.5.28 Ohkasoh Sisera sohh8quaeu ut kenogkeneganit, kah mishont8au papashpe latticeut tohwutch wutchariotum quohque peyaum8uk? tohwutch sepohtéam8uk chariotse wheelsash?
E.Jdg.5.28: The mother of Sisera looked out at a window, and cried through the lattice, Why is his chariot so long in coming? why tarry the wheels of his chariots?

α.Jdg.5.29 OOwaantamwe sonksquomoh wunnamp8hamunkquoh, nux, namp8hamauau wuhhogkuh.
E.Jdg.5.29: Her wise ladies answered her, yea, she returned answer to herself,

α.Jdg.5.30 Sunnummatta sohkoséog? sun matta chachaubenumóog sequttahhamóonk, nish$noh wosketomp, pasuk peenomp asuh nees8oh? Sisera m8chekenáe sequttahhamóonk, ahámogquesue m8chekenáe sequttahhamóonk, [a]ehtaue ahámogqu[e]sue m8chekenaj sequttahhamóonk, sequttahham8e mussittippukunash?
E.Jdg.5.30: Have they not sped? have they not divided the prey; to every man a damsel or two; to Sisera a prey of divers colours, a prey of divers colours of needlework, of divers colours of needlework on both sides, meet for the necks of them that take the spoil?

α.Jdg.5.31 Wame kummatwomog yeu unninneáhettich Woi Jehovah, qut nag womonukqueaneg, ogqueneunkqussehettich nepauzoh manuhke sohhog: Kah ohke anwohshin yauunchage kodtumwae.
E.Jdg.5.31: So let all thine enemies perish, O LORD: but let them that love him be as the sun when he goeth forth in his might. And the land had rest forty years.

α.Jdg.6.1 KAH wunnaumonuh Israel matcheseog ut anaquabit Jehovah: kah Jehovah ummagunuh ut wunnutcheganit Midian nesausuk tahshe kodtumwae.
E.Jdg.6.1: And the children of Israel did evil in the sight of the LORD: and the LORD delivered them into the hand of Midian seven years.

α.Jdg.6.2 Kah wunnutcheg Midian sohkauau Israeloh, newutche Midianitsog wunnaumonuh Isráel ayimauáhettit, assampamukquodtash ut wadchuuhkontu, kah hassunekash, kah menuhkonogwosh.
E.Jdg.6.2: And the hand of Midian prevailed against Israel: and because of the Midianites the children of Israel made them the dens which are in the mountains, and caves, and strong holds.

α.Jdg.6.3 Kah n$nih, Israel ohketeahettit, Midianitsoge kuhkuhqueog, kah Amalakitsog, kah wutchepwóe wunnaumóneunk, nag ayeuuhkonittue kuhkuhqueog.
E.Jdg.6.3: And so it was, when Israel had sown, that the Midianites came up, and the Amalekites, and the children of the east, even they came up against them;

α.Jdg.6.4 Kah nag wutayeuuhkonittue tuppuksinehtauóuh, kah pagwat[ó]og ohkee mechummuongash, nô pajeh peyoa[n] Gaza, kah wanne sequnnumáuóog meetsuonk Israeloh, asuh sheep, asuh ox, asuh asse
E.Jdg.6.4: And they encamped against them, and destroyed the increase of the earth, till thou come unto Gaza, and left no sustenance for Israel, neither sheep, nor ox, nor ass.

α.Jdg.6.5 Newutche nag kuhkuhqueog nashpe wunneetasseumoh, kah wetuóash, kah peyaog onatuh quaquequeshontaut newutche m[ó]nacheg, newutche nanéeswe nag kah uk[-]kamels8uh wanne woh ogkemóog, kah petutteaog ohke pagwatauunat.
E.Jdg.6.5: For they came up with their cattle and their tents, and they came as grasshoppers for multitude; for both they and their camels were without number: and they entered into the land to destroy it.

α.Jdg.6.6 Kah Israel m8chekodchekhéoog wutche Midisanitsog: kah wunnaumonuh Israel mauunnitteauáog Jehovah.
E.Jdg.6.6: And Israel was greatly impoverished because of the Midianites; and the children of Israel cried unto the LORD.

α.Jdg.6.7 Kah n$nih, wunnaumonuh Israel máuunnitteeauáhettit Jehovah, newutche Midianitsog.
E.Jdg.6.7: And it came to pass, when the children of Israel cried unto the LORD because of the Midianites,

α.Jdg.6.8 Jehovah ann8nau quoshodtumwaenúh, en wunnaumonat Israel, noh nah ánont: yeu wussin Jehovah um-Manitt8moh Israel, kukkuhkuhk8uninnumw[ó]p wutch Egipt, kah kussohh8wunumwop wutch missináe kommukqut.
E.Jdg.6.8: That the LORD sent a prophet unto the children of Israel, which said unto them, Thus saith the LORD God of Israel, I brought you up from Egypt, and brought you forth out of the house of bondage;

α.Jdg.6.9 Kah kuppohquohwuninnumwop wutch wunnutchegan8out Egyptiansog, kah wutch wunnutchegan8out wame chekeneehukqueogig kah nutama8hkauopanneg wutch anaquabeog, kah kittinnuma[n]umop, wutohkeeu.
E.Jdg.6.9: And I delivered you out of the hand of the Egyptians, and out of the hand of all that oppressed you, and drave them out from before you, and gave you their land;

α.Jdg.6.10 Kah kittinnumwop, nen Jehovah kum-Manitt8mw8 ahque wabesuon8k um-manitt8m8uh Amoritsog, neg wutohtuout áeyog: qut matta ken8swehtam8mw8 n8wadtauatonkqussuonk.
E.Jdg.6.10: And I said unto you, I am the LORD your God; fear not the gods of the Amorites, in whose land ye dwell: but ye have not obeyed my voice.

α.Jdg.6.11 Wut-Angelumoh Jehovah peyau, kah appu agwe n8timissit, ne ohtag ut Ophrath, ne wadtaumaik Joashut wut-Abiezrit, & wunnaumonuh Gideon, pogkohham wheatash kishke winepresse$ut, attuhtauunat wutch Midianitsut.
E.Jdg.6.11: And there came an angel of the LORD, and sat under an oak which was in Ophrah, that pertained unto Joash the Abiezrite: and his son Gideon threshed wheat by the winepress, to hide it from the Midianites.

α.Jdg.6.12 Kah wutangelumoh Jehovah wuñaehtau, kah wuttinuh, Jehovah k8wetomuk ken menuhkoshketomp.
E.Jdg.6.12: And the angel of the LORD appeared unto him, and said unto him, The LORD is with thee, thou mighty man of valour.

α.Jdg.6.13 Kah Gideon wuttinuh, woi nussontimom, Jehovah wetomukqueog, neit tohwutch wame yeu spunnaog? kah uttiyeu wame ummonchanatamwe usseongash, nish k8shinonog anukqueogkupash, an8wehettit, sunnummatta Jehovah, kukkuhkuhk8unukou[n]onu[s] wutch Egypt, qut yeuyeu Jehovah kutohquanumukqu[n], kah mag8 kuhhogkanonash en wunnutchegan8out Midianitsog.
E.Jdg.6.13: And Gideon said unto him, Oh my Lord, if the LORD be with us, why then is all this befallen us? and where be all his miracles which our fathers told us of, saying, Did not the LORD bring us up from Egypt? but now the LORD hath forsaken us, and delivered us into the hands of the Midianites.

α.Jdg.6.14 Kah Jehovah ummo[n]unneauoh, kah n8wau, monchish yeu ut kummenuhkesuonganit, kah pish kuppohquohwhun Israel, wutch wunnutchegan8out Midianitsog, sunnummatta kutann8n8mis?
E.Jdg.6.14: And the LORD looked upon him, and said, Go in this thy might, and thou shalt save Israel from the hand of the Midianites: have not I sent thee?

α.Jdg.6.15 Káh wuttinuh woi nussontimon, uttoh woi nuttit pohquohwhunon Israel? kusseh, nutteateashiyeuonk matcheku ut Manasseh, kah nen nupeisses wekit n8sh.
E.Jdg.6.15: And he said unto him, Oh my Lord, wherewith shall I save Israel?  behold, my family is poor in Manasseh, and I am the least in my father's house.

α.Jdg.6.16 Kah Jehovah wuttinuh wunnamuhkut k8wetomsh, kah pish kuttogkom Midianitsog onatuh pasuk wosketomp.
E.Jdg.6.16: And the LORD said unto him, Surely I will be with thee, and thou shalt smite the Midianites as one man.

α.Jdg.6.17 Kah wuttinuh, yeuyeu namehteauan kitteamonteanittuonk ut anaquabean neit nahtseh kuhkinneasuonk, ne keket8kieop.
E.Jdg.6.17: And he said unto him, If now I have found grace in thy sight, then shew me a sign that thou talkest with me.

α.Jdg.6.18 Ahque ne$wutch amaish, k8wehquetumoush, no pajeh peyaonon, kah paudtauon nussephausuonk kah ponamon anaquabean, kah n8wau, yeu nutapin noh pajeh wonk kuppeyonat.
E.Jdg.6.18: Depart not hence, I pray thee, until I come unto thee, and bring forth my present, and set it before thee. And he said, I will tarry until thou come again.

α.Jdg.6.19 Kah Gideon petutteau kah quoquoshwunau goatsemesoh, kah mat seane petukqunegash, wutch Ephathe n8khik: weyaus pondamun man8tat, kah ponam sabaheg wisquadt, kah wussohwuttauoh ut agwe n8timissit, kah ponamun anaquabenit.
E.Jdg.6.19: And Gideon went in, and made ready a kid, and unleavened cakes of an ephah of flour: the flesh he put in a basket, and he put the broth in a pot, and brought it out unto him under the oak, and presented it.

α.Jdg.6.20 Kah wut-Angelumoh God wuttinuh nemunush weyaus, kah matseane petukqunnegash, kah ponsh qussukquanehtu, kah sokenush sabaheg, kah wutussen.
E.Jdg.6.20: And the angel of God said unto him, Take the flesh and the unleavened cakes, and lay them upon this rock, and pour out the broth. And he did so.

α.Jdg.6.21 Neit wut-Angelumoh Jehovah, summagunum uhquae wutanwohhou, ne ohtag wunnutcheganit, kah mussikquam weyaus, kah mat seane petukqunnegash: kah waapem8 n8tau wutch qussukquanit, kah mahchekussum weyaus, kah matta seane petukqunnegash: neit wut-Angelumoh Jehovah amayeoh wutch wunnaum8onganit.
E.Jdg.6.21: Then the angel of the LORD put forth the end of the staff that was in his hand, and touched the flesh and the unleavened cakes; and there rose up fire out of the rock, and consumed the flesh and the unleavened cakes. Then the angel of the LORD departed out of his sight.

α.Jdg.6.22 Kah Gideon wahteunk noh wut-Angelumoh Jehovah, Gideon n8wau, woi Lord Jehovah newutche nunnau wut-Angelumoh Jehovah, mamusskesukque.
E.Jdg.6.22: And when Gideon perceived that he was an angel of the LORD, Gideon said, Alas, O LORD God! for because I have seen an angel of the LORD face to face.

α.Jdg.6.23 Kah Jehovah wuttinuh, wunohteash, wabesehkon, matta pish kenuppoh.
E.Jdg.6.23: And the LORD said unto him, Peace be unto thee; fear not: thou shalt not die.

α.Jdg.6.24 Neit Gideon na$ut ayim Altar en Jehovah$ut, kah wuttissowetamun Jehovah-Shalom pajeh yeu kesukok, ohteau ut Ophrath wut-Abiezeritsog.
E.Jdg.6.24: Then Gideon built an altar there unto the LORD, and called it Jehovahshalom: unto this day it is yet in Ophrah of the Abiezrites.

α.Jdg.6.25 Kah n$nih, ne nohkog, Jehvoah wuttinuh, neemun k8sh wutoxenémes, nahohtoeu ox, nesausuk adtahshe kodtumwohkog, kah kepuhteash Baalle Altar ne k8sh wadchanoncheh kah tummehthash kobpag ne noh kishke.
E.Jdg.6.25: And it came to pass the same night, that the LORD said unto him, Take thy father's young bullock, even the second bullock of seven years old, and throw down the altar of Baal that thy father hath, and cut down the grove that is by it:

α.Jdg.6.26 Kah ayimau altaroh Lord kum-Manitt8m, ut woskeche yeu qussukquanit, ut wunnehteóe ayeuonganit, kah neemun nahohtóeu ox, kah magish chikohsue sephausuonk, nashpe kuppie wutuhqunash nish pish tamatahhamanish.
E.Jdg.6.26: And build an altar unto the LORD thy God upon the top of this rock, in the ordered place, and take the second bullock, and offer a burnt sacrifice with the wood of the grove which thou shalt cut down.

α.Jdg.6.27 Neit Gideon nemunau piogqussuoh wosketompuh wuttinneumoh, kah usseu ne anomp Jehovah, kah nnih, newutche wabesuóneau 8shoh neh weekit, & wosketompaog ne otanat, wunn8nánumwin ussenat kesukodáeu, neit nukonáeu wutussen.
E.Jdg.6.27: Then Gideon took ten men of his servants, and did as the LORD had said unto him: and so it was, because he feared his father's household, and the men of the city, that he could not do it by day, that he did it by night.

α.Jdg.6.28 Kah wosketompaog ne otanat nompoáe omohkehettit, kusseh wutaltarumoh Baal kepuhkausu, kah kuppi ne kishke ohtagkup tumehthausu, kah nahohtóeu ox mo sephausin ut altarut ne noh adt ayimuk.
E.Jdg.6.28: And when the men of the city arose early in the morning, behold, the altar of Baal was cast down, and the grove was cut down that was by it, and the second bullock was offered upon the altar that was built.

α.Jdg.6.29 Kah hettuog, howan yeu wutussen? kah nag natinnehamohettit kah nat8tamwehteahettit, n8waog Gideon wunnaumonuh Joash yeu wutussen.
E.Jdg.6.29: And they said one to another, Who hath done this thing? And when they enquired and asked, they said, Gideon the son of Joash hath done this thing.

α.Jdg.6.30 Neit wosketompaog ne otanat unnaog Joashoh, sohh8wus kenaumon, onk woh nupp8, newutche kepuhteau wutaltarumoh Baal, kah newutche n8suttahham kuppi, ne kishke ohtagkup.
E.Jdg.6.30: Then the men of the city said unto Joash, Bring out thy son, that he may die: because he hath cast down the altar of Baal, and because he hath cut down the grove that was by it.

α.Jdg.6.31 Kah Joash unnau wame neh ayeuuhkónittue neepauwehauónitche: sun[,] kukken8tamauómw8 Baal? sun kuttómheau? noh kôn8tamwansheont, nushinaj, ash$pame mohtompog, noh manitt8it, ken8tamwaushunsh wuhhogkuh, newutche howan kepuhteau wutaltarumoh.
E.Jdg.6.31: And Joash said unto all that stood against him, Will ye plead for Baal? will ye save him? he that will plead for him, let him be put to death whilst it is yet morning: if he be a god, let him plead for himself, because one hath cast down his altar.

α.Jdg.6.32 Newajeh ne kesukok hennont Jerubbaal, an8wadt, Baal ayeuuhkonittue ken8nonch, newutche kepuhteaoh wutaltarumoh.
E.Jdg.6.32: Therefore on that day he called him Jerubbaal, saying, Let Baal plead against him, because he hath thrown down his altar.

α.Jdg.6.33 Neit wame Mideanitsog, kah Amalekitsog, kha wutchepwae wunnechaneuh, miayéog, kah qushkodteaog, & tuppuksinwog ut 8nouhkóiyeuut Jezreel.
E.Jdg.6.33: Then all the Midianites and the Amalekites and the children of the east were gathered together, and went over, and pitched in the valley of Jezreel.

α.Jdg.6.34 Qut wunnashauanitt8moh Jehovah nuhkuhkomwoh Gideon kah puhpequohto monopuhpeg, kah Abiezer wutasukaue miya8moh.
E.Jdg.6.34: But the Spirit of the LORD came upon Gideon, and he blew a trumpet; and Abiezer was gathered after him.

α.Jdg.6.35 Kah ann8nau ann8nainneuh pannuppe wame Manassesut, noh wonk asukaue miya8mont, & ann8nau ann8naénuh en Asher kah en Zabulon, kah en Naphthali, kah kuhkuhqueog wunnogskauónaoont.
E.Jdg.6.35: And he sent messengers throughout all Manasseh; who also was gathered after him: and he sent messengers unto Asher, and unto Zebulun, and unto Naphtali; and they came up to meet them.

α.Jdg.6.36 Kah Gideon unnau Goduh, tomwheadt Israel nashpe nunnutcheganit, ne an8waop.
E.Jdg.6.36: And Gideon said unto God, If thou wilt save Israel by mine hand, as thou hast said,

α.Jdg.6.37 Kusseh, nupponam, fleece wool ohkekontu, & neechippog webe woskeche fleecut ohtag, kah nunnohsit ut wame ohkeit, neit woh n8wahheoh pish kuttomweh Israel nashpe nunnutcheg, ne án8waop.
E.Jdg.6.37: Behold, I will put a fleece of wool in the floor; and if the dew be on the fleece only, and it be dry upon all the earth beside, then shall I know that thou wilt save Israel by mine hand, as thou hast said.

α.Jdg.6.38 Kah n$nihyeup, newutche nompoae omohkeu, kah miánau fleecoh, kah senupp[â]num neechippog wutch fleecut, numwae wunnonkanit nippe.
E.Jdg.6.38: And it was so: for he rose up early on the morrow, and thrust the fleece together, and wringed the dew out of the fleece, a bowl full of water.

α.Jdg.6.39 Kah Gideon unnau Goduh, kummusquanittam8onk ahque ayeuuhkonittue kussopitteaj wutche nen, kah webe majish pasukqut nukket8hkam: qutchehennitti, k8wehquetumoush, webe yeu en pasukqut, nashpe fleece; yéuyeu webe nu[n]ohtaj ut fleecut, kah ut wame ohkeit neechepog88itch.
E.Jdg.6.39: And Gideon said unto God, Let not thine anger be hot against me, and I will speak but this once: let me prove, I pray thee, but this once with the fleece; let it now be dry only upon the fleece, and upon all the ground let there be dew.

α.Jdg.6.40 Kah God wutussen ne nohkog, newutche webe nunohtop ut fleecut, kah wame ohke neechepog88.
E.Jdg.6.40: And God did so that night: for it was dry upon the fleece only, and there was dew on all the ground.

α.Jdg.7.1 NEit Jerubbaal (noh Gideon) kah wame missinninnuh neh weechogqutcheg, nompoae neepoog, kah tuppuksinwog kishke Herodae tohkekomuut, neit Midianitse ayeuteaog nanummiyeu 8sukauouh, kishke Morée wadchuut, ut 8nouhkoiyeuut.
E.Jdg.7.1: Then Jerubbaal, who is Gideon, and all the people that were with him, rose up early, and pitched beside the well of Harod: so that the host of the Midianites were on the north side of them, by the hill of Moreh, in the valley.

α.Jdg.7.2 Kah Jehovah uttam Gideon, missinninnúog neg weechógqueaneg wussaumanwog wutche nen, nummagunat Midianitsog en wunnutchegan8óut, ishkont Israel nutayeuuhkonittue waéenoómukquog, n8wahettit, nehenwonche nunnutcheg nuttomwehik.
E.Jdg.7.2: And the LORD said unto Gideon, The people that are with thee are too many for me to give the Midianites into their hands, lest Israel vaunt themselves against me, saying, Mine own hand hath saved me.

α.Jdg.7.3 Newutche hah yeyuyeu, mishont8wash ut wuhtauogk8wóut missinninnuog, n8wash, Howan wâbesit kah wabesit, qushkitch, kah nompoáeu monchitch wutch wadchuut Gilead, kah nawutch qushkeneau missinninnuog neesneechage kah neese muttannonganogkussuog, kah neg ashequeyeuutcheg piogque muttannonganogkussuog.
E.Jdg.7.3: Now therefore go to, proclaim in the ears of the people, saying, Whosoever is fearful and afraid, let him return and depart early from mount Gilead. And there returned of the people twenty and two thousand; and there remained ten thousand.

α.Jdg.7.4 Kah Jehovah unnau Gideon, missinninnuog ash wussaumánwog, w8muss8s en nippekontu, & nag nukqutchheáog wutch ken: kah pish nnih neg áunôneg yeuoh pish k8weechóg, noh pish k8weechau: kah howan ánun, yeuoh matta pish k8weechóg8, noh matta pish monchu.
E.Jdg.7.4: And the LORD said unto Gideon, The people are yet too many; bring them down unto the water, and I will try them for thee there: and it shall be, that of whom I say unto thee, This shall go with thee, the same shall go with thee; and of whomsoever I say unto thee, This shall not go with thee, the same shall not go.

α.Jdg.7.5 Neit w8msuunau missinninnúh en nippekontu, kah Jehovah unnau Gideonoh, nish$noh pasuk meenanoe wadtattog nippe onatuh anum, noh pish kutchippan, kah wonk nishnoh wutappisittukqussunun wuttattamunat.
E.Jdg.7.5: So he brought down the people unto the water: and the LORD said unto Gideon, Every one that lappeth of the water with his tongue, as a dog lappeth, him shalt thou set by himself; likewise every one that boweth down upon his knees to drink.

α.Jdg.7.6 Kah neg quompenupánumoncheg, nishwe pasuk88og wosketompaog: qut onkatogig wame missinninnuog appesittukqussinne wuttattamwog nippe.
E.Jdg.7.6: And the number of them that lapped, putting their hand to their mouth, were three hundred men: but all the rest of the people bowed down upon their knees to drink water.

α.Jdg.7.7 Kah Jehovah unnau Gideonoh nashpe neg nishwe pasuk88wog quompenippanumoncheg, pish kuttomwehheñumw8: kah nummag Midiannitsog en kenutcheganit: kah onkatogig wame monchehettich, nish$noh howan wutayeuonganit.
E.Jdg.7.7: And the LORD said unto Gideon, By the three hundred men that lapped will I save you, and deliver the Midianites into thine hand: and let all the other people go every man unto his place.

α.Jdg.7.8 Neit missinninnuog nemunnumwog meechum ut wunnutchegan8óut, kah ummónopuhpequon8ash, kah moncheáheau wame Israel, nishnoh howan wekit, kah weech[à]yeumuk yeush nishwe pasuk8woh, kah wutayeuwehteom8uh Midianitsog, w8muhkôag appuog 8noukôiyeuut.
E.Jdg.7.8: So the people took victuals in their hand, and their trumpets: and he sent all the rest of Israel every man unto his tent, and retained those three hundred men: and the host of Midian was beneath him in the valley.

α.Jdg.7.9 Kah [n]nih ne nohkog, Jehovah wuttinuh, neepaush w8msish en ayeuteaut, newutche nummagun ut kenutcheganit.
E.Jdg.7.9: And it came to pass the same night, that the LORD said unto him, Arise, get thee down unto the host; for I have delivered it into thine hand.

α.Jdg.7.10 Qut wabesean en w8msineat, weeche w8mseum Phurah kittinneum en ayeuhteaut.
E.Jdg.7.10: But if thou fear to go down, go thou with Phurah thy servant down to the host:

α.Jdg.7.11 Kah pish ken8tam toh á8wáhettit, kah ompetak kenutcheg pish menuhki w8mussineat en ayeuhteaut, neit weeche w8msumau Phurahoh wuttinneumoh en poquodche kenauwameanu[u]t, ut ayeuteaut.
E.Jdg.7.11: And thou shalt hear what they say; and afterward shall thine hands be strengthened to go down unto the host. Then went he down with Phurah his servant unto the outside of the armed men that were in the host.

α.Jdg.7.12 Kah Midianitsog kah Amalekitsog, wame wutchepwoie wunneecháneunk sepsinwog ut 8nouhkoiyeuut onatuh chânsompsit newutche muttaánwog, kah uk-Camelsumóuh wanne wóogkemoog, onatuh nagontu kishke ketahhannit, ne wuttinánaau.
E.Jdg.7.12: And the Midianites and the Amalekites and all the children of the east lay along in the valley like grasshoppers for multitude; and their camels were without number, as the sand by the sea side for multitude.

α.Jdg.7.13 Kah Gideon paont, kusseh, wosketomp unnau wuttinnukquom8onk neh nees8hetticheh, kah n8wau, kusseh nuttinnukquom unnukquom8onk, kah kusseh, barlie petukqunnunk, unnequosheau wutayeuwéhteomut Midian, kah petutteom8 wetuomut, kah wuttogkodtamuneau, kah punusheau, kah ónt8nohteóm8 ne wetu sepshin.
E.Jdg.7.13: And when Gideon was come, behold, there was a man that told a dream unto his fellow, and said, Behold, I dreamed a dream, and, lo, a cake of barley bread tumbled into the host of Midian, and came unto a tent, and smote it that it fell, and overturned it, that the tent lay along.

α.Jdg.7.14 Kah nees8hetticheh namp8ham kah n8wau, yeu matta teag, webe wuttogkodteg Gideon wunnaumonuh Joash, Israelle wosketomp, newutche God magou Midean, kah wame ayeuteah, en wunnutcheganit.
E.Jdg.7.14: And his fellow answered and said, This is nothing else save the sword of Gideon the son of Joash, a man of Israel: for into his hand hath God delivered Midian, and all the host.

α.Jdg.7.15 Kah nnih, Gideon n8tog missahhamunat unnukquomuonk, kah ne [á]nauwuttam8m8uk, wowussumau, kah qushkeu en Israelle ayeuhteaut, kah n8wau, neepók. newutche Jehovah magou en kenutchegan8óut Midiane ayeuteaog.
E.Jdg.7.15: And it was so, when Gideon heard the telling of the dream, and the interpretation thereof, that he worshipped, and returned into the host of Israel, and said, Arise; for the LORD hath delivered into your hand the host of Midian.

α.Jdg.7.16 Kah chachaubenau nishwe pásuk88oh wosketompuh, nishwe chippe, kah ponam monopuhpeg nishnoh wosketomp wunnutcheganit, naspe mahchishquash, kah wequanantegash anomishquadt.
E.Jdg.7.16: And he divided the three hundred men into three companies, and he put a trumpet in every man's hand, with empty pitchers, and lamps within the pitchers.

α.Jdg.7.17 Kah nah wuttinuh, monunneiegk, kah neane ussek. kah kusseh, peyoon poquodche tuppuksinn8onganit, pish nnih, neaseh, ne ussek.
E.Jdg.7.17: And he said unto them, Look on me, and do likewise: and, behold, when I come to the outside of the camp, it shall be that, as I do, so shall ye do.

α.Jdg.7.18 Puhpequohtauo[n] monopuhpeg, kah wame neg weechogqueaneg, neit kenaau wonk puhpequohtô8k ponopuhpequonash, ut waénu wame 
E.Jdg.7.18: When I blow with a trumpet, I and all that are with me, then blow ye the trumpets also on every side of all the camp, and say, The sword of the LORD, and of Gideon.

α.Jdg.7.19 Neit Gideon kah nequt pasuk88ohneh weechogqutcheh, peyaog poquodche tuppuksinn8wonganit, waj kutchissik nôeu askuhwheteaonk, kah nag wuske wunohtóog askuhwheteaonk, kah nag puhpequohtoog monopuhpequanash, kah sukquehthamwog wishquash nish ohtagish wunnutchegan8óut.
E.Jdg.7.19: So Gideon, and the hundred men that were with him, came unto the outside of the camp in the beginning of the middle watch; and they had but newly set the watch: and they blew the trumpets, and brake the pitchers that were in their hands.

α.Jdg.7.20 Kah nishwe chippan8og puhpequohtóog monopuhpequanash, kah sukquehthamwog wishquash, kah wuttinnumwog wequanantegash ut ummenadchean8[ô]ut, kah monopuhpeg unni[n]nuhkôunit puhpequonat, kah mishont8waog wuttogkodteg Jehovah kah Gideon.
E.Jdg.7.20: And the three companies blew the trumpets, and brake the pitchers, and held the lamps in their left hands, and the trumpets in their right hands to blow withal: and they cried, The sword of the LORD, and of Gideon.

α.Jdg.7.21 Kah neepoog nish$noh wosketomp wutayeuonganit, waeénu tuppuksinn8onganit, kah wame ayeuteaog wussemoog, kah neesk88waog, kah omskauóog.
E.Jdg.7.21: And they stood every man in his place round about the camp; and all the host ran, and cried, and fled.

α.Jdg.7.22 K[à]h nishwe pasuk88og puhpequaog, kah Jehovah togkomwaheau nishnoh wostompuh nees8hetticheh, pannuppe wame ayeuhteáuh, kah ayeuteaog spuhh8waog en Bethshittah, en Zererath, kah en sussippoiyeuut Abel-meholah en Tabbath.
E.Jdg.7.22: And the three hundred blew the trumpets, and the LORD set every man's sword against his fellow, even throughout all the host: and the host fled to Bethshittah in Zererath, and to the border of Abelmeholah, unto Tabbath.

α.Jdg.7.23 Kah Israelle wosketompaog miayeog wutch Naphthali, & wutch Asher, kah wutch Manasseh, kah n8suttahwháog Midianitsoh.
E.Jdg.7.23: And the men of Israel gathered themselves together out of Naphtali, and out of Asher, and out of all Manasseh, and pursued after the Midianites.

α.Jdg.7.24 Kah Gideon ann8nau ann8naénúh pannuppe wame w[a]dchuut Ephraim, n8wau, w8msek ayeuuhkonittue Midianitsog, kah neemunnum8k t8shkeongash negonnáeu nagok en nogque Beth-barah kah Jordan. Neit wame Ephraime wosketompaog miayéog, kah neemunnumwog t8shkeongash en nogque Beth-bára kah Jordan.
E.Jdg.7.24: And Gideon sent messengers throughout all mount Ephraim, saying, come down against the Midianites, and take before them the waters unto Bethbarah and Jordan. Then all the men of Ephraim gathered themselves together, and took the waters unto Bethbarah and Jordan.

α.Jdg.7.25 Kah nemunáog nesuoh Midianitse sontimoh, Oreb kah Zeeb: kah nag nushaog Oreb, ut Orebe qussukquanit, kah nushaog Zeboh, ut Zeebbe wine-presseut, kah n8suttahwhaog Midianoh, kah paudtoog uppuhkukk88ash Oreb kah Zeb ut Gideon, ogkomut Jordan.
E.Jdg.7.25: And they took two princes of the Midianites, Oreb and Zeeb; and they slew Oreb upon the rock Oreb, and Zeeb they slew at the winepress of Zeeb, and pursued Midian, and brought the heads of Oreb and Zeeb to Gideon on the other side Jordan.

α.Jdg.8.1 KAh Ephraime wosketompaog wuttugquoh, tohwutch yeu unnehheáog, matta k8wehkoméinan nonche ayeuuhkonat Midianitsog? kah ummenuhke m8m8squenóuh.
E.Jdg.8.1: And the men of Ephraim said unto him, Why hast thou served us thus, that thou calledst us not, when thou wentest to fight with the Midianites?  And they did chide with him sharply.

α.Jdg.8.2 Kah nah wuttinuh, toh nutussem, tatuppinonumog nuhhogkat? sunnummatta mukkupasquaonk Ephraim 8weenóminneash, anue wunnegen onk wunnegonauwinneaonk Abiezer?
E.Jdg.8.2: And he said unto them, What have I done now in comparison of you? Is not the gleaning of the grapes of Ephraim better than the vintage of Abiezer?

α.Jdg.8.3 God magou ut kenutchegan8out Midane sontimuh Oreb, kah Zeeb: kah teaguas nuttapenum ussenat kuttatupinnitteanat nuhhogkat? neit ummusquanittam8ongan8 ahquohteau, ne mahche n8wadt.
E.Jdg.8.3: God hath delivered into your hands the princes of Midian, Oreb and Zeeb: and what was I able to do in comparison of you? Then their anger was abated toward him, when he had said that.

α.Jdg.8.4 Kah Giddeon peyau Jordan, kah qushkodteau, nagum kah nishwe pasuk88oh wusketompuh neh weechogqutcheh sauunumwog, qut ashpumme n8suttahh8waog.
E.Jdg.8.4: And Gideon came to Jordan, and passed over, he, and the three hundred men that were with him, faint, yet pursuing them.

α.Jdg.8.5 Kah unnau Succothe wosketompuh, k8wehquetumonumw8 assam8k petukqunegash missinninnuog neg weechogquneaneg, newutche neg sauunnumwog, kah neen nunn8suttáh Zebah kah Zalmunnah Midiane ketass8tamwog.
E.Jdg.8.5: And he said unto the men of Succoth, Give, I pray you, loaves of bread unto the people that follow me; for they be faint, and I am pursuing after Zebah and Zalmunna, kings of Midian.

α.Jdg.8.6 Kah Succothe sontimaog n8waog; sun mahche wunnutcheganash Zebah kah Zalmunna, ut kenutchegan8wóut, woh nutassamonanonut kutayeuwehteomog.
E.Jdg.8.6: And the princes of Succoth said, Are the hands of Zebah and Zalmunna now in thine hand, that we should give bread unto thine army?

α.Jdg.8.7 Kah Gidion n8wau, néwajeh, Jehovah mahche maguk Zebah kah Zalmunah ut nunnutcheganit, neit pish nehneekikom k8weyaus8 nashpe tóuohkomukque asinnekoussehtu, kah koussehtu.
E.Jdg.8.7: And Gideon said, Therefore when the LORD hath delivered Zebah and Zalmunna into mine hand, then I will tear your flesh with the thorns of the wilderness and with briers.

α.Jdg.8.8 Kah na$wutch kuhkuhqueu en Penuel, kah na wonk neane wuttin ken8non; kah Penuelle wosketompaog wunnamp8hamauóuh, neane Succothe wosketompaog namp8hamauwahetteup.
E.Jdg.8.8: And he went up thence to Penuel, and spake unto them likewise: and the men of Penuel answered him as the men of Succoth had answered him.

α.Jdg.8.9 Kah ne wonk wuttinnon Penuelle wostompuh, n8wau, wonk wunohte[a]e peyóon, pish nussukquttahham yeu wonkonous.
E.Jdg.8.9: And he spake also unto the men of Penuel, saying, When I come again in peace, I will break down this tower.

α.Jdg.8.10 Onk Zeba kah Zalmunna appupanneg Karkor, kah wutayeuwehteomoh weeche, papaume nabo napanna tahshe muttannonganogkussuog wosketompuh, wame n[e]g asquttahwhutcheg ayeuteaenuog wutchepwoe wunnechaneunk, newutche na wuttit penushoneau nequt pasuk8e kah neesneechage muttannonganogkussuog wusketompaog neg sohwhunukeg togkodteg.
E.Jdg.8.10: Now Zebah and Zalmunna were in Karkor, and their hosts with them, about fifteen thousand men, all that were left of all the hosts of the children of the east: for there fell an hundred and twenty thousand men that drew sword.

α.Jdg.8.11 Kah Gideon kuhkuhqueu en ummayéuóut neg apitcheg wetuomehut: wutchepwóiyeu Nobah kah Jogbehah, kah togkomau ayeuteuh, newutche ayeuteaog nanauwayeuog.
E.Jdg.8.11: And Gideon went up by the way of them that dwelt in tents on the east of Nobah and Jogbehah, and smote the host; for the host was secure.

α.Jdg.8.12 Kah Zeba kah Zalmunna wasemohettit, nah wunn8swuttahwhoh, kah tohqunau nesuoh Mideane ketahs8tamwoh, Zeba kah Zalmunna, kah quehquenauánumwéheau wame ayeuhteuh.
E.Jdg.8.12: And when Zebah and Zalmunna fled, he pursued after them, and took the two kings of Midian, Zebah and Zalmunna, and discomfited all the host.

α.Jdg.8.13 Kah Gideon wunnaumonuh Joash, qushkeu wutch ayeuwuttinnat, ash papashpishunkup.
E.Jdg.8.13: And Gideon the son of Joash returned from battle before the sun was up,

α.Jdg.8.14 Kah tohqunnau wuskeneuh wutch Succothe wosketompaog, kah wuñat8tamauoh, kah wutogketamungquoh Succothe sontimuh, kah wuteldersumóuh, nesausuk tahshinchag kah nésausuk tahsuog wosketompaog.
E.Jdg.8.14: And caught a young man of the men of Succoth, and enquired of him: and he described unto him the princes of Succoth, and the elders thereof, even threescore and seventeen men.

α.Jdg.8.15 Kah peyaoneau Succothe wosketompuh, kah n8wau, kusseh, Zebah kah Zalmunnah neg nashpé kehkomeóhpanneg, kussimwop, sun mahche wunutchegash Zebah kah Zalmunna ut kenutchegan8óut, woh nutassamónaoónt kittinneumog neg sauunukeg.
E.Jdg.8.15: And he came unto the men of Succoth, and said, Behold Zebah and Zalmunna, with whom ye did upbraid me, saying, Are the hands of Zebah and Zalmunna now in thine hand, that we should give bread unto thy men that are weary?

α.Jdg.8.16 Kah nemunau eldersoh ne otanat, kah to[u]ohkomukque asinnekôussog, kah kóussog, kah neh wunnashpe kuhk8tomauónuh Succothe wosketompuh.
E.Jdg.8.16: And he took the elders of the city, and thorns of the wilderness and briers, and with them he taught the men of Succoth.

α.Jdg.8.17 Kah n8ketahham Penuelle wonkonous, kah nushau wosketompuh ne otanat.
E.Jdg.8.17: And he beat down the tower of Penuel, and slew the men of the city.

α.Jdg.8.18 Neit unnau Zeba kah Zalmunnah, toh noshketompó8og neg nashuhpanneg ut Tabor? kah namp8hamwog neane ken, ne wuttatuppewinneau, nish$noh pasuk ogqueneunkqusseup wunnaumonat ketass8t.
E.Jdg.8.18: Then said he unto Zebah and Zalmunna, What manner of men were they whom ye slew at Tabor? And they answered, As thou art, so were they; each one resembled the children of a king.

α.Jdg.8.19 Kah n8wau, neg mo neematog, wunnaumonuh nokas, neane Jehovah pomantog, nag pomantamwáheogkus, matta kenushinn8mw8.
E.Jdg.8.19: And he said, They were my brethren, even the sons of my mother: as the LORD liveth, if ye had saved them alive, I would not slay you.

α.Jdg.8.20 Kah unnau Jetheroh mohtommegheoncheh, neepaush kah nag nush, qut wusken matta sohwunnumm8 wuttogkodteg, newutche wabesu, newutche ash wuskenu8.
E.Jdg.8.20: And he said unto Jether his firstborn, Up, and slay them. But the youth drew not his sword: for he feared, because he was yet a youth.

α.Jdg.8.21 Neit Zeba kah Zalmunna n8waog, neepaush ken, kah nuhkuhkiinnean, newutche neanussit wosketomp, nnih ummenuhkesuonk, kah Gideon neepau, kah nushau Zeba kah Zalmunna, kah amaunum 8n8whosuongan8 ut Camelsog wussittuppukkann8óut.
E.Jdg.8.21: Then Zebah and Zalmunna said, Rise thou, and fall upon us: for as the man is, so is his strength. And Gideon arose, and slew Zebah and Zalmunna, and took away the ornaments that were on their camels' necks.

α.Jdg.8.22 Neit Israelle wosketompaog unnaog Gideonoh, nanawinnean, naneeswe ken, kah kenaumon, kah wonk wunnaumonuh kenaumon, newutche kuttómhimun wutch Midian wunnutcheganit. 
E.Jdg.8.22: Then the men of Israel said unto Gideon, Rule thou over us, both thou, and thy son, and thy son's son also: for thou hast delivered us from the hand of Midian.

α.Jdg.8.23 Kah Gideon nah wuttinuh, matta kenánauúnun8mw8, asuh matta pish nunnaumon kenánauánuk8w8: Jehovah pish kenanawunukumw8.
E.Jdg.8.23: And Gideon said unto them, I will not rule over you, neither shall my son rule over you: the LORD shall rule over you.

α.Jdg.8.24 Kah Gideon nah wuttinuh, k8wehquetumauunumw8 kodtantam8onk, woh kittinnuminneáont, nishnoh wosketomp sequttahham8e wussogsohh8unash, (newutche neg ahtoog golde soggussohh8unash, newutche Ishmaelitsu8og.
E.Jdg.8.24: And Gideon said unto them, I would desire a request of you, that ye would give me every man the earrings of his prey. (For they had golden earrings, because they were Ishmaelites.)

α.Jdg.8.25 Kah nag namp8hamwog, n8wekontamwe magunánonash, kah sepakinnumwog hogk8onk, kah nag wuttinnohkoneau nishnoh wosketomp sequttahham8e wussogkussohh8unash)
E.Jdg.8.25: And they answered, We will willingly give them. And they spread a garment, and did cast therein every man the earrings of his prey.

α.Jdg.8.26 Kah nean tuhkequog golde sogguhsohh8unash nish wehquetukish, nequt muttannunk kah nesausuk tahshe pasukqunash golde sheklesash, chaubohkish wunn8whos8ongash, kah kuhkishinneapeash, kah purple hogk8ongash, ut Midiane ketahs8timwut, kah chaubohkish chainsash nish ohtagish camelsog wussittippukan8óut.
E.Jdg.8.26: And the weight of the golden earrings that he requested was a thousand and seven hundred shekels of gold; beside ornaments, and collars, and purple raiment that was on the kings of Midian, and beside the chains that were about their camels' necks.

α.Jdg.8.27 Kah Gideon wutayimunash ephodu8ut, kah uppondamun wut8tanat, ut Oprath, kah wame Israel na au wunnanwund8squaantamunnaóont, ne padhukquit Gideon kah week.
E.Jdg.8.27: And Gideon made an ephod thereof, and put it in his city, even in Ophrah: and all Israel went thither a whoring after it: which thing became a snare unto Gideon, and to his house.

α.Jdg.8.28 Yeu mo Midian en sohkauon anaquabhettit wuñaumonuh Israel, neit matta wonk tahshinnum8og uppuhkuhk8oash, kah ohke mánunohteau, yauunchage kodtumwáe, pamontog Gideon.
E.Jdg.8.28: Thus was Midian subdued before the children of Israel, so that they lifted up their heads no more. And the country was in quietness forty years in the days of Gideon.

α.Jdg.8.29 Kah Jerubbaal wunnaumonuh Joash monchu kah ayeu nehenwonche wekit.
E.Jdg.8.29: And Jerubbaal the son of Joash went and dwelt in his own house.

α.Jdg.8.30 Kah Gideon nesausuk tahshinchagkussuoh wunnaumonuh, sohhamunutcheh wutch wéhquâut, newutche m8chek8kauau.
E.Jdg.8.30: And Gideon had threescore and ten sons of his body begotten: for he had many wives.

α.Jdg.8.31 Kah 8wishquin noh apit Shechim, noh wonk wunnekitteauoh wunnaumonuh, neh as8wenoncheh Abimelek.
E.Jdg.8.31: And his concubine that was in Shechem, she also bare him a son, whose name he called Abimelech.

α.Jdg.8.32 Kah Gideon wunnaumonuh Joash nupp8oh ut wunne kutchisuuneat, kah posekinau 8weenohkemut Joash 8shoh, ut Oprath Abiezritsog.
E.Jdg.8.32: And Gideon the son of Joash died in a good old age, and was buried in the sepulchre of Joash his father, in Ophrah of the Abiezrites.

α.Jdg.8.33 Kah nnih, quenau Gideon nupuk, wunnaumonuh Israel wonk qushkeog, kah nunwun8squaausuog Baalimoh, kah ayeuaog Baal-berith ummanitt8m8uh.
E.Jdg.8.33: And it came to pass, as soon as Gideon was dead, that the children of Israel turned again, and went a whoring after Baalim, and made Baalberith their god.

α.Jdg.8.34 Kah wunnaumonuh Israel matta mehquanumau8og Jehovah umManitt8m8uh, noh tomheomp wutch wunnutchegan8óut wame ummatwom8uh, waeenu.
E.Jdg.8.34: And the children of Israel remembered not the LORD their God, who had delivered them out of the hands of all their enemies on every side:

α.Jdg.8.35 Asuh matta womoausue unnehheo8og wek Jerubbaal, noh Gidion, neaunag wame ne wanegik ne nohtinont Israeloh.
E.Jdg.8.35: Neither shewed they kindness to the house of Jerubbaal, namely, Gideon, according to all the goodness which he had shewed unto Israel.

α.Jdg.9.1 KAh Abimelech wunnaumonuh Jerubbaal au Shechem, en ohkasoh weetompasuut, kah nah ukkeket8hkauoh, kah wame wutteashiyéu8onk ohkasoh 8shoh wekit, n8wau,
E.Jdg.9.1: And Abimelech the son of Jerubbaal went to Shechem unto his mother's brethren, and communed with them, and with all the family of the house of his mother's father, saying,

α.Jdg.9.2 K8wehquetumauunumw8 ken8n8k ut wehtauog8óut wame Shecheme wosketompaog, uttoh anue wunnegen wutch kenaau, wame wunnaumonuh Jerubbaal (nag nesausuk adtahshinchagkussutcheg) nanawunukqueog, asuh pasuk nanawunukqueog? mehquontam8k wonk nen kuskonn8 kah k8weyaus8.
E.Jdg.9.2: Speak, I pray you, in the ears of all the men of Shechem, Whether is better for you, either that all the sons of Jerubbaal, which are threescore and ten persons, reign over you, or that one reign over you? remember also that I am your bone and your flesh.

α.Jdg.9.3 Kah ohkasoh weetompasuh, 8wéadtimóuh ut wéhtauogk8óut wame Shecheme wosketompaog, wame yeush kutt8wongash, kah wuttahh8woash mósogquemoash asuhkauónat Abimelech, newutche n8waog, yeuoh kemattin.
E.Jdg.9.3: And his mother's brethren spake of him in the ears of all the men of Shechem all these words: and their hearts inclined to follow Abimelech; for they said, He is our brother.

α.Jdg.9.4 Kah wuttinnumauuh nesausuk tohshinchagkinneái silver wutch wekit Baal-berith, nish nashpe Abimelech, ann8nont tahn8cheyeue, kah nunkonúnutcheh wosketompuh, neh asukkongqutcheh.
E.Jdg.9.4: And they gave him threescore and ten pieces of silver out of the house of Baalberith, wherewith Abimelech hired vain and light persons, which followed him.

α.Jdg.9.5 Kah au 8shoh wekit ut Oprath, & nushau wematuh wunnaumonuh Jerubbaal, nesausuk tahshinchagkussuoh wosketompuh, ut pasukquinnu qussukquanit: qut o[n]ch Jotham ummuttassonsoh wunnaumonuh Jerubbaal, ushqunneanau, newutche puttogqueu.
E.Jdg.9.5: And he went unto his father's house at Ophrah, and slew his brethren the sons of Jerubbaal, being threescore and ten persons, upon one stone: notwithstanding yet Jotham the youngest son of Jerubbaal was left; for he hid himself.

α.Jdg.9.6 Kah wame Shecheme wosketompaog miyaeuh, kah wame wek Millo, kah moncheog kah Abimelekoh ketass8tamwéheáog, kishke neepattunkquonkane mukoshquttaut ne ohtag Shechem.
E.Jdg.9.6: And all the men of Shechem gathered together, and all the house of Millo, and went, and made Abimelech king, by the plain of the pillar that was in Shechem.

α.Jdg.9.7 Jah nag unnahettit Jothamóh, monchu kah neepau kodtuhkoag wadchuut Gerizim, kah wadtauatonkqussue mishont8wau, kah nah wuttinuh, n8tiek kenaau Shecheme wosketompaog, onk woh God ken8tunkumw8.
E.Jdg.9.7: And when they told it to Jotham, he went and stood in the top of mount Gerizim, and lifted up his voice, and cried, and said unto them, Hearken unto me, ye men of Shechem, that God may hearken unto you.

α.Jdg.9.8 Mehtukquash nukkône áhhunag sohham8m8ash susséqunônat ketass8t nag nanawunukquehetticheh, kah nag uttamwog oliveo[n]tug, nanawunnean.
E.Jdg.9.8: The trees went forth on a time to anoint a king over them; and they said unto the olive tree, Reign thou over us.

α.Jdg.9.9 Qut oliveúhtug nah wuttinuh, sun woh nunnukkodtum n8nogk8onk ne nashpe, nashpe nen, quttiánumog God kah wosketomp, kah woh nanawunum mehtugquash?
E.Jdg.9.9: But the olive tree said unto them, Should I leave my fatness, wherewith by me they honour God and man, and go to be promoted over the trees?

α.Jdg.9.10 Kah mehtugquog uttamwog figsuhtugk, peyaush, nanawinnean.
E.Jdg.9.10: And the trees said to the fig tree, Come thou, and reign over us.

α.Jdg.9.11 Qut figsuhtug nah wuttinuh, sun woh nunnukodtum n8weekinn8onk, kah n8nummeechummuonk, kah woh nanawunumunat mehtugquash?
E.Jdg.9.11: But the fig tree said unto them, Should I forsake my sweetness, and my good fruit, and go to be promoted over the trees?

α.Jdg.9.12 Neit mehtugquog uttamwog weenomisippog, peyaush ken kah nanawinne[a]n.
E.Jdg.9.12: Then said the trees unto the vine, Come thou, and reign over us.

α.Jdg.9.13 Kah weenomesippog nah wuttinuh, sun woh nunnukkodtum n8wineum ne wekontamwáhukquit God kah wosketomp, & woh nanawunnumunat mehtugquash?
E.Jdg.9.13: And the vine said unto them, Should I leave my wine, which cheereth God and man, and go to be promoted over the trees?

α.Jdg.9.14 Neit wame mehtugquog unnaog kôussoh, peyaush ken, nanawinnean.
E.Jdg.9.14: Then said all the trees unto the bramble, Come thou, and reign over us.

α.Jdg.9.15 Kah kôus unnau mehtukquoh, wunnamuhkut sussequnéog nukketass8tam8uneat, neit peyonk, paubuhtantam8k nuto[n]kouohtom, kah mtta [nn]an8g, n8tau sohham8m8utch wutch koussit, kah mahchekuswonch Lebanóne chikkupoh.
E.Jdg.9.15: And the bramble said unto the trees, If in truth ye anoint me king over you, then come and put your trust in my shadow: and if not, let fire come out of the bramble, and devour the cedars of Lebanon.

α.Jdg.9.16 N[e]wutche yeuyeu, wunnamuhkuteyeue usseoóg kah pahketeaháe, ne kukketass8tamuhkoneau Abimelek, kah wunnenéheog Jerubbaal, kah wek, kah unnehheog neantummuhh8wom8uk wunnutchegash.
E.Jdg.9.16: Now therefore, if ye have done truly and sincerely, in that ye have made Abimelech king, and if ye have dealt well with Jerubbaal and his house, and have done unto him according to the deserving of his hands;

α.Jdg.9.17 (newutche n8sh kutayeuwehteaunshikumwop kah m8chekit pokkodtantamup uppomantamoonk, kah kuttomhikkouwop wutch wunnutcheganit Midian.
E.Jdg.9.17: (For my father fought for you, and adventured his life far, and delivered you out of the hand of Midian:

α.Jdg.9.18 Kah kenaau kutayeuwekonittue waabehtamumw8 yeu keskok n8sh wek, kah kenushomw8 wunnaumonuh nesausuk tahshinchagkodtog wosketompaog ut pasukquinnu qussukquanit, kah Abimelek wunnaumonuh mittamwossisse wuttinneumoh, kukketass8tamwehéau ut Shechem, newutche noh kemattou.)
E.Jdg.9.18: And ye are risen up against my father's house this day, and have slain his sons, threescore and ten persons, upon one stone, and have made Abimelech, the son of his maidservant, king over the men of Shechem, because he is your brother;)

α.Jdg.9.19 Neit wunnamuhkutee kah pahke unneheog Jerubbaal, kah wek, yeu kesukók, wekontam8k ut Abimelekanit, kah noh wonk weekontam8onuk8k.
E.Jdg.9.19: If ye then have dealt truly and sincerely with Jerubbaal and with his house this day, then rejoice ye in Abimelech, and let him also rejoice in you:

α.Jdg.9.20 Qut matta n[a]n8g, n8tau sohham8m8utch wutch Abimelekut, & mohchukuswonch Shecheme wosketompuh, kah wek Millo: kah n8tau wutch sohham8m8utch Shecheme wosketompaut, kah wutch wekit Milló, kah mahchikuswonch Abimelechoh.
E.Jdg.9.20: But if not, let fire come out from Abimelech, and devour the men of Shechem, and the house of Millo; and let fire come out from the men of Shechem, and from the house of Millo, and devour Abimelech.

α.Jdg.9.21 Kah Jothan quogquee wusseemo, kah monchu en Beer, kah ná wutayin wutch ukqushaonk Abimelechoh wematoh.
E.Jdg.9.21: And Jotham ran away, and fled, and went to Beer, and dwelt there, for fear of Abimelech his brother.

α.Jdg.9.22 Abimelech nanawunont nishwe kodtumwae ut Israel.
E.Jdg.9.22: When Abimelech had reigned three years over Israel,

α.Jdg.9.23 Neit God ann8nau matche nashauónguh nashaue Abimelech kah wosketompaog Shechem, kah Shecheme wosketompaog wutass8kekomwe unneheouh Abimelechoh.
E.Jdg.9.23: Then God sent an evil spirit between Abimelech and the men of Shechem; and the men of Shechem dealt treacherously with Abimelech:

α.Jdg.9.24 Onk ne unkquanum8e usseonk, neanheahettit nesausuk tahshinchage kussuoh wunnaumonuh Jerubbaal woh peyaum8, kah 8sqheongan8 woh ponamauon Abimelech, weematt8uh noh nah noshont, kah ut Shechemae wosketompaog, neh manuhquehukqutcheh wunnushonat wematoh.
E.Jdg.9.24: That the cruelty done to the threescore and ten sons of Jerubbaal might come, and their blood be laid upon Abimelech their brother, which slew them; and upon the men of Shechem, which aided him in the killing of his brethren.

α.Jdg.9.25 Kah Shecheme, wosketompaog wunnashaog askuhwheteaenuh wutch noh, ut kodukkoag wadchuuhkontu: kah nah ummukk8ki[n]ouh, wáme neh noh kishke paumushanutcheh: kah unnon Abimelech.
E.Jdg.9.25: And the men of Shechem set liers in wait for him in the top of the mountains, and they robbed all that came along that way by them: and it was told Abimelech.

α.Jdg.9.26 Kah Gaal wunnaumonuh Ebed, peyau weeche wematuh, kah qushkodteau en Shechem; kah shechem wosketompaog uppaubatan[u]mouh.
E.Jdg.9.26: And Gaal the son of Ebed came with his brethren, and went over to Shechem: and the men of Shechem put their confidence in him.

α.Jdg.9.27 Kah nag sohhamwog en ohteakonit, kah moinneantamwog 8weenominneohtekon8oash, kah tattashkukkomwog weenominneash[,] kah weekontamwog, kah petutteaog weekit ummanitt8m8uh, kah meetsuog kah wuttáttamwog, kah mattanumaog Abimelechoh.
E.Jdg.9.27: And they went out into the fields, and gathered their vineyards, and trode the grapes, and made merry, and went into the house of their god, and did eat and drink, and cursed Abimelech.

α.Jdg.9.28 Kah Gâal wunnaumonuh Ebed n8wau hówan Abimelech, & howan Sechem, noh woh wodtinneumuhkauogkut: sunnummat neh wunnaumonuh Jerubbaal, kah Zebul wutannohsueneumoh: wuttinneumuhkok Hamore wosketompaog 8shoh Shechem newutche tohwutch woh noh wuttinneumohkauogkut; 
E.Jdg.9.28: And Gaal the son of Ebed said, Who is Abimelech, and who is Shechem, that we should serve him? is not he the son of Jerubbaal? and Zebul his officer? serve the men of Hamor the father of Shechem: for why should we serve him?

α.Jdg.9.29 Kah napehnont yeug missinninnuog agwappehettit nunnutcheganit, neit woh nutóntash Abimeléch: kah unnau Abimelechoh, mian kutayeuwehteomog, kah sohhash.
E.Jdg.9.29: And would to God this people were under my hand! then would I remove Abimelech. And he said to Abimelech, Increase thine army, and come out.

α.Jdg.9.30 Kah Zebul keitotanae nananuwaen, n8tog ukkutt8wongash Gaal, wunnaumonuh Ebed, ummusquantam8onk nashqunneau.
E.Jdg.9.30: And when Zebul the ruler of the city heard the words of Gaal the son of Ebed, his anger was kindled.

α.Jdg.9.31 Kah keme ann8nau ann8naenuh en Abimelechanit, n8wau, kusseh Gaal wunnaumonuh Ebed, kah weematoh, peyaog Sechem, kah kusseh, menehketeáuog keitotan ayeuuhkone ken.
E.Jdg.9.31: And he sent messengers unto Abimelech privily, saying, Behold, Gaal the son of Ebed and his brethren be come to Shechem; and, behold, they fortify the city against thee.

α.Jdg.9.32 Kah newutche nukonae neepaush, ken kah missinninnuog neg wetomukqueaneg, kah uskuhwheteash, ut ohteuhkonit.
E.Jdg.9.32: Now therefore up by night, thou and the people that is with thee, and lie in wait in the field:

α.Jdg.9.33 Kah pish n$nih, mohtompog quenau pashpishont, pish kenompoae waabim, kah que[n]tash keitotan: kah kusseh, nagum kah missinninnuh neh weechayéumukqutcheh, ayeuuhkone sohwehtunkquean, neit nag kittinheoneau, nean tapeneaman.
E.Jdg.9.33: And it shall be, that in the morning, as soon as the sun is up, thou shalt rise early, and set upon the city: and, behold, when he and the people that is with him come out against thee, then mayest thou do to them as thou shalt find occasion.

α.Jdg.9.34 Káh Abimelech omohku, kah wame missinninnuh neh weetomukqutcheh[,] nukonaeu, kah ayeuuhkonittue askuhwhekontamwog Sechem, yaue chippe.
E.Jdg.9.34: And Abimelech rose up, and all the people that were with him, by night, and they laid wait against Shechem in four companies.

α.Jdg.9.35 Kah Gaal wunnaumonuh Ebed, sohham kah neepau ahhut petutteamuk otanáe squontamut, kah Abimelech neepau, kah missinninnuh neh weetomukqutcheh, wutch askuhwhekonat.
E.Jdg.9.35: And Gaal the son of Ebed went out, and stood in the entering of the gate of the city: and Abimelech rose up, and the people that were with him, from lying in wait.

α.Jdg.9.36 Kah Gaal nauont missinninnuh, unnau Zebuloh, kusseh, missinninnuog w8msuog wutch wadchuuhkontu: kah Zebull wuttinuh kenaum wutonkauohtom8ash wadchuog onatuh wosketompaut.
E.Jdg.9.36: And when Gaal saw the people, he said to Zebul, Behold, there come people down from the top of the mountains. And Zebul said unto him, Thou seest the shadow of the mountains as if they were men.

α.Jdg.9.37 Kah Gaal wonk kutt8 kah n8wau, kuhkinneash, missinninnuog w8msuog ut nôeu ohteakonit, kah onkatogig chipwushaonk 8mwog mukoshquttaut Meonenim.
E.Jdg.9.37: And Gaal spake again, and said, See there come people down by the middle of the land, and another company come along by the plain of Meonenim.

α.Jdg.9.38 Neit Zebul wuttinuh, yeuyeu uttiy[e]u kutt8n an8wo[m]8ukup, howan Abimelech, noh woh wutiñiñeumuhkauogkut: sun yeug matta missinninnuog neg Jishanumoncheg? sohhash yeuyeu k8wehquetumoush, kah ayeuhkos.
E.Jdg.9.38: Then said Zebul unto him, Where is now thy mouth, wherewith thou saidst, Who is Abimelech, that we should serve him? is not this the people that thou hast despised? go out, I pray now, and fight with them.

α.Jdg.9.39 Kah Gaal sohham anaquabhettit wosketomp[a]og Shechem, kah ayeuuhkonau Abimelechoh.
E.Jdg.9.39: And Gaal went out before the men of Shechem, and fought with Abimelech.

α.Jdg.9.40 Kah Abimilech wutomskauoh, kah wusseemo ut anaqu[á]benit, kah monaog kepuhteámukeg, kah n8chumwehtáhhutcheg, wéhque ahhut petutteamuk squontamut.
E.Jdg.9.40: And Abimelech chased him, and he fled before him, and many were overthrown and wounded, even unto the entering of the gate.

α.Jdg.9.41 Kah Abimilech ayeup Arumah: kah Zebul sohwhôteau [G]aaloh, kah weematoh, matta woh 8tohkenaout Shechem.
E.Jdg.9.41: And Abimelech dwelt at Arumah: and Zebul thrust out Gaal and his brethren, that they should not dwell in Shechem.

α.Jdg.9.42 Kah nnih, nompohké88k, missinninúog sohhamwog en ohteakonit, kah unnon Abimelech.
E.Jdg.9.42: And it came to pass on the morrow, that the people went out into the field; and they told Abimelech.

α.Jdg.9.43 Kah neemunau missinninnúh, wunnishwe chippunuh, k[a]h askuhwheteau ut ohteakonit, kah natauwompu, kah kusseh missinninnùog sohhamwog wutch otanat, kah nah wutayeuuhkonittue waabehtauoh, kah wuttogkomuh.
E.Jdg.9.43: And he took the people, and divided them into three companies, and laid wait in the field, and looked, and, behold, the people were come forth out of the city; and he rose up against them, and smote them.

α.Jdg.9.44 Kah Abimilech, káh chipwushaonk neh weetomukqut, kutchit[óû]sháog, kah neepoog ahhut petutteamuk otanáe squontamut, kah onkatogig neese chippanugeg, ukquogquée quéentáuóuh wame [m]issinninnu[ô]g neg apitcheg ohteakonit, kah nah wunnushóuh.
E.Jdg.9.44: And Abimelech, and the company that was with him, rushed forward, and stood in the entering of the gate of the city: and the two other companies ran upon all the people that were in the fields, and slew them.

α.Jdg.9.45 Kah Abimilech ayeuuhkontam otan nehteag ne kesukok, kah sohkam otan, kah nushau missinninnúh neh nô ápinitcheh, kah n8ketahham otan, kah wusséaúhkon salt,
E.Jdg.9.45: And Abimelech fought against the city all that day; and he took the city, and slew the people that was therein, and beat down the city, and sowed it with salt.

α.Jdg.9.46 Kah wame wosketompaog neg apitcheg Shecheme wónkon8sinut, n8tamwéhettit: neg petutteaog wonkon8sinut ut weekit Manittoe Berith.
E.Jdg.9.46: And when all the men of the tower of Shechem heard that, they entered into an hold of the house of the god Berith.

α.Jdg.9.47 Káh unnon Abimilech, wame Shecheme wonkon8sináe wosketompaog miayéog.
E.Jdg.9.47: And it was told Abimelech, that all the men of the tower of Shechem were gathered together.

α.Jdg.9.48 Kah Abimilech ukkuhkuhk8unoh Zalmone wadchuut, nagum kah wame missinninnúh weecheógqutcheh; kah Abimilech n[e]emunum togkunk ut wunnutcheganit, kah t[u]mehtham wuhtuk wutch mehtugqut, kah wunneemunnum[u]n, kah upponamun wutugkit kah unnau missinninnuh nah weechayeumukqutcheh, uttoh an náyeóg nutussen, kenuppe ussek.
E.Jdg.9.48: And Abimelech gat him up to mount Zalmon, he and all the people that were with him; and Abimelech took an axe in his hand, and cut down a bough from the trees, and took it, and laid it on his shoulder, and said unto the people that were with him, What ye have seen me do, make haste, and do as I have done.

α.Jdg.9.49 Kah wame missinninnúog wonk nish$noh tummetham wudtuk, kah asuhkauáog Abimelech, kah nish upponamunáoash wonkon8sinut, kah nish wunnashpe chikohsu8neau ut wonkan8sinut: neit wame wosketompaog ut Shecheme wonkón8sinnut, wonk nupp8og, papaume nequt muttannonganog kussuog wosketompaog kah mittamwussissog.
E.Jdg.9.49: And all the people likewise cut down every man his bough, and followed Abimelech, and put them to the hold, and set the hold on fire upon them; so that all the men of the tower of Shechem died also, about a thousand men and women.

α.Jdg.9.50 Neit Abimelech au Thebez, ayeuuhkonittue tuppuksin8óntam Thebez, kah wussohkomun.
E.Jdg.9.50: Then went Abimelech to Thebez, and encamped against Thebez, and took it.

α.Jdg.9.51 Qut na mo menuhki wonkon8s anomu keitotanat, kah na wutusph8óneau wame wosketompaog kah mittamwossisog[,] kah wame neg apitcheg otanat, kah ukkuppahwhôh, kah kuhkuhquéog woskeche wonkon8sinut.
E.Jdg.9.51: But there was a strong tower within the city, and thither fled all the men and women, and all they of the city, and shut it to them, and gat them up to the top of the tower.

α.Jdg.9.52 Kah Abimelech peyau wonkon8sinut, káh wutáyeuuhkontamun, kah an kishke wonkon8sinne squont, chikohsumunat nashpe n8táu.
E.Jdg.9.52: And Abimelech came unto the tower, and fought against it, and went hard unto the door of the tower to burn it with fire.

α.Jdg.9.53 Kah howáe mittumwossis penuhteau togguhwhonganompk kodchuhki ut uppuhkukqut Abimelech, kah sohquttahhamun woskonontup.
E.Jdg.9.53: And a certain woman cast a piece of a millstone upon Abimelech's head, and all to brake his skull.

α.Jdg.9.54 Káh kenuppe wehkomau wuskenuh konumunutcheh wutauwohteaongásh, kah wuttinuh, kodta[n]ush kuttogkodteg, kah nusheh, kah wosketompaog matta wuttinnowonaóont, mittamwussis wunnushoh: kah 8skeneumoh uppannuppehtohoukquoh, kah nupp8.
E.Jdg.9.54: Then he called hastily unto the young man his armourbearer, and said unto him, Draw thy sword, and slay me, that men say not of me, A women slew him. And his young man thrust him through, and he died.

α.Jdg.9.55 Kah wosketompaog Israel, nauahettit Abimelech nupp8i, amaeog nish$noh ut wutayeuonganit.
E.Jdg.9.55: And when the men of Israel saw that Abimelech was dead, they departed every man unto his place.

α.Jdg.9.56 Yeu God wuttinonkquttauon wutch ummatcheseonk Abimelech, ne anheop 8shoh, wunnushonat nesausuk tahshinchage weematoh.
E.Jdg.9.56: Thus God rendered the wickedness of Abimelech, which he did unto his father, in slaying his seventy brethren:

α.Jdg.9.57 Kah wame ummatcheseongan8 wosketompaog Shechem, God wutonkquttauoh ut uppuhkukk8out: kah ummattanummuaonk Jotham wunnaumonuh J[é]rubbaal nag wunuhkukkongquneau.
E.Jdg.9.57: And all the evil of the men of Shechem did God render upon their heads: and upon them came the curse of Jotham the son of Jerubbaal.

α.Jdg.10.1 KAh mahche Abimelech, Tolah wunnaumonuh Puah, wunnaumonuh Dodo, Issacharé wosketomp neepau wadchanonat Isreel, kah ayeu Shamir ut Ephraime wadchuut.
E.Jdg.10.1: And after Abimelech there arose to defend Israel Tola the son of Puah, the son of Dodo, a man of Issachar; and he dwelt in Shamir in mount Ephraim.

α.Jdg.10.2 Kah wussumau Israeloh neesneechage kodtumwae, kah nishwe, kah nupp8, ka[d] posekinop Shamir.
E.Jdg.10.2: And he judged Israel twenty and three years, and died, and was buried in Shamir.

α.Jdg.10.3 Kah nahohtoeu nagum, Jair uk-Giléadit, wussumau Israelloh neesneechage kah neese kodtumwae.
E.Jdg.10.3: And after him arose Jair, a Gileadite, and judged Israel twenty and two years.

α.Jdg.10.4 Kah nishwinchage kussuoh wunnaumonuh, neg na8mukqutcheg nishwinchagkodoh assemesoh, kah nag ahtoog shwinchagkodtash keitotanash, nish ahettamugish Havoth$Jair pajeh yeu kesukok, nish ohtagish ohkit Gilead.
E.Jdg.10.4: And he had thirty sons that rode on thirty ass colts, and they had thirty cities, which are called Havothjair unto this day, which are in the land of Gilead.

α.Jdg.10.5 Kah Jair nupp8, kah posekinau Camon.
E.Jdg.10.5: And Jair died, and was buried in Camon.

α.Jdg.10.6 Kah wonk wunnaumonuh Israel matcheseóg ut anaquabit Jehovah, kah wóussumaog Baalim kah Ashteroth kah Siriae manitt8h, kah Zidone manitt8h, kah Moabe manitt8h, kah ummanitt8moh wunnaumonuh Ammon, kah Philistianse manittoh, kah nag ahquânumáog Jehovah, kah mattá 8wôwussumóuh.
E.Jdg.10.6: And the children of Israel did evil again in the sight of the LORD, and served Baalim, and Ashtaroth, and the gods of Syria, and the gods of Zidon, and the gods of Moab, and the gods of the children of Ammon, and the gods of the Philistines, and forsook the LORD, and served not him.

α.Jdg.10.7 Kah ummusquantam8onk Jehovah ayeuuhkonittue kussopeteau ut Israelut, kah nah ummagunuh ut wunnutchegan8óut Philistiansog, kah ut wunnutchegan8óut wunnaumonuh Ammon.
E.Jdg.10.7: And the anger of the LORD was hot against Israel, and he sold them into the hands of the Philistines, and into the hands of the children of Ammon.

α.Jdg.10.8 K[á]h ne kodtumuk, m8m8sqhéoog kah sunnukuhwhóog wunnaumonuh Israel, nabò shwosuk tahshe kodtumwae, wame wun[u]aumonuh Israel, neg ogkomut Jordane, wutohtuout Ammoritsog, ne Gilead.
E.Jdg.10.8: And that year they vexed and oppressed the children of Israel: eighteen years, all the children of Israel that were on the other side Jordan in the land of the Amorites, which is in Gilead.

α.Jdg.10.9 Kah wonk, wunnaumonuh Ammon qushkodteáuh Jord[a]n, ayeuuhkonónat wonk Judah, kah Benjamin, kah ayeuuhkonittue wek Ephraim, newaj Israel onkquomome sunukkuhwhut.
E.Jdg.10.9: Moreover the children of Ammon passed over Jordan to fight also against Judah, and against Benjamin, and against the house of Ephraim; so that Israel was sore distressed.

α.Jdg.10.10 Kah wunnaumonuh Israel mauunitteauaog Jehóvah, n8waog, kummatchenehenumun, newutche naneeswe nutóhquanumomun num-Manitt8mun, kah wonk n8wowussumomun Baalim.
E.Jdg.10.10: And the children of Israel cried unto the LORD, saying, We have sinned against thee, both because we have forsaken our God, and also served Baalim.

α.Jdg.10.11 Kah Jehovah unnau wunnaumonuh Israel, sunnum$matta kuttomhenn8mwous wutch Egyptiansut, kah wutch Amoritsut, wutch wunnaumonuh Ammon, kah wutch Philistiansut.
E.Jdg.10.11: And the LORD said unto the children of Israel, Did not I deliver you from the Egyptians, and from the Amorites, from the children of Ammon, and from the Philistines?

α.Jdg.10.12 Zidoniansog wonk, kah Amalekitsog, kah Maonitsog, kussunukkuhhuk8opanneg, kah kummauunnittiimwop, kah kuttomwehennumwop wutch wunnutchegan8out.
E.Jdg.10.12: The Zidonians also, and the Amalekites, and the Maonites, did oppress you; and ye cried to me, and I delivered you out of their hand.

α.Jdg.10.13 Qut onch, kutohquanumimw8, kah k8wowussumomw8 onkatogig manitt8og, newaj matta wonk kuttomhénnomw8.
E.Jdg.10.13: Yet ye have forsaken me, and served other gods: wherefore I will deliver you no more.

α.Jdg.10.14 Monchek, kah mauunnitteok manitt8og neg pepenauogig, nag pohquohwhunuk8k, ut k8tame[h]punnaongan8out.
E.Jdg.10.14: Go and cry unto the gods which ye have chosen; let them deliver you in the time of your tribulation.

α.Jdg.10.15 Kah wunnaumonuh Israel unnaog Jehovah, nummatchesemun, unnehinan uttoh an tapeneaman, webe tomohinnean, k8wehquetumauunnumun yeu kesukok,
E.Jdg.10.15: And the children of Israel said unto the LORD, We have sinned: do thou unto us whatsoever seemeth good unto thee; deliver us only, we pray thee, this day.

α.Jdg.10.16 Kah nag amaunog penoe Manitt8h wutch nag kenugke, kah w[á]ussumaog Lord, kah ukketeahogkounoh neuantam wutch wutonkquomom8ongash Israel.
E.Jdg.10.16: And they put away the strange gods from among them, and served the LORD: and his soul was grieved for the misery of Israel.

α.Jdg.10.17 Neit wunnáumonuh Ammon miayéoh, kah tuppuksinwog ut Gilead: kah wunnaumonuh Israel moae moeoh, kah tuppuksinwog Mizpeh.
E.Jdg.10.17: Then the children of Ammon were gathered together, and encamped in Gilead. And the children of Israel assembled themselves together, and encamped in Mizpeh.

α.Jdg.10.18 Kah Gileade missinninnuog kah Sontimóog hettuog, howan noh negonnae ayeuuhkonont wunnaumonuh Ammon? noh pish upkuhkukk8uh wame wadohkitcheg Gilead.
E.Jdg.10.18: And the people and princes of Gilead said one to another, What man is he that will begin to fight against the children of Ammon? he shall be head over all the inhabitants of Gilead.

α.Jdg.11.1 
E.Jdg.11.1: Now Jephthah the Gileadite was a mighty man of valour, and he was the son of an harlot: and Gilead begat Jephthah.

α.Jdg.11.2 
E.Jdg.11.2: And Gilead's wife bare him sons; and his wife's sons grew up, and they thrust out Jephthah, and said unto him, Thou shalt not inherit in our father's house; for thou art the son of a strange woman.

α.Jdg.11.3 
E.Jdg.11.3: Then Jephthah fled from his brethren, and dwelt in the land of Tob: and there were gathered vain men to Jephthah, and went out with him.

α.Jdg.11.4 
E.Jdg.11.4: And it came to pass in process of time, that the children of Ammon made war against Israel.

α.Jdg.11.5 
E.Jdg.11.5: And it was so, that when the children of Ammon made war against Israel, the elders of Gilead went to fetch Jephthah out of the land of Tob:

α.Jdg.11.6 
E.Jdg.11.6: And they said unto Jephthah, Come, and be our captain, that we may fight with the children of Ammon.

α.Jdg.11.7 
E.Jdg.11.7: And Jephthah said unto the elders of Gilead, Did not ye hate me, and expel me out of my father's house? and why are ye come unto me now when ye are in distress?

α.Jdg.11.8 
E.Jdg.11.8: And the elders of Gilead said unto Jephthah, Therefore we turn again to thee now, that thou mayest go with us, and fight against the children of Ammon, and be our head over all the inhabitants of Gilead.

α.Jdg.11.9 
E.Jdg.11.9: And Jephthah said unto the elders of Gilead, If ye bring me home again to fight against the children of Ammon, and the LORD deliver them before me, shall I be your head?

α.Jdg.11.10 
E.Jdg.11.10: And the elders of Gilead said unto Jephthah, The LORD be witness between us, if we do not so according to thy words.

α.Jdg.11.11 
E.Jdg.11.11: Then Jephthah went with the elders of Gilead, and the people made him head and captain over them: and Jephthah uttered all his words before the LORD in Mizpeh.

α.Jdg.11.12 
E.Jdg.11.12: And Jephthah sent messengers unto the king of the children of Ammon, saying, What hast thou to do with me, that thou art come against me to fight in my land?

α.Jdg.11.13 
E.Jdg.11.13: And the king of the children of Ammon answered unto the messengers of Jephthah, Because Israel took away my land, when they came up out of Egypt, from Arnon even unto Jabbok, and unto Jordan: now therefore restore those lands again peaceably.

α.Jdg.11.14 
E.Jdg.11.14: And Jephthah sent messengers again unto the king of the children of Ammon:

α.Jdg.11.15 
E.Jdg.11.15: And said unto him, Thus saith Jephthah, Israel took not away the land of Moab, nor the land of the children of Ammon:

α.Jdg.11.16 
E.Jdg.11.16: But when Israel came up from Egypt, and walked through the wilderness unto the Red sea, and came to Kadesh;

α.Jdg.11.17 
E.Jdg.11.17: Then Israel sent messengers unto the king of Edom, saying, Let me, I pray thee, pass through thy land: but the king of Edom would not hearken thereto. And in like manner they sent unto the king of Moab: but he would not consent: and Israel abode in Kadesh.

α.Jdg.11.18 
E.Jdg.11.18: Then they went along through the wilderness, and compassed the land of Edom, and the land of Moab, and came by the east side of the land of Moab, and pitched on the other side of Arnon, but came not within the border of Moab: for Arnon was the border of Moab.

α.Jdg.11.19 
E.Jdg.11.19: And Israel sent messengers unto Sihon king of the Amorites, the king of Heshbon; and Israel said unto him, Let us pass, we pray thee, through thy land into my place.

α.Jdg.11.20 
E.Jdg.11.20: But Sihon trusted not Israel to pass through his coast: but Sihon gathered all his people together, and pitched in Jahaz, and fought against Israel.

α.Jdg.11.21 
E.Jdg.11.21: And the LORD God of Israel delivered Sihon and all his people into the hand of Israel, and they smote them: so Israel possessed all the land of the Amorites, the inhabitants of that country.

α.Jdg.11.22 
E.Jdg.11.22: And they possessed all the coasts of the Amorites, from Arnon even unto Jabbok, and from the wilderness even unto Jordan.

α.Jdg.11.23 
E.Jdg.11.23: So now the LORD God of Israel hath dispossessed the Amorites from before his people Israel, and shouldest thou possess it?

α.Jdg.11.24 
E.Jdg.11.24: Wilt not thou possess that which Chemosh thy god giveth thee to possess? So whomsoever the LORD our God shall drive out from before us, them will we possess.

α.Jdg.11.25 
E.Jdg.11.25: And now art thou any thing better than Balak the son of Zippor, king of Moab? did he ever strive against Israel, or did he ever fight against them,

α.Jdg.11.26 
E.Jdg.11.26: While Israel dwelt in Heshbon and her towns, and in Aroer and her towns, and in all the cities that be along by the coasts of Arnon, three hundred years? why therefore did ye not recover them within that time?

α.Jdg.11.27 
E.Jdg.11.27: Wherefore I have not sinned against thee, but thou doest me wrong to war against me: the LORD the Judge be judge this day between the children of Israel and the children of Ammon.

α.Jdg.11.28 
E.Jdg.11.28: Howbeit the king of the children of Ammon hearkened not unto the words of Jephthah which he sent him.

α.Jdg.11.29 
E.Jdg.11.29: Then the Spirit of the LORD came upon Jephthah, and he passed over Gilead, and Manasseh, and passed over Mizpeh of Gilead, and from Mizpeh of Gilead he passed over unto the children of Ammon.

α.Jdg.11.30 
E.Jdg.11.30: And Jephthah vowed a vow unto the LORD, and said, If thou shalt without fail deliver the children of Ammon into mine hands,

α.Jdg.11.31 
E.Jdg.11.31: Then it shall be, that whatsoever cometh forth of the doors of my house to meet me, when I return in peace from the children of Ammon, shall surely be the LORD's, and I will offer it up for a burnt offering.

α.Jdg.11.32 
E.Jdg.11.32: So Jephthah passed over unto the children of Ammon to fight against them; and the LORD delivered them into his hands.

α.Jdg.11.33 
E.Jdg.11.33: And he smote them from Aroer, even till thou come to Minnith, even twenty cities, and unto the plain of the vineyards, with a very great slaughter. Thus the children of Ammon were subdued before the children of Israel.

α.Jdg.11.34 
E.Jdg.11.34: And Jephthah came to Mizpeh unto his house, and, behold, his daughter came out to meet him with timbrels and with dances: and she was his only child; beside her he had neither son nor daughter.

α.Jdg.11.35 
E.Jdg.11.35: And it came to pass, when he saw her, that he rent his clothes, and said, Alas, my daughter! thou hast brought me very low, and thou art one of them that trouble me: for I have opened my mouth unto the LORD, and I cannot go back.

α.Jdg.11.36 
E.Jdg.11.36: And she said unto him, My father, if thou hast opened thy mouth unto the LORD, do to me according to that which hath proceeded out of thy mouth; forasmuch as the LORD hath taken vengeance for thee of thine enemies, even of the children of Ammon.

α.Jdg.11.37 
E.Jdg.11.37: And she said unto her father, Let this thing be done for me: let me alone two months, that I may go up and down upon the mountains, and bewail my virginity, I and my fellows.

α.Jdg.11.38 
E.Jdg.11.38: And he said, Go. And he sent her away for two months: and she went with her companions, and bewailed her virginity upon the mountains.

α.Jdg.11.39 
E.Jdg.11.39: And it came to pass at the end of two months, that she returned unto her father, who did with her according to his vow which he had vowed: and she knew no man. And it was a custom in Israel,

α.Jdg.11.40 
E.Jdg.11.40: That the daughters of Israel went yearly to lament the daughter of Jephthah the Gileadite four days in a year.

α.Jdg.12.1 
E.Jdg.12.1: And the men of Ephraim gathered themselves together, and went northward, and said unto Jephthah, Wherefore passedst thou over to fight against the children of Ammon, and didst not call us to go with thee? we will burn thine house upon thee with fire.

α.Jdg.12.2 
E.Jdg.12.2: And Jephthah said unto them, I and my people were at great strife with the children of Ammon; and when I called you, ye delivered me not out of their hands.

α.Jdg.12.3 
E.Jdg.12.3: And when I saw that ye delivered me not, I put my life in my hands, and passed over against the children of Ammon, and the LORD delivered them into my hand: wherefore then are ye come up unto me this day, to fight against me?

α.Jdg.12.4 
E.Jdg.12.4: Then Jephthah gathered together all the men of Gilead, and fought with Ephraim: and the men of Gilead smote Ephraim, because they said, Ye Gileadites are fugitives of Ephraim among the Ephraimites, and among the Manassites.

α.Jdg.12.5 
E.Jdg.12.5: And the Gileadites took the passages of Jordan before the Ephraimites: and it was so, that when those Ephraimites which were escaped said, Let me go over; that the men of Gilead said unto him, Art thou an Ephraimite? If he said, Nay;

α.Jdg.12.6 
E.Jdg.12.6: Then said they unto him, Say now Shibboleth: and he said Sibboleth: for he could not frame to pronounce it right. Then they took him, and slew him at the passages of Jordan: and there fell at that time of the Ephraimites forty and two thousand.

α.Jdg.12.7 
E.Jdg.12.7: And Jephthah judged Israel six years. Then died Jephthah the Gileadite, and was buried in one of the cities of Gilead.

α.Jdg.12.8 
E.Jdg.12.8: And after him Ibzan of Bethlehem judged Israel.

α.Jdg.12.9 
E.Jdg.12.9: And he had thirty sons, and thirty daughters, whom he sent abroad, and took in thirty daughters from abroad for his sons. And he judged Israel seven years.

α.Jdg.12.10 
E.Jdg.12.10: Then died Ibzan, and was buried at Bethlehem.

α.Jdg.12.11 
E.Jdg.12.11: And after him Elon, a Zebulonite, judged Israel; and he judged Israel ten years.

α.Jdg.12.12 
E.Jdg.12.12: And Elon the Zebulonite died, and was buried in Aijalon in the country of Zebulun.

α.Jdg.12.13 
E.Jdg.12.13: And after him Abdon the son of Hillel, a Pirathonite, judged Israel.

α.Jdg.12.14 
E.Jdg.12.14: And he had forty sons and thirty nephews, that rode on threescore and ten ass colts: and he judged Israel eight years.

α.Jdg.12.15 
E.Jdg.12.15: And Abdon the son of Hillel the Pirathonite died, and was buried in Pirathon in the land of Ephraim, in the mount of the Amalekites.

α.Jdg.13.1 
E.Jdg.13.1: And the children of Israel did evil again in the sight of the LORD; and the LORD delivered them into the hand of the Philistines forty years.

α.Jdg.13.2 
E.Jdg.13.2: And there was a certain man of Zorah, of the family of the Danites, whose name was Manoah; and his wife was barren, and bare not.

α.Jdg.13.3 
E.Jdg.13.3: And the angel of the LORD appeared unto the woman, and said unto her, Behold now, thou art barren, and bearest not: but thou shalt conceive, and bear a son.

α.Jdg.13.4 
E.Jdg.13.4: Now therefore beware, I pray thee, and drink not wine nor strong drink, and eat not any unclean thing:

α.Jdg.13.5 
E.Jdg.13.5: For, lo, thou shalt conceive, and bear a son; and no razor shall come on his head: for the child shall be a Nazarite unto God from the womb: and he shall begin to deliver Israel out of the hand of the Philistines.

α.Jdg.13.6 
E.Jdg.13.6: Then the woman came and told her husband, saying, A man of God came unto me, and his countenance was like the countenance of an angel of God, very terrible: but I asked him not whence he was, neither told he me his name:

α.Jdg.13.7 
E.Jdg.13.7: But he said unto me, Behold, thou shalt conceive, and bear a son; and now drink no wine nor strong drink, neither eat any unclean thing: for the child shall be a Nazarite to God from the womb to the day of his death.

α.Jdg.13.8 
E.Jdg.13.8: Then Manoah intreated the LORD, and said, O my Lord, let the man of God which thou didst send come again unto us, and teach us what we shall do unto the child that shall be born.

α.Jdg.13.9 
E.Jdg.13.9: And God hearkened to the voice of Manoah; and the angel of God came again unto the woman as she sat in the field: but Manoah her husband was not with her.

α.Jdg.13.10 
E.Jdg.13.10: And the woman made haste, and ran, and shewed her husband, and said unto him, Behold, the man hath appeared unto me, that came unto me the other day.

α.Jdg.13.11 
E.Jdg.13.11: And Manoah arose, and went after his wife, and came to the man, and said unto him, Art thou the man that spakest unto the woman? And he said, I am.

α.Jdg.13.12 
E.Jdg.13.12: And Manoah said, Now let thy words come to pass. How shall we order the child, and how shall we do unto him?

α.Jdg.13.13 
E.Jdg.13.13: And the angel of the LORD said unto Manoah, Of all that I said unto the woman let her beware.

α.Jdg.13.14 
E.Jdg.13.14: She may not eat of any thing that cometh of the vine, neither let her drink wine or strong drink, nor eat any unclean thing: all that I commanded her let her observe.

α.Jdg.13.15 
E.Jdg.13.15: And Manoah said unto the angel of the LORD, I pray thee, let us detain thee, until we shall have made ready a kid for thee.

α.Jdg.13.16 
E.Jdg.13.16: And the angel of the LORD said unto Manoah, Though thou detain me, I will not eat of thy bread: and if thou wilt offer a burnt offering, thou must offer it unto the LORD. For Manoah knew not that he was an angel of the LORD.

α.Jdg.13.17 
E.Jdg.13.17: And Manoah said unto the angel of the LORD, What is thy name, that when thy sayings come to pass we may do thee honour?

α.Jdg.13.18 
E.Jdg.13.18: And the angel of the LORD said unto him, Why askest thou thus after my name, seeing it is secret?

α.Jdg.13.19 
E.Jdg.13.19: So Manoah took a kid with a meat offering, and offered it upon a rock unto the LORD: and the angel did wonderously; and Manoah and his wife looked on.

α.Jdg.13.20 
E.Jdg.13.20: For it came to pass, when the flame went up toward heaven from off the altar, that the angel of the LORD ascended in the flame of the altar. And Manoah and his wife looked on it, and fell on their faces to the ground.

α.Jdg.13.21 
E.Jdg.13.21: But the angel of the LORD did no more appear to Manoah and to his wife. Then Manoah knew that he was an angel of the LORD.

α.Jdg.13.22 
E.Jdg.13.22: And Manoah said unto his wife, We shall surely die, because we have seen God.

α.Jdg.13.23 
E.Jdg.13.23: But his wife said unto him, If the LORD were pleased to kill us, he would not have received a burnt offering and a meat offering at our hands, neither would he have shewed us all these things, nor would as at this time have told us such things as these.

α.Jdg.13.24 
E.Jdg.13.24: And the woman bare a son, and called his name Samson: and the child grew, and the LORD blessed him.

α.Jdg.13.25 
E.Jdg.13.25: And the Spirit of the LORD began to move him at times in the camp of Dan between Zorah and Eshtaol.

α.Jdg.14.1 
E.Jdg.14.1: And Samson went down to Timnath, and saw a woman in Timnath of the daughters of the Philistines.

α.Jdg.14.2 
E.Jdg.14.2: And he came up, and told his father and his mother, and said, I have seen a woman in Timnath of the daughters of the Philistines: now therefore get her for me to wife.

α.Jdg.14.3 
E.Jdg.14.3: Then his father and his mother said unto him, Is there never a woman among the daughters of thy brethren, or among all my people, that thou goest to take a wife of the uncircumcised Philistines? And Samson said unto his father, Get her for me; for she pleaseth me well.

α.Jdg.14.4 
E.Jdg.14.4: But his father and his mother knew not that it was of the LORD, that he sought an occasion against the Philistines: for at that time the Philistines had dominion over Israel.

α.Jdg.14.5 
E.Jdg.14.5: Then went Samson down, and his father and his mother, to Timnath, and came to the vineyards of Timnath: and, behold, a young lion roared against him.

α.Jdg.14.6 
E.Jdg.14.6: And the Spirit of the LORD came mightily upon him, and he rent him as he would have rent a kid, and he had nothing in his hand: but he told not his father or his mother what he had done.

α.Jdg.14.7 
E.Jdg.14.7: And he went down, and talked with the woman; and she pleased Samson well.

α.Jdg.14.8 
E.Jdg.14.8: And after a time he returned to take her, and he turned aside to see the carcase of the lion: and, behold, there was a swarm of bees and honey in the carcase of the lion.

α.Jdg.14.9 
E.Jdg.14.9: And he took thereof in his hands, and went on eating, and came to his father and mother, and he gave them, and they did eat: but he told not them that he had taken the honey out of the carcase of the lion.

α.Jdg.14.10 
E.Jdg.14.10: So his father went down unto the woman: and Samson made there a feast; for so used the young men to do.

α.Jdg.14.11 
E.Jdg.14.11: And it came to pass, when they saw him, that they brought thirty companions to be with him.

α.Jdg.14.12 
E.Jdg.14.12: And Samson said unto them, I will now put forth a riddle unto you: if ye can certainly declare it me within the seven days of the feast, and find it out, then I will give you thirty sheets and thirty change of garments:

α.Jdg.14.13 
E.Jdg.14.13: But if ye cannot declare it me, then shall ye give me thirty sheets and thirty change of garments. And they said unto him, Put forth thy riddle, that we may hear it.

α.Jdg.14.14 
E.Jdg.14.14: And he said unto them, Out of the eater came forth meat, and out of the strong came forth sweetness. And they could not in three days expound the riddle.

α.Jdg.14.15 
E.Jdg.14.15: And it came to pass on the seventh day, that they said unto Samson's wife, Entice thy husband, that he may declare unto us the riddle, lest we burn thee and thy father's house with fire: have ye called us to take that we have? is it not so?

α.Jdg.14.16 
E.Jdg.14.16: And Samson's wife wept before him, and said, Thou dost but hate me, and lovest me not: thou hast put forth a riddle unto the children of my people, and hast not told it me. And he said unto her, Behold, I have not told it my father nor my mother, and shall I tell it thee?

α.Jdg.14.17 
E.Jdg.14.17: And she wept before him the seven days, while their feast lasted: and it came to pass on the seventh day, that he told her, because she lay sore upon him: and she told the riddle to the children of her people.

α.Jdg.14.18 
E.Jdg.14.18: And the men of the city said unto him on the seventh day before the sun went down, What is sweeter than honey? And what is stronger than a lion?  and he said unto them, If ye had not plowed with my heifer, ye had not found out my riddle.

α.Jdg.14.19 
E.Jdg.14.19: And the Spirit of the LORD came upon him, and he went down to Ashkelon, and slew thirty men of them, and took their spoil, and gave change of garments unto them which expounded the riddle. And his anger was kindled, and he went up to his father's house.

α.Jdg.14.20 
E.Jdg.14.20: But Samson's wife was given to his companion, whom he had used as his friend.

α.Jdg.15.1 
E.Jdg.15.1: But it came to pass within a while after, in the time of wheat harvest, that Samson visited his wife with a kid; and he said, I will go in to my wife into the chamber. But her father would not suffer him to go in.

α.Jdg.15.2 
E.Jdg.15.2: And her father said, I verily thought that thou hadst utterly hated her; therefore I gave her to thy companion: is not her younger sister fairer than she? take her, I pray thee, instead of her.

α.Jdg.15.3 
E.Jdg.15.3: And Samson said concerning them, Now shall I be more blameless than the Philistines, though I do them a displeasure.

α.Jdg.15.4 
E.Jdg.15.4: And Samson went and caught three hundred foxes, and took firebrands, and turned tail to tail, and put a firebrand in the midst between two tails.

α.Jdg.15.5 
E.Jdg.15.5: And when he had set the brands on fire, he let them go into the standing corn of the Philistines, and burnt up both the shocks, and also the standing corn, with the vineyards and olives.

α.Jdg.15.6 
E.Jdg.15.6: Then the Philistines said, Who hath done this? And they answered, Samson, the son in law of the Timnite, because he had taken his wife, and given her to his companion. And the Philistines came up, and burnt her and her father with fire.

α.Jdg.15.7 
E.Jdg.15.7: And Samson said unto them, Though ye have done this, yet will I be avenged of you, and after that I will cease.

α.Jdg.15.8 
E.Jdg.15.8: And he smote them hip and thigh with a great slaughter: and he went down and dwelt in the top of the rock Etam.

α.Jdg.15.9 
E.Jdg.15.9: Then the Philistines went up, and pitched in Judah, and spread themselves in Lehi.

α.Jdg.15.10 
E.Jdg.15.10: And the men of Judah said, Why are ye come up against us? And they answered, To bind Samson are we come up, to do to him as he hath done to us.

α.Jdg.15.11 
E.Jdg.15.11: Then three thousand men of Judah went to the top of the rock Etam, and said to Samson, Knowest thou not that the Philistines are rulers over us? what is this that thou hast done unto us? And he said unto them, As they did unto me, so have I done unto them.

α.Jdg.15.12 
E.Jdg.15.12: And they said unto him, We are come down to bind thee, that we may deliver thee into the hand of the Philistines. And Samson said unto them, Swear unto me, that ye will not fall upon me yourselves.

α.Jdg.15.13 
E.Jdg.15.13: And they spake unto him, saying, No; but we will bind thee fast, and deliver thee into their hand: but surely we will not kill thee. And they bound him with two new cords, and brought him up from the rock.

α.Jdg.15.14 
E.Jdg.15.14: And when he came unto Lehi, the Philistines shouted against him: and the Spirit of the LORD came mightily upon him, and the cords that were upon his arms became as flax that was burnt with fire, and his bands loosed from off his hands.

α.Jdg.15.15 
E.Jdg.15.15: And he found a new jawbone of an ass, and put forth his hand, and took it, and slew a thousand men therewith.

α.Jdg.15.16 
E.Jdg.15.16: And Samson said, With the jawbone of an ass, heaps upon heaps, with the jaw of an ass have I slain a thousand men.

α.Jdg.15.17 
E.Jdg.15.17: And it came to pass, when he had made an end of speaking, that he cast away the jawbone out of his hand, and called that place Ramathlehi.

α.Jdg.15.18 
E.Jdg.15.18: And he was sore athirst, and called on the LORD, and said, Thou hast given this great deliverance into the hand of thy servant: and now shall I die for thirst, and fall into the hand of the uncircumcised?

α.Jdg.15.19 
E.Jdg.15.19: But God clave an hollow place that was in the jaw, and there came water thereout; and when he had drunk, his spirit came again, and he revived: wherefore he called the name thereof Enhakkore, which is in Lehi unto this day.

α.Jdg.15.20 
E.Jdg.15.20: And he judged Israel in the days of the Philistines twenty years.

α.Jdg.16.1 
E.Jdg.16.1: Then went Samson to Gaza, and saw there an harlot, and went in unto her.

α.Jdg.16.2 
E.Jdg.16.2: And it was told the Gazites, saying, Samson is come hither. And they compassed him in, and laid wait for him all night in the gate of the city, and were quiet all the night, saying, In the morning, when it is day, we shall kill him.

α.Jdg.16.3 
E.Jdg.16.3: And Samson lay till midnight, and arose at midnight, and took the doors of the gate of the city, and the two posts, and went away with them, bar and all, and put them upon his shoulders, and carried them up to the top of an hill that is before Hebron.

α.Jdg.16.4 
E.Jdg.16.4: And it came to pass afterward, that he loved a woman in the valley of Sorek, whose name was Delilah.

α.Jdg.16.5 
E.Jdg.16.5: And the lords of the Philistines came up unto her, and said unto her, Entice him, and see wherein his great strength lieth, and by what means we may prevail against him, that we may bind him to afflict him; and we will give thee every one of us eleven hundred pieces of silver.

α.Jdg.16.6 
E.Jdg.16.6: And Delilah said to Samson, Tell me, I pray thee, wherein thy great strength lieth, and wherewith thou mightest be bound to afflict thee.

α.Jdg.16.7 
E.Jdg.16.7: And Samson said unto her, If they bind me with seven green withs that were never dried, then shall I be weak, and be as another man.

α.Jdg.16.8 
E.Jdg.16.8: Then the lords of the Philistines brought up to her seven green withs which had not been dried, and she bound him with them.

α.Jdg.16.9 
E.Jdg.16.9: Now there were men lying in wait, abiding with her in the chamber. And she said unto him, The Philistines be upon thee, Samson. And he brake the withs, as a thread of tow is broken when it toucheth the fire. So his strength was not known.

α.Jdg.16.10 
E.Jdg.16.10: And Delilah said unto Samson, Behold, thou hast mocked me, and told me lies: now tell me, I pray thee, wherewith thou mightest be bound.

α.Jdg.16.11 
E.Jdg.16.11: And he said unto her, If they bind me fast with new ropes that never were occupied, then shall I be weak, and be as another man.

α.Jdg.16.12 
E.Jdg.16.12: Delilah therefore took new ropes, and bound him therewith, and said unto him, The Philistines be upon thee, Samson. And there were liers in wait abiding in the chamber. And he brake them from off his arms like a thread.

α.Jdg.16.13 
E.Jdg.16.13: And Delilah said unto Samson, Hitherto thou hast mocked me, and told me lies: tell me wherewith thou mightest be bound. And he said unto her, If thou weavest the seven locks of my head with the web.

α.Jdg.16.14 
E.Jdg.16.14: And she fastened it with the pin, and said unto him, The Philistines be upon thee, Samson. And he awaked out of his sleep, and went away with the pin of the beam, and with the web.

α.Jdg.16.15 
E.Jdg.16.15: And she said unto him, How canst thou say, I love thee, when thine heart is not with me? thou hast mocked me these three times, and hast not told me wherein thy great strength lieth.

α.Jdg.16.16 
E.Jdg.16.16: And it came to pass, when she pressed him daily with her words, and urged him, so that his soul was vexed unto death;

α.Jdg.16.17 
E.Jdg.16.17: That he told her all his heart, and said unto her, There hath not come a razor upon mine head; for I have been a Nazarite unto God from my mother's womb: if I be shaven, then my strength will go from me, and I shall become weak, and be like any other man.

α.Jdg.16.18 
E.Jdg.16.18: And when Delilah saw that he had told her all his heart, she sent and called for the lords of the Philistines, saying, Come up this once, for he hath shewed me all his heart. Then the lords of the Philistines came up unto her, and brought money in their hand.

α.Jdg.16.19 
E.Jdg.16.19: And she made him sleep upon her knees; and she called for a man, and she caused him to shave off the seven locks of his head; and she began to afflict him, and his strength went from him.

α.Jdg.16.20 
E.Jdg.16.20: And she said, The Philistines be upon thee, Samson. And he awoke out of his sleep, and said, I will go out as at other times before, and shake myself. And he wist not that the LORD was departed from him.

α.Jdg.16.21 
E.Jdg.16.21: But the Philistines took him, and put out his eyes, and brought him down to Gaza, and bound him with fetters of brass; and he did grind in the prison house.

α.Jdg.16.22 
E.Jdg.16.22: Howbeit the hair of his head began to grow again after he was shaven.

α.Jdg.16.23 
E.Jdg.16.23: Then the lords of the Philistines gathered them together for to offer a great sacrifice unto Dagon their god, and to rejoice: for they said, Our god hath delivered Samson our enemy into our hand.

α.Jdg.16.24 
E.Jdg.16.24: And when the people saw him, they praised their god: for they said, Our god hath delivered into our hands our enemy, and the destroyer of our country, which slew many of us.

α.Jdg.16.25 
E.Jdg.16.25: And it came to pass, when their hearts were merry, that they said, Call for Samson, that he may make us sport. And they called for Samson out of the prison house; and he made them sport: and they set him between the pillars.

α.Jdg.16.26 
E.Jdg.16.26: And Samson said unto the lad that held him by the hand, Suffer me that I may feel the pillars whereupon the house standeth, that I may lean upon them.

α.Jdg.16.27 
E.Jdg.16.27: Now the house was full of men and women; and all the lords of the Philistines were there; and there were upon the roof about three thousand men and women, that beheld while Samson made sport.

α.Jdg.16.28 
E.Jdg.16.28: And Samson called unto the LORD, and said, O Lord God, remember me, I pray thee, and strengthen me, I pray thee, only this once, O God, that I may be at once avenged of the Philistines for my two eyes.

α.Jdg.16.29 
E.Jdg.16.29: And Samson took hold of the two middle pillars upon which the house stood, and on which it was borne up, of the one with his right hand, and of the other with his left.

α.Jdg.16.30 
E.Jdg.16.30: And Samson said, Let me die with the Philistines. And he bowed himself with all his might; and the house fell upon the lords, and upon all the people that were therein. So the dead which he slew at his death were more than they which he slew in his life.

α.Jdg.16.31 
E.Jdg.16.31: Then his brethren and all the house of his father came down, and took him, and brought him up, and buried him between Zorah and Eshtaol in the buryingplace of Manoah his father. And he judged Israel twenty years.

α.Jdg.17.1 
E.Jdg.17.1: And there was a man of mount Ephraim, whose name was Micah.

α.Jdg.17.2 
E.Jdg.17.2: And he said unto his mother, The eleven hundred shekels of silver that were taken from thee, about which thou cursedst, and spakest of also in mine ears, behold, the silver is with me; I took it. And his mother said, Blessed be thou of the LORD, my son.

α.Jdg.17.3 
E.Jdg.17.3: And when he had restored the eleven hundred shekels of silver to his mother, his mother said, I had wholly dedicated the silver unto the LORD from my hand for my son, to make a graven image and a molten image: now therefore I will restore it unto thee.

α.Jdg.17.4 
E.Jdg.17.4: Yet he restored the money unto his mother; and his mother took two hundred shekels of silver, and gave them to the founder, who made thereof a graven image and a molten image: and they were in the house of Micah.

α.Jdg.17.5 
E.Jdg.17.5: And the man Micah had an house of gods, and made an ephod, and teraphim, and consecrated one of his sons, who became his priest.

α.Jdg.17.6 
E.Jdg.17.6: In those days there was no king in Israel, but every man did that which was right in his own eyes.

α.Jdg.17.7 
E.Jdg.17.7: And there was a young man out of Bethlehemjudah of the family of Judah, who was a Levite, and he sojourned there.

α.Jdg.17.8 
E.Jdg.17.8: And the man departed out of the city from Bethlehemjudah to sojourn where he could find a place: and he came to mount Ephraim to the house of Micah, as he journeyed.

α.Jdg.17.9 
E.Jdg.17.9: And Micah said unto him, Whence comest thou? And he said unto him, I am a Levite of Bethlehemjudah, and I go to sojourn where I may find a place.

α.Jdg.17.10 
E.Jdg.17.10: And Micah said unto him, Dwell with me, and be unto me a father and a priest, and I will give thee ten shekels of silver by the year, and a suit of apparel, and thy victuals. So the Levite went in.

α.Jdg.17.11 
E.Jdg.17.11: And the Levite was content to dwell with the man; and the young man was unto him as one of his sons.

α.Jdg.17.12 
E.Jdg.17.12: And Micah consecrated the Levite; and the young man became his priest, and was in the house of Micah.

α.Jdg.17.13 
E.Jdg.17.13: Then said Micah, Now know I that the LORD will do me good, seeing I have a Levite to my priest.

α.Jdg.18.1 
E.Jdg.18.1: In those days there was no king in Israel: and in those days the tribe of the Danites sought them an inheritance to dwell in; for unto that day all their inheritance had not fallen unto them among the tribes of Israel.

α.Jdg.18.2 
E.Jdg.18.2: And the children of Dan sent of their family five men from their coasts, men of valour, from Zorah, and from Eshtaol, to spy out the land, and to search it; and they said unto them, Go, search the land: who when they came to mount Ephraim, to the house of Micah, they lodged there.

α.Jdg.18.3 
E.Jdg.18.3: When they were by the house of Micah, they knew the voice of the young man the Levite: and they turned in thither, and said unto him, Who brought thee hither? and what makest thou in this place? and what hast thou here?

α.Jdg.18.4 
E.Jdg.18.4: And he said unto them, Thus and thus dealeth Micah with me, and hath hired me, and I am his priest.

α.Jdg.18.5 
E.Jdg.18.5: And they said unto him, Ask counsel, we pray thee, of God, that we may know whether our way which we go shall be prosperous.

α.Jdg.18.6 
E.Jdg.18.6: And the priest said unto them, Go in peace: before the LORD is your way wherein ye go.

α.Jdg.18.7 
E.Jdg.18.7: Then the five men departed, and came to Laish, and saw the people that were therein, how they dwelt careless, after the manner of the Zidonians, quiet and secure; and there was no magistrate in the land, that might put them to shame in any thing; and they were far from the Zidonians, and had no business with any man.

α.Jdg.18.8 
E.Jdg.18.8: And they came unto their brethren to Zorah and Eshtaol: and their brethren said unto them, What say ye?

α.Jdg.18.9 
E.Jdg.18.9: And they said, Arise, that we may go up against them: for we have seen the land, and, behold, it is very good: and are ye still? be not slothful to go, and to enter to possess the land.

α.Jdg.18.10 
E.Jdg.18.10: When ye go, ye shall come unto a people secure, and to a large land: for God hath given it into your hands; a place where there is no want of any thing that is in the earth.

α.Jdg.18.11 
E.Jdg.18.11: And there went from thence of the family of the Danites, out of Zorah and out of Eshtaol, six hundred men appointed with weapons of war.

α.Jdg.18.12 
E.Jdg.18.12: And they went up, and pitched in Kirjathjearim, in Judah: wherefore they called that place Mahanehdan unto this day: behold, it is behind Kirjathjearim.

α.Jdg.18.13 
E.Jdg.18.13: And they passed thence unto mount Ephraim, and came unto the house of Micah.

α.Jdg.18.14 
E.Jdg.18.14: Then answered the five men that went to spy out the country of Laish, and said unto their brethren, Do ye know that there is in these houses an ephod, and teraphim, and a graven image, and a molten image? now therefore consider what ye have to do.

α.Jdg.18.15 
E.Jdg.18.15: And they turned thitherward, and came to the house of the young man the Levite, even unto the house of Micah, and saluted him.

α.Jdg.18.16 
E.Jdg.18.16: And the six hundred men appointed with their weapons of war, which were of the children of Dan, stood by the entering of the gate.

α.Jdg.18.17 
E.Jdg.18.17: And the five men that went to spy out the land went up, and came in thither, and took the graven image, and the ephod, and the teraphim, and the molten image: and the priest stood in the entering of the gate with the six hundred men that were appointed with weapons of war.

α.Jdg.18.18 
E.Jdg.18.18: And these went into Micah's house, and fetched the carved image, the ephod, and the teraphim, and the molten image. Then said the priest unto them, What do ye?

α.Jdg.18.19 
E.Jdg.18.19: And they said unto him, Hold thy peace, lay thine hand upon thy mouth, and go with us, and be to us a father and a priest: is it better for thee to be a priest unto the house of one man, or that thou be a priest unto a tribe and a family in Israel?

α.Jdg.18.20 
E.Jdg.18.20: And the priest's heart was glad, and he took the ephod, and the teraphim, and the graven image, and went in the midst of the people.

α.Jdg.18.21 
E.Jdg.18.21: So they turned and departed, and put the little ones and the cattle and the carriage before them.

α.Jdg.18.22 
E.Jdg.18.22: And when they were a good way from the house of Micah, the men that were in the houses near to Micah's house were gathered together, and overtook the children of Dan.

α.Jdg.18.23 
E.Jdg.18.23: And they cried unto the children of Dan. And they turned their faces, and said unto Micah, What aileth thee, that thou comest with such a company?

α.Jdg.18.24 
E.Jdg.18.24: And he said, Ye have taken away my gods which I made, and the priest, and ye are gone away: and what have I more? and what is this that ye say unto me, What aileth thee?

α.Jdg.18.25 
E.Jdg.18.25: And the children of Dan said unto him, Let not thy voice be heard among us, lest angry fellows run upon thee, and thou lose thy life, with the lives of thy household.

α.Jdg.18.26 
E.Jdg.18.26: And the children of Dan went their way: and when Micah saw that they were too strong for him, he turned and went back unto his house.

α.Jdg.18.27 
E.Jdg.18.27: And they took the things which Micah had made, and the priest which he had, and came unto Laish, unto a people that were at quiet and secure: and they smote them with the edge of the sword, and burnt the city with fire.

α.Jdg.18.28 
E.Jdg.18.28: And there was no deliverer, because it was far from Zidon, and they had no business with any man; and it was in the valley that lieth by Bethrehob. And they built a city, and dwelt therein.

α.Jdg.18.29 
E.Jdg.18.29: And they called the name of the city Dan, after the name of Dan their father, who was born unto Israel: howbeit the name of the city was Laish at the first.

α.Jdg.18.30 
E.Jdg.18.30: And the children of Dan set up the graven image: and Jonathan, the son of Gershom, the son of Manasseh, he and his sons were priests to the tribe of Dan until the day of the captivity of the land.

α.Jdg.18.31 
E.Jdg.18.31: And they set them up Micah's graven image, which he made, all the time that the house of God was in Shiloh.

α.Jdg.19.1 
E.Jdg.19.1: And it came to pass in those days, when there was no king in Israel, that there was a certain Levite sojourning on the side of mount Ephraim, who took to him a concubine out of Bethlehemjudah.

α.Jdg.19.2 
E.Jdg.19.2: And his concubine played the whore against him, and went away from him unto her father's house to Bethlehemjudah, and was there four whole months.

α.Jdg.19.3 
E.Jdg.19.3: And her husband arose, and went after her, to speak friendly unto her, and to bring her again, having his servant with him, and a couple of asses: and she brought him into her father's house: and when the father of the damsel saw him, he rejoiced to meet him.

α.Jdg.19.4 
E.Jdg.19.4: And his father in law, the damsel's father, retained him; and he abode with him three days: so they did eat and drink, and lodged there.

α.Jdg.19.5 
E.Jdg.19.5: And it came to pass on the fourth day, when they arose early in the morning, that he rose up to depart: and the damsel's father said unto his son in law, Comfort thine heart with a morsel of bread, and afterward go your way.

α.Jdg.19.6 
E.Jdg.19.6: And they sat down, and did eat and drink both of them together: for the damsel's father had said unto the man, Be content, I pray thee, and tarry all night, and let thine heart be merry.

α.Jdg.19.7 
E.Jdg.19.7: And when the man rose up to depart, his father in law urged him: therefore he lodged there again.

α.Jdg.19.8 
E.Jdg.19.8: And he arose early in the morning on the fifth day to depart; and the damsel's father said, Comfort thine heart, I pray thee. And they tarried until afternoon, and they did eat both of them.

α.Jdg.19.9 
E.Jdg.19.9: And when the man rose up to depart, he, and his concubine, and his servant, his father in law, the damsel's father, said unto him, Behold, now the day draweth toward evening, I pray you tarry all night: behold, the day groweth to an end, lodge here, that thine heart may be merry; and to morrow get you early on your way, that thou mayest go home.

α.Jdg.19.10 
E.Jdg.19.10: But the man would not tarry that night, but he rose up and departed, and came over against Jebus, which is Jerusalem; and there were with him two asses saddled, his concubine also was with him.

α.Jdg.19.11 
E.Jdg.19.11: And when they were by Jebus, the day was far spent; and the servant said unto his master, Come, I pray thee, and let us turn in into this city of the Jebusites, and lodge in it.

α.Jdg.19.12 
E.Jdg.19.12: And his master said unto him, We will not turn aside hither into the city of a stranger, that is not of the children of Israel; we will pass over to Gibeah.

α.Jdg.19.13 
E.Jdg.19.13: And he said unto his servant, Come, and let us draw near to one of these places to lodge all night, in Gibeah, or in Ramah.

α.Jdg.19.14 
E.Jdg.19.14: And they passed on and went their way; and the sun went down upon them when they were by Gibeah, which belongeth to Benjamin.

α.Jdg.19.15 
E.Jdg.19.15: And they turned aside thither, to go in and to lodge in Gibeah: and when he went in, he sat him down in a street of the city: for there was no man that took them into his house to lodging.

α.Jdg.19.16 
E.Jdg.19.16: And, behold, there came an old man from his work out of the field at even, which was also of mount Ephraim; and he sojourned in Gibeah: but the men of the place were Benjamites.

α.Jdg.19.17 
E.Jdg.19.17: And when he had lifted up his eyes, he saw a wayfaring man in the street of the city: and the old man said, Whither goest thou? and whence comest thou?

α.Jdg.19.18 
E.Jdg.19.18: And he said unto him, We are passing from Bethlehemjudah toward the side of mount Ephraim; from thence am I: and I went to Bethlehemjudah, but I am now going to the house of the LORD; and there is no man that receiveth me to house.

α.Jdg.19.19 
E.Jdg.19.19: Yet there is both straw and provender for our asses; and there is bread and wine also for me, and for thy handmaid, and for the young man which is with thy servants: there is no want of any thing.

α.Jdg.19.20 
E.Jdg.19.20: And the old man said, Peace be with thee; howsoever let all thy wants lie upon me; only lodge not in the street.

α.Jdg.19.21 
E.Jdg.19.21: So he brought him into his house, and gave provender unto the asses: and they washed their feet, and did eat and drink.

α.Jdg.19.22 
E.Jdg.19.22: Now as they were making their hearts merry, behold, the men of the city, certain sons of Belial, beset the house round about, and beat at the door, and spake to the master of the house, the old man, saying, Bring forth the man that came into thine house, that we may know him.

α.Jdg.19.23 
E.Jdg.19.23: And the man, the master of the house, went out unto them, and said unto them, Nay, my brethren, nay, I pray you, do not so wickedly; seeing that this man is come into mine house, do not this folly.

α.Jdg.19.24 
E.Jdg.19.24: Behold, here is my daughter a maiden, and his concubine; them I will bring out now, and humble ye them, and do with them what seemeth good unto you: but unto this man do not so vile a thing.

α.Jdg.19.25 
E.Jdg.19.25: But the men would not hearken to him: so the man took his concubine, and brought her forth unto them; and they knew her, and abused her all the night until the morning: and when the day began to spring, they let her go.

α.Jdg.19.26 
E.Jdg.19.26: Then came the woman in the dawning of the day, and fell down at the door of the man's house where her lord was, till it was light.

α.Jdg.19.27 
E.Jdg.19.27: And her lord rose up in the morning, and opened the doors of the house, and went out to go his way: and, behold, the woman his concubine was fallen down at the door of the house, and her hands were upon the threshold.

α.Jdg.19.28 
E.Jdg.19.28: And he said unto her, Up, and let us be going. But none answered. Then the man took her up upon an ass, and the man rose up, and gat him unto his place.

α.Jdg.19.29 
E.Jdg.19.29: And when he was come into his house, he took a knife, and laid hold on his concubine, and divided her, together with her bones, into twelve pieces, and sent her into all the coasts of Israel.

α.Jdg.19.30 
E.Jdg.19.30: And it was so, that all that saw it said, There was no such deed done nor seen from the day that the children of Israel came up out of the land of Egypt unto this day: consider of it, take advice, and speak your minds.

α.Jdg.20.1 
E.Jdg.20.1: Then all the children of Israel went out, and the congregation was gathered together as one man, from Dan even to Beersheba, with the land of Gilead, unto the LORD in Mizpeh.

α.Jdg.20.2 
E.Jdg.20.2: And the chief of all the people, even of all the tribes of Israel, presented themselves in the assembly of the people of God, four hundred thousand footmen that drew sword.

α.Jdg.20.3 
E.Jdg.20.3: (Now the children of Benjamin heard that the children of Israel were gone up to Mizpeh.) Then said the children of Israel, Tell us, how was this wickedness?

α.Jdg.20.4 
E.Jdg.20.4: And the Levite, the husband of the woman that was slain, answered and said, I came into Gibeah that belongeth to Benjamin, I and my concubine, to lodge.

α.Jdg.20.5 
E.Jdg.20.5: And the men of Gibeah rose against me, and beset the house round about upon me by night, and thought to have slain me: and my concubine have they forced, that she is dead.

α.Jdg.20.6 
E.Jdg.20.6: And I took my concubine, and cut her in pieces, and sent her throughout all the country of the inheritance of Israel: for they have committed lewdness and folly in Israel.

α.Jdg.20.7 
E.Jdg.20.7: Behold, ye are all children of Israel; give here your advice and counsel.

α.Jdg.20.8 
E.Jdg.20.8: And all the people arose as one man, saying, We will not any of us go to his tent, neither will we any of us turn into his house.

α.Jdg.20.9 
E.Jdg.20.9: But now this shall be the thing which we will do to Gibeah; we will go up by lot against it;

α.Jdg.20.10 
E.Jdg.20.10: And we will take ten men of an hundred throughout all the tribes of Israel, and an hundred of a thousand, and a thousand out of ten thousand, to fetch victual for the people, that they may do, when they come to Gibeah of Benjamin, according to all the folly that they have wrought in Israel.

α.Jdg.20.11 
E.Jdg.20.11: So all the men of Israel were gathered against the city, knit together as one man.

α.Jdg.20.12 
E.Jdg.20.12: And the tribes of Israel sent men through all the tribe of Benjamin, saying, What wickedness is this that is done among you?

α.Jdg.20.13 
E.Jdg.20.13: Now therefore deliver us the men, the children of Belial, which are in Gibeah, that we may put them to death, and put away evil from Israel. But the children of Benjamin would not hearken to the voice of their brethren the children of Israel.

α.Jdg.20.14 
E.Jdg.20.14: But the children of Benjamin gathered themselves together out of the cities unto Gibeah, to go out to battle against the children of Israel.

α.Jdg.20.15 
E.Jdg.20.15: And the children of Benjamin were numbered at that time out of the cities twenty and six thousand men that drew sword, beside the inhabitants of Gibeah, which were numbered seven hundred chosen men.

α.Jdg.20.16 
E.Jdg.20.16: Among all this people there were seven hundred chosen men lefthanded; every one could sling stones at an hair breadth, and not miss.

α.Jdg.20.17 
E.Jdg.20.17: And the men of Israel, beside Benjamin, were numbered four hundred thousand men that drew sword: all these were men of war.

α.Jdg.20.18 
E.Jdg.20.18: And the children of Israel arose, and went up to the house of God, and asked counsel of God, and said, Which of us shall go up first to the battle against the children of Benjamin? And the LORD said, Judah shall go up first.

α.Jdg.20.19 
E.Jdg.20.19: And the children of Israel rose up in the morning, and encamped against Gibeah.

α.Jdg.20.20 
E.Jdg.20.20: And the men of Israel went out to battle against Benjamin; and the men of Israel put themselves in array to fight against them at Gibeah.

α.Jdg.20.21 
E.Jdg.20.21: And the children of Benjamin came forth out of Gibeah, and destroyed down to the ground of the Israelites that day twenty and two thousand men.

α.Jdg.20.22 
E.Jdg.20.22: And the people the men of Israel encouraged themselves, and set their battle again in array in the place where they put themselves in array the first day.

α.Jdg.20.23 
E.Jdg.20.23: (And the children of Israel went up and wept before the LORD until even, and asked counsel of the LORD, saying, Shall I go up again to battle against the children of Benjamin my brother? And the LORD said, Go up against him.)

α.Jdg.20.24 
E.Jdg.20.24: And the children of Israel came near against the children of Benjamin the second day.

α.Jdg.20.25 
E.Jdg.20.25: And Benjamin went forth against them out of Gibeah the second day, and destroyed down to the ground of the children of Israel again eighteen thousand men; all these drew the sword.

α.Jdg.20.26 
E.Jdg.20.26: Then all the children of Israel, and all the people, went up, and came unto the house of God, and wept, and sat there before the LORD, and fasted that day until even, and offered burnt offerings and peace offerings before the LORD.

α.Jdg.20.27 
E.Jdg.20.27: And the children of Israel enquired of the LORD, (for the ark of the covenant of God was there in those days,

α.Jdg.20.28 
E.Jdg.20.28: And Phinehas, the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron, stood before it in those days,) saying, Shall I yet again go out to battle against the children of Benjamin my brother, or shall I cease? And the LORD said, Go up; for to morrow I will deliver them into thine hand.

α.Jdg.20.29 
E.Jdg.20.29: And Israel set liers in wait round about Gibeah.

α.Jdg.20.30 
E.Jdg.20.30: And the children of Israel went up against the children of Benjamin on the third day, and put themselves in array against Gibeah, as at other times.

α.Jdg.20.31 
E.Jdg.20.31: And the children of Benjamin went out against the people, and were drawn away from the city; and they began to smite of the people, and kill, as at other times, in the highways, of which one goeth up to the house of God, and the other to Gibeah in the field, about thirty men of Israel.

α.Jdg.20.32 
E.Jdg.20.32: And the children of Benjamin said, They are smitten down before us, as at the first. But the children of Israel said, Let us flee, and draw them from the city unto the highways.

α.Jdg.20.33 
E.Jdg.20.33: And all the men of Israel rose up out of their place, and put themselves in array at Baaltamar: and the liers in wait of Israel came forth out of their places, even out of the meadows of Gibeah.

α.Jdg.20.34 
E.Jdg.20.34: And there came against Gibeah ten thousand chosen men out of all Israel, and the battle was sore: but they knew not that evil was near them.

α.Jdg.20.35 
E.Jdg.20.35: And the LORD smote Benjamin before Israel: and the children of Israel destroyed of the Benjamites that day twenty and five thousand and an hundred men: all these drew the sword.

α.Jdg.20.36 
E.Jdg.20.36: So the children of Benjamin saw that they were smitten: for the men of Israel gave place to the Benjamites, because they trusted unto the liers in wait which they had set beside Gibeah.

α.Jdg.20.37 
E.Jdg.20.37: And the liers in wait hasted, and rushed upon Gibeah; and the liers in wait drew themselves along, and smote all the city with the edge of the sword.

α.Jdg.20.38 
E.Jdg.20.38: Now there was an appointed sign between the men of Israel and the liers in wait, that they should make a great flame with smoke rise up out of the city.

α.Jdg.20.39 
E.Jdg.20.39: And when the men of Israel retired in the battle, Benjamin began to smite and kill of the men of Israel about thirty persons: for they said, Surely they are smitten down before us, as in the first battle.

α.Jdg.20.40 
E.Jdg.20.40: But when the flame began to arise up out of the city with a pillar of smoke, the Benjamites looked behind them, and, behold, the flame of the city ascended up to heaven.

α.Jdg.20.41 
E.Jdg.20.41: And when the men of Israel turned again, the men of Benjamin were amazed: for they saw that evil was come upon them.

α.Jdg.20.42 
E.Jdg.20.42: Therefore they turned their backs before the men of Israel unto the way of the wilderness; but the battle overtook them; and them which came out of the cities they destroyed in the midst of them.

α.Jdg.20.43 
E.Jdg.20.43: Thus they inclosed the Benjamites round about, and chased them, and trode them down with ease over against Gibeah toward the sunrising.

α.Jdg.20.44 
E.Jdg.20.44: And there fell of Benjamin eighteen thousand men; all these were men of valour.

α.Jdg.20.45 
E.Jdg.20.45: And they turned and fled toward the wilderness unto the rock of Rimmon: and they gleaned of them in the highways five thousand men; and pursued hard after them unto Gidom, and slew two thousand men of them.

α.Jdg.20.46 
E.Jdg.20.46: So that all which fell that day of Benjamin were twenty and five thousand men that drew the sword; all these were men of valour.

α.Jdg.20.47 
E.Jdg.20.47: But six hundred men turned and fled to the wilderness unto the rock Rimmon, and abode in the rock Rimmon four months.

α.Jdg.20.48 
E.Jdg.20.48: And the men of Israel turned again upon the children of Benjamin, and smote them with the edge of the sword, as well the men of every city, as the beast, and all that came to hand: also they set on fire all the cities that they came to.

α.Jdg.21.1 
E.Jdg.21.1: Now the men of Israel had sworn in Mizpeh, saying, There shall not any of us give his daughter unto Benjamin to wife.

α.Jdg.21.2 
E.Jdg.21.2: And the people came to the house of God, and abode there till even before God, and lifted up their voices, and wept sore;

α.Jdg.21.3 
E.Jdg.21.3: And said, O LORD God of Israel, why is this come to pass in Israel, that there should be to day one tribe lacking in Israel?

α.Jdg.21.4 
E.Jdg.21.4: And it came to pass on the morrow, that the people rose early, and built there an altar, and offered burnt offerings and peace offerings.

α.Jdg.21.5 
E.Jdg.21.5: And the children of Israel said, Who is there among all the tribes of Israel that came not up with the congregation unto the LORD? For they had made a great oath concerning him that came not up to the LORD to Mizpeh, saying, He shall surely be put to death.

α.Jdg.21.6 
E.Jdg.21.6: And the children of Israel repented them for Benjamin their brother, and said, There is one tribe cut off from Israel this day.

α.Jdg.21.7 
E.Jdg.21.7: How shall we do for wives for them that remain, seeing we have sworn by the LORD that we will not give them of our daughters to wives?

α.Jdg.21.8 Kah nag n8waog, howan ut Israelle chippan8onganit, noh mat kohkuhqueg en Mizpeh ut Lordut? kah kusseh matta howan 8m8un ut tuppuksinn8onganit, wutch Jabesh$Gilead, en mukkinneonganit.
E.Jdg.21.8: And they said, What one is there of the tribes of Israel that came not up to Mizpeh to the LORD? And, behold, there came none to the camp from Jabeshgilead to the assembly.

α.Jdg.21.9 Newutche missinninnuog ogkemoog, kah kusseh, matta howaneg wadohkitcheg Jabesh-Gilead na wutapeineau.
E.Jdg.21.9: For the people were numbered, and, behold, there were none of the inhabitants of Jabeshgilead there.

α.Jdg.21.10 Kah mukkinneonk na$en ann8nau, nabo ne[e]se muttannonganog kussuog wutch anue menuhkoshketompaut, kah wuttann8no[u]h n8waog, monchek togkom8k wadohkitcheg Jabesh-gilead, en kenag togkodteg, kah weeche mittamwossissog kah mukkiesog.
E.Jdg.21.10: And the congregation sent thither twelve thousand men of the valiantest, and commanded them, saying, Go and smite the inhabitants of Jabeshgilead with the edge of the sword, with the women and the children.

α.Jdg.21.11 Kah yeu pish aséog, pish kuppapaquanne paguanóuh nishnoh wosketomp, kah nishnoh mittamwossis noh neesuk woskétompuh.
E.Jdg.21.11: And this is the thing that ye shall do, Ye shall utterly destroy every male, and every woman that hath lain by man.

α.Jdg.21.12 Kah nameheáog kenugké wadohkinitcheh Jabesh-gilead yauut pasuk88h penompuh, mattá waheoncheg wosketompuh, wunneesinat wosketompuh, kah nag uppas8óuh tuppuksinn8onganit ut Shiloh, ne ohkeit Canáan.
E.Jdg.21.12: And they found among the inhabitants of Jabeshgilead four hundred young virgins, that had known no man by lying with any male: and they brought them unto the camp to Shiloh, which is in the land of Canaan.

α.Jdg.21.13 Kah mamusse mukkinéonk ann8team8og ken8nonat wunnaumonuh Benjamin, neg apitcheg Rimmoné qussukquanit, kah wunnohteáe nag wehkom[ó]naóont.
E.Jdg.21.13: And the whole congregation sent some to speak to the children of Benjamin that were in the rock Rimmon, and to call peaceably unto them.

α.Jdg.21.14 Kah Benjamin wonk peyau na ahquompak, kah wuttinnumauóuh mittamwossissoh neh keteahahetticheh mittamw[ô]ssissog wutch Jabesh-gilead, qut matta wameseah.
E.Jdg.21.14: And Benjamin came again at that time; and they gave them wives which they had saved alive of the women of Jabeshgilead: and yet so they sufficed them not.

α.Jdg.21.15 Kah missinninnúog aiuskoiantamwóg wutch [M]enjamin, newutche Jehovah touwehtham wutchippan8ongash Israel.
E.Jdg.21.15: And the people repented them for Benjamin, because that the LORD had made a breach in the tribes of Israel.

α.Jdg.21.16 Neit mukkinneae eldersog n8waog, toh woh kutussemun wutch ummittamwuss8oh neg ashquehtahwhutcheg? newutche mittamwussissóg paguanaog wutch Benjamin.
E.Jdg.21.16: Then the elders of the congregation said, How shall we do for wives for them that remain, seeing the women are destroyed out of Benjamin?

α.Jdg.21.17 Kah n8waog, na mos ohtoonganeu8 wutch neg pohquohhukeg wutch Benjamin, onk chippan8onk matta woh paguatau8un wutch Israelut.
E.Jdg.21.17: And they said, There must be an inheritance for them that be escaped of Benjamin, that a tribe be not destroyed out of Israel.

α.Jdg.21.18 Qut matta woh kittinnumauóunónog kuttaunonoh: newutche wunnaumonuh Israél chadchekeyeuwopaneg, n8waog, matánumunaj noh w[ò]mittamwussisukauont Benjamin.
E.Jdg.21.18: Howbeit we may not give them wives of our daughters: for the children of Israel have sworn, saying, Cursed be he that giveth a wife to Benjamin.

α.Jdg.21.19 Neit n8waog, kusseh, na mishadtup8onk en Lordut ut Shiloh, nish$noh kodtum8, ut ayeuonganit nanummiyeu Béthel, wutcheksuayeu ne may wadshik Bethel aushik Shechem, kah Sowaneiyeu Lebanon.
E.Jdg.21.19: Then they said, Behold, there is a feast of the LORD in Shiloh yearly in a place which is on the north side of Bethel, on the east side of the highway that goeth up from Bethel to Shechem, and on the south of Lebonah.

α.Jdg.21.20 Newajéh ann8nahettit wunnaumonuh Benjamin, n8waog, monchek askuhwhekontam8k ut weenominneohtekonehtu.
E.Jdg.21.20: Therefore they commanded the children of Benjamin, saying, Go and lie in wait in the vineyards;

α.Jdg.21.21 Káh natauwompek, kah kusseh, Shiloe wuttaunéunk sohhamwehettit pumukonat pummukkoonganehtu, neit sohham8k wutch wenominneohtekonehtu, kah tohqun8k nish$noh pasuk ummittamwussoh, wutch wuttaunit Shiloh, kah ongq wutohkit Benjamin.
E.Jdg.21.21: And see, and, behold, if the daughters of Shiloh come out to dance in dances, then come ye out of the vineyards, and catch you every man his wife of the daughters of Shiloh, and go to the land of Benjamin.

α.Jdg.21.22 Kah pish n$nih 8shoh asuh weetompassuoh peyaónukqueog ammoussuwunitteunkqueog, neit pish nuttinnonon[ó]g, kitteamonteanumok newutche nenawun[,] newutche matta n8wadchanumauomun nish$noh wosketomp ummittamwussoh, ut ayeuwuttinneat, newutche matta kittinnumauóog yeuyeu, onk woh kummatcheseonoont.
E.Jdg.21.22: And it shall be, when their fathers or their brethren come unto us to complain, that we will say unto them, Be favourable unto them for our sakes: because we reserved not to each man his wife in the war: for ye did not give unto them at this time, that ye should be guilty.

α.Jdg.21.23 Kah wunnaumonuh Benjamin wutussenin, kah 8mittamwussissinneauh neadtahs8unit, wutch nag paumukoncheg, neh tohqunahetticheh, kah nag moncheog kah qushkeog en wuttohtuongan8out, kah wonk ayimwog keitotanásh, kah wutayinneáoash.
E.Jdg.21.23: And the children of Benjamin did so, and took them wives, according to their number, of them that danced, whom they caught: and they went and returned unto their inheritance, and repaired the cities, and dwelt in them.

α.Jdg.21.24 Kah wunnaumonuh Israel na$wutch amaeneau, na ahquompak, nish$noh en wutchippan8ónganit, kah en wutteateashiyeuonganit, kah na 8muneau nish$noh ut wutohtoonganit.
E.Jdg.21.24: And the children of Israel departed thence at that time, every man to his tribe and to his family, and they went out from thence every man to his inheritance.

α.Jdg.21.25 Yeush kesukodtash na matta mo ketass8t ut Israelut, nish$nóh usse[u] neane wunnegik ut nehenwonche wuskesukqut.
E.Jdg.21.25: In those days there was no king in Israel: every man did that which was right in his own eyes.