
α.Mal.1.1 WEannunne wuttinn8waonk Jehovah en Israelut nashpe Malachi.
E.Mal.1.1 The burden of the word of the LORD to Israel by Malachi.

α.Mal.1.2 K8womunnumw8, wussin J[e]hovah: qut onch kussimw8 uttoh kuttit wom[ó]sinán? sunnummatta Esau Jakoboh 8weematteup, wussin Jehovah? qut onch n8womonom Jakob.
E.Mal.1.2 I have loved you, saith the LORD. Yet ye say, Wherein hast thou loved us? Was not Esau Jacob's brother? saith the LORD: yet I loved Jacob,

α.Mal.1.3 Kah nussekeneauomp Esau, kah nummahchumwehteóp 8wadchumash kah wutohtóonk, wutch touohkomukque dragonsog.
E.Mal.1.3 And I hated Esau, and laid his mountains and his heritage waste for the dragons of the wilderness.

α.Mal.1.4 Kah Edom an8wadt, nummatchekhetteamun, qut nukqushkemun, kah n8wekitteamun touishinnee ayeuongash: yeu wussin Jehovah ayeuhteaunit: nag pish wekitteaog, qut nukkepuhteam; pish wuttéhettamuneau, wussissippoiyeum matcheetowonk, kah missinninnúog neh Jehovah musquanumoncheh micheme.
E.Mal.1.4 Whereas Edom saith, We are impoverished, but we will return and build the desolate places; thus saith the LORD of hosts, They shall build, but I will throw down; and they shall call them, The border of wickedness, and, The people against whom the LORD hath indignation for ever.

α.Mal.1.5 Kah kuskesukquash pish wunnaumunash, kah pish kussimw8, Jehovah pish misheheau wutch Israelle sussippoiyeuut.
E.Mal.1.5 And your eyes shall see, and ye shall say, The LORD will be magnified from the border of Israel.

α.Mal.1.6 Wunnaumoniin quttianumau 8shoh, kah wuttinneumuneunk wussontimomuh: neit nen wut8shimuk, uttiyeu nukquttiánumitteáonk? kah sontimáyeon, uttiyeu nukqushitteaonk? Jehovah ayeuhteau[n]it kuttugk8, woi sephausuénuog neg sekeneogig n8w[é]suonk: kah kussimw8, uttoh nuttit nussekeneámu[n]an k8wesuonk?
E.Mal.1.6 A son honoureth his father, and a servant his master: if then I be a father, where is mine honour? and if I be a master, where is my fear? saith the LORD of hosts unto you, O priests, that despise my name. And ye say, Wherein have we despised thy name?

α.Mal.1.7 Kummagumw8 nishkeneungque petukqunneg ut nut$Altarumut, kah kussimw8, utto[k] kuttit nishkhennunan? an8waog, wuttablum Jehovah mishanánumukquodt.
E.Mal.1.7 Ye offer polluted bread upon mine altar; and ye say, Wherein have we polluted thee? In that ye say, The table of the LORD is contemptible.

α.Mal.1.8 Sephauseog pôgkenum8muk, sun mat matchittinn8? kah mag8óg n8chumwesit kah mahchinadt, sun mat matchittinn8? 
E.Mal.1.8 And if ye offer the blind for sacrifice, is it not evil? and if ye offer the lame and sick, is it not evil? offer it now unto thy governor; will he be pleased with thee, or accept thy person? saith the LORD of hosts.

α.Mal.1.9 Kah yeuyeu k8wehquetumonumw8, nanompassum8k God onk woh kukkitteamonteanumukqun: yeu n$niyeup nashpe kenaau, sun woh k8t8anumuk8, wussin Jehovah ayeuhteaunit?
E.Mal.1.9 And now, I pray you, beseech God that he will be gracious unto us: this hath been by your means: will he regard your persons? saith the LORD of hosts.

α.Mal.1.10 Howan noh ut kenugke kenaau, noh kobhog squont wutch monteag? kah matta kenashqunánum8m8 n8teau ut nut-altarumut, wutch monteag; matta kuttápeneauon[ó]mw8 nuttapeneam8 mag8onk ut kenutchegan8óut.
E.Mal.1.10 Who is there even among you that would shut the doors for nought? neither do ye kindle fire on mine altar for nought. I have no pleasure in you, saith the LORD of hosts, neither will I accept an offering at your hand.

α.Mal.1.11 Newutche waj pashpishont pajeh wayont n8wesuonk pish missi ut kenguke penuwohteaut, kah nishnoh ut ayeuonganit, weetemungquok kah pahke mag8onk: newutche n8wesuonk pish missi ut ken[u]gke penuwohte[o]ut, wussin Jehovah ayeuhteaunit.
E.Mal.1.11 For from the rising of the sun even unto the going down of the same my name shall be great among the Gentiles; and in every place incense shall be offered unto my name, and a pure offering: for my name shall be great among the heathen, saith the LORD of hosts.

α.Mal.1.12 Qut kenishketeauuneau an8waog, wuttablum Jehovah nishketeauun, kah ne meechumm[ú]onk, ne ummeechumum mishanánumukquodt.
E.Mal.1.12 But ye have profaned it, in that ye say, The table of the LORD is polluted; and the fruit thereof, even his meat, is contemptible.

α.Mal.1.13 Wonk kuttinn8wómw8, kusseh uttoh an sauunumukquodt: kah kummishamantamuneau wussin Jehovah ayeuhteaunit, kah kuppas8omw8 noh nehnegukáusit, kah n8chumwesit, kah mahchinadt: yeu kuttinne kuppaudtauuneau mag8onk: sun woh yeu nuttapeneamon ut kenutchegan8óut, wussin Jehovah?
E.Mal.1.13 Ye said also, Behold, what a weariness is it! and ye have snuffed at it, saith the LORD of hosts; and ye brought that which was torn, and the lame, and the sick; thus ye brought an offering: should I accept this of your hand? saith the LORD.

α.Mal.1.14 Qut mattanumunach ass8kekodteam8énin, noh wanompaiyeumit ut ufflocksumut, quoshomont kah sephamauont Jehovah ne áneuk: newutche nen mishe ketass8t wussin Jehovah ayeuhteaunit, kah n8wesuonk queihtamweonunkquodt ut kenugke penuwohteaut.
E.Mal.1.14 But cursed be the deceiver, which hath in his flock a male, and voweth, and sacrificeth unto the LORD a corrupt thing: for I am a great King, saith the LORD of hosts, and my name is dreadful among the heathen.

α.Mal.2.1 KAh yeuyeu, woi kenaau sephausuenuog, yeu ann8team8onk wutche kenaau.
E.Mal.2.1 And now, O ye priests, this commandment is for you.

α.Mal.2.2 Matta n8tam8óg, kah matta ponam8óg kuttahh8óut, sohsumwáhtinneat n8wesuonk wussin Jehovah ayeuhteaunit: nutann8n matta 
E.Mal.2.2 If ye will not hear, and if ye will not lay it to heart, to give glory unto my name, saith the LORD of hosts, I will even send a curse upon you, and I will curse your blessings: yea, I have cursed them already, because ye do not lay it to heart.

α.Mal.2.3 Kusseh, nutánusseh k8skannemuneog, kah nusseáhhan 8[o]e
E.Mal.2.3 Behold, I will corrupt your seed, and spread dung upon your faces, even the dung of your solemn feasts; and one shall take you away with it.

α.Mal.2.4 Kah pish k8wahteomw8, nutann8[h]amup yeu ann8team8onk en kuhhogkaout, onk woh n8n8waonk weetomuh Levi, wussin Jehovah ayeuhteaunit.
E.Mal.2.4 And ye shall know that I have sent this commandment unto you, that my covenant might be with Levi, saith the LORD of hosts.

α.Mal.2.5 Pomantam8e kah wunohteae n8n8waonk weetomukup, kah nish nuttinninnumáuonápash, nashpe wabesuonk ne wabesuonsip, kah wabesit ut anaquohtag n8wesuonk.
E.Mal.2.5 My covenant was with him of life and peace; and I gave them to him for the fear wherewith he feared me, and was afraid before my name.

α.Mal.2.6 Wunnamuhkutée naumatuonk wutt8nit ahtóp, kah machuk matta maskom8unap ut wu[ssi]ss[it]t8nit: n8nohteae kah sampweseáe n8weechógkup, kah qushkéheop m8naoh wutch matcheetunat.
E.Mal.2.6 The law of truth was in his mouth, and iniquity was not found in his lips: he walked with me in peace and equity, and did turn many away from iniquity.

α.Mal.2.7 Newutche sephausuenúe [m]ussissitt8n woh wadchanum wohwohtam8onk, kah nag woh nati[nnea]hwháog wutti[nn]u[matuont] ut wutt8n8wóut: newutche neh wutann8naéneumoh Jehovah ayeuhteaunit.
E.Mal.2.7 For the priest's lips should keep knowledge, and they should seek the law at his mouth: for he is the messenger of the LORD of hosts.

α.Mal.2.8 Qut kenaau kuppóhchámw8 wutch mayut, m8naog kuttogkussittahsumwa[h]eómw8 naumatuonk, kutánussehteómw8 8n8wáonk Levi, wussin Jehovah ayeuhteaunit.
E.Mal.2.8 But ye are departed out of the way; ye have caused many to stumble at the law; ye have corrupted the covenant of Levi, saith the LORD of hosts.

α.Mal.2.9 Newaj wonk meishinánuméhennóg, kah mattohhentupánumukqussehen8óg ut anaquabhettit wame missinninnuog, neane mo nanawehteau8og nummayash, qut kuteiyáné ussémw8 ut naumatuonganit.
E.Mal.2.9 Therefore have I also made you contemptible and base before all the people, according as ye have not kept my ways, but have been partial in the law.

α.Mal.2.10 
E.Mal.2.10 Have we not all one father? hath not one God created us? why do we deal treacherously every man against his brother, by profaning the covenant of our fathers?

α.Mal.2.11 
E.Mal.2.11 Judah hath dealt treacherously, and an abomination is committed in Israel and in Jerusalem; for Judah hath profaned the holiness of the LORD which he loved, and hath married the daughter of a strange god.

α.Mal.2.12 
E.Mal.2.12 The LORD will cut off the man that doeth this, the master and the scholar, out of the tabernacles of Jacob, and him that offereth an offering unto the LORD of hosts.

α.Mal.2.13 
E.Mal.2.13 And this have ye done again, covering the altar of the LORD with tears, with weeping, and with crying out, insomuch that he regardeth not the offering any more, or receiveth it with good will at your hand.

α.Mal.2.14 
E.Mal.2.14 Yet ye say, Wherefore? Because the LORD hath been witness between thee and the wife of thy youth, against whom thou hast dealt treacherously: yet is she thy companion, and the wife of thy covenant.

α.Mal.2.15 
E.Mal.2.15 And did not he make one? Yet had he the residue of the spirit. And wherefore one? That he might seek a godly seed. Therefore take heed to your spirit, and let none deal treacherously against the wife of his youth.

α.Mal.2.16 
E.Mal.2.16 For the LORD, the God of Israel, saith that he hateth putting away: for one covereth violence with his garment, saith the LORD of hosts: therefore take heed to your spirit, that ye deal not treacherously.

α.Mal.2.17 
E.Mal.2.17 Ye have wearied the LORD with your words. Yet ye say, Wherein have we wearied him? When ye say, Every one that doeth evil is good in the sight of the LORD, and he delighteth in them; or, Where is the God of judgment?

α.Mal.3.1 
E.Mal.3.1 Behold, I will send my messenger, and he shall prepare the way before me: and the LORD, whom ye seek, shall suddenly come to his temple, even the messenger of the covenant, whom ye delight in: behold, he shall come, saith the LORD of hosts.

α.Mal.3.2 
E.Mal.3.2 But who may abide the day of his coming? and who shall stand when he appeareth? for he is like a refiner's fire, and like fullers' soap:

α.Mal.3.3 
E.Mal.3.3 And he shall sit as a refiner and purifier of silver: and he shall purify the sons of Levi, and purge them as gold and silver, that they may offer unto the LORD an offering in righteousness.

α.Mal.3.4 
E.Mal.3.4 Then shall the offering of Judah and Jerusalem be pleasant unto the LORD, as in the days of old, and as in former years.

α.Mal.3.5 
E.Mal.3.5 And I will come near to you to judgment; and I will be a swift witness against the sorcerers, and against the adulterers, and against false swearers, and against those that oppress the hireling in his wages, the widow, and the fatherless, and that turn aside the stranger from his right, and fear not me, saith the LORD of hosts.

α.Mal.3.6 
E.Mal.3.6 For I am the LORD, I change not; therefore ye sons of Jacob are not consumed.

α.Mal.3.7 
E.Mal.3.7 Even from the days of your fathers ye are gone away from mine ordinances, and have not kept them. Return unto me, and I will return unto you, saith the LORD of hosts. But ye said, Wherein shall we return?

α.Mal.3.8 
E.Mal.3.8 Will a man rob God? Yet ye have robbed me. But ye say, Wherein have we robbed thee? In tithes and offerings.

α.Mal.3.9 
E.Mal.3.9 Ye are cursed with a curse: for ye have robbed me, even this whole nation.

α.Mal.3.10 
E.Mal.3.10 Bring ye all the tithes into the storehouse, that there may be meat in mine house, and prove me now herewith, saith the LORD of hosts, if I will not open you the windows of heaven, and pour you out a blessing, that there shall not be room enough to receive it.

α.Mal.3.11 
E.Mal.3.11 And I will rebuke the devourer for your sakes, and he shall not destroy the fruits of your ground; neither shall your vine cast her fruit before the time in the field, saith the LORD of hosts.

α.Mal.3.12 
E.Mal.3.12 And all nations shall call you blessed: for ye shall be a delightsome land, saith the LORD of hosts.

α.Mal.3.13 
E.Mal.3.13 Your words have been stout against me, saith the LORD. Yet ye say, What have we spoken so much against thee?

α.Mal.3.14 
E.Mal.3.14 Ye have said, It is vain to serve God: and what profit is it that we have kept his ordinance, and that we have walked mournfully before the LORD of hosts?

α.Mal.3.15 
E.Mal.3.15 And now we call the proud happy; yea, they that work wickedness are set up; yea, they that tempt God are even delivered.

α.Mal.3.16 
E.Mal.3.16 Then they that feared the LORD spake often one to another: and the LORD hearkened, and heard it, and a book of remembrance was written before him for them that feared the LORD, and that thought upon his name.

α.Mal.3.17 
E.Mal.3.17 And they shall be mine, saith the LORD of hosts, in that day when I make up my jewels; and I will spare them, as a man spareth his own son that serveth him.

α.Mal.3.18 
E.Mal.3.18 Then shall ye return, and discern between the righteous and the wicked, between him that serveth God and him that serveth him not.

α.Mal.4.1 
E.Mal.4.1 For, behold, the day cometh, that shall burn as an oven; and all the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly, shall be stubble: and the day that cometh shall burn them up, saith the LORD of hosts, that it shall leave them neither root nor branch.

α.Mal.4.2 
E.Mal.4.2 But unto you that fear my name shall the Sun of righteousness arise with healing in his wings; and ye shall go forth, and grow up as calves of the stall.

α.Mal.4.3 
E.Mal.4.3 And ye shall tread down the wicked; for they shall be ashes under the soles of your feet in the day that I shall do this, saith the LORD of hosts.

α.Mal.4.4 
E.Mal.4.4 Remember ye the law of Moses my servant, which I commanded unto him in Horeb for all Israel, with the statutes and judgments.

α.Mal.4.5 
E.Mal.4.5 Behold, I will send you Elijah the prophet before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the LORD:

α.Mal.4.6 
E.Mal.4.6 And he shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to their fathers, lest I come and smite the earth with a curse.