Λ.0 Nashauanittue Meninnunk wutch MUKKIESOG, Wussesèmumun wutch Sogkodtunganash Naneeswe TESTAMENTSASH; WUTCH Ukkesitchipp8ongan8 Ukketeahogkounooh. Negonáe wussukhùmun ut Englishmánne Unnont8waonganit, nashpe ne ánue, wunnegenùe Nohtompeantog. Noh as8wèsit JOHN COTTON. Kah yeuyeu qushkinnúmun en Indiane Unnont8waonganit wutch 8ne[n]ehikqunàout INDIANE MUKKIESOG, Nashpe GRINDAL RAWSON. Wunnaunchem8káe Nohtompeantog ut kenugke INDIANOG. Onatuh mishketuog kodtantam8k pahke meninnunnúe Wuttinn8waonk, onk woh kenashpèkinean. 1 Pet. 2. 2. CAMBRIDGE: Printeu8p nashpe Samuel Green, kah Bartholomew Green. 1691.
Λ.3 Menninunk wutch MUKKIESOG. / MILK FOR BABES.
Nat. TOH kutusseaunshuk GOD?  / Q. WHat hath GOD done for you?
Namp. GOD nukkezhuke, nanawúnuk, kah woh nuppohquohwhunuk. / A. God hath made me, He keepeth me, and he can save me.
Nat. Howan GOD? / Q. Who is God?
Namp. GOD nashauanitt88, wutch nehenwonche, kah nashpe nehenwonche. /God is a spirit of himself, and for himself.
Nat. Tohsu8og Manitt8og? / Q. How many Gods be there?
Namp. Pasuk nont GOD, qut nishu8, Wutt8shimau, Wunnaumoniin, kah 8neetupanatamwe nashauanit. / A. There is but one God in three Persons, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.
Nat. Uttoh kittin keezhukqunaz GOD? / Q. How did God make you?
Namp. Ut negonne nunneechetuonganog, Sampweseae, kah 8neetupanatamwe. / A. In my first parents holy and righteous.
Nat. Sun kunneetimus Sampweseae, kah 8neetupanatamwe? / Q. Are you then born holy and righteous?
Namp. Matchaog. Negonne n8chetuonganog, matcheseuppanneeg, kah neen nutapehteau8og. / A. No, my first Father sinned and I in him.
Nat. Sun matcheseae kunneetimus? / Q. Are you then born a sinner?
Λ.4 
Namp. Nukkuhkenaihetteap ut matcheetup[a]natam8ónganit kah nunneeteup ut matcheseonganit. / A. I was conceived in sinne, and born in iniquity.
Nat. Uttiyeu keneetue Matcheseonk? / Q. What is your birth-sin?
Namp. Adame matcheseonk nutogquontamóntean, kah anittue wuttinnepomantam8onganit nuttiyeuwonukq[u]n. / A. {Adams} sinne imputed to me and a corrupt nature dwelling in me.
Nat. Chagua anitt[u]e Kuttinnepomantam8onk? / Q. What is your corrupt nature?
Namp. Nuttinnepomantam8onk mohchiyeu8 wutch kitteamonteanitteaonk, numwohteau matcheseonk, kah ne webe, kah nagwutteohteau. / A. My corrupt nature is empty of Grace, bent unto sinne, and onely unto sinne, and that continually.
Nat. Chagua Matchseonk? / Q. What is sin?
Namp. Matcheseonk, pannenehheaonk Naumatuonk. / A. Sin is the transgression of the Law. 
Nat. Tohsunash Naumatuongash GOD? / Q. How many Commandements of the Law be there?
Namp. Piogquttash. / A. Ten.
Nat. Chagua Negonnòhtag? / Q. What is the first Commandement?
Namp. Ummanitt8mé[h]kon onkatogeeg manit8og ut anaquabeh. / A. Thou shalt have no other Gods but me.
Nat. Toh nauwuttam88 yeu Naumatuonk? / Q. What is the meaning of this Commandement?
Namp. Onk woh n8wowossumómun webèyeue, wunnamuhkuttée GOD, kah matta onkatagk, qut webe nagum. / A. That we should worship the onely true God, and no other beside him.
Nat. Uttiyeu Nahohtóeu An8team8onk? / Q. What is the second Commandement?
Namp. Aiyimauùhkon kuhhog n[uu]neukontu[n]koh. &c. / A. Thou shalt not make to thy selfe any graven image, &c.
Nat. Toh nauwuttam88 yeu An8team8onk? / Q. What is the meaning of this Commandement?
Namp. Onk woh n8wowossumomun wunnam[u]hkuttee GOD nashpe wunnamuhkuttée wowossumuaonk, neane GOD an8teamup, kah matta neane wosketomp namehte[u]nkup. / A. That we should worship the true God with true worship; such as God hath ordained, not such as man hath invented.
Nat. Uttiyeu Nishwe An8team8onk? / Q. What is the third Commandement?
Λ.5 
Namp. Neemun8hkon 8wesuonk JEHOVAH kummanitt8m tahn8che. / A. Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain, &c.
Nat. Toh anauwuttam8uk OOwesuonk GOD? / Q. What is here meant by the Name of God?
Namp. GOD nehenwonche Nagum, kah wunneseongash GOD ne nashpe waheomuk, neane wosketomp waheomuk nashpe 8wesuonk, kah uppahkèyeue wunnegenuongash, 8wowossumuaonk, wuttinn8waonk, kah wutanakausuongash. / A. God himselfe and the good things of God, whereby he is known as a man by his Name, as his Attributes, worship, word, and works.
Nat. Uttiyeu matta tahn8che attumunum8unate 8wesuonk GOD? / Q. What is it not to take his Name in vain?
Namp. Auwohkônate GOD, kah 8neseongash GOD, wutch wussohsum8onganit, kah nehenwonche nuttinniyeuonganun mat tahn8chèyeue, mat matwabesùe, matta matcheet8e. / A. To make use of God, and the good things of God, to his glory, and our good, not vainly, not unreverently, not unprofitably.
Nat. Uttiyeu yaue An8team8onk? / Q. What is the fourth Commandment?
Namp. Mehquontash Sabbath day woh kuppahketeauun. / A. Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day, &c.
Nat. Toh nauwuttam88 ne An8team8onk? / Q. What is the meaning of this Commandment? 
Namp. Onk woh nutanwohsinn8wontamumun wutch anakausuonk; nano m8cheke wutch pomp8onganit, onk woh nuppas8sukau8mun GOD, nashpe 8neet[u]panatamwe peantamweseongash. / A. That we should rest from labour and much more from play on the Lords day, that we may draw nigh to God in holy duties.
Nat. Uttiyeu Nepanna tashe An8team8onk? / Q. What is the fifth Commandement?
Namp. Quttianum K8sh, kah Kokas onk woh kussepe pomantam ut kutohkeit uttiyeu JEHOVAH Kum-Manitt8m aninnumunkquean. / A. Honor thy Father and thy Mother, that thy dayes may be long in the land, which the Lord thy God giveth thee.
Nat. Toh nauwuttam88 yeuut, nashpe wutt8shimau, kah wuttokamau? 
Namp. Wame anukunkqueageegk, asuh ut chashiyeuonganit , ut Sch8lhuwaonganit, ut Moeuwehkomunganit, kah ut wame Neetohteaum[u]nganunnónog. / A. All our Superiours, whether in Family, School, Church, and Common-wealth.
Nat. Uttiyeu Quttianumaongan8 ne nashpe woh quttianumadt? / Q. What is the honour due to them?
Namp. Quttianittuonk, noswehtam8onk, kah (tapenont) onkquatunk. / A. Reverence, obedience, and (when I am able,) Recompense.
Nat. Uttiyeu nequtta tashe An8team8onk? / Q. What is the sixth Commandement?
Namp. Nush[ð]hteohkon. / A. Thou shalt do no murther.
Nat. Toh nauwuttam88 ne An8team8onk? / Q. What is the meaning of this Comment [sic]?
Namp. Onk woh mat nuttiohquehteómun nuppomantam8onganun, asuh n8namamm8onganun, asuh uppomantam8ongan8 onkatogeegk, qut naneeswe wadchanumúnate. / A. That we should not shorten the life, or health of our selves or others, but preserve both.
Nat. Uttiyeu nesausuk tashe An8team8onk. / Q. What is the seventh Commandement?
(Nam) Mamussehkon / Thou shalt not commit Adultery. 
Nat. Uttiyeu ne nashpe an8nittàmuk? / Q. What is the sinne here forbidden?
Namp. Kohkonantam8onk ne nashpe nishnoh pasuk woh 8wahteauun wutahteauunate 8wisq ut pahketeahahuwaonganit, kah quttianittuonganit. / A. To defile ourselves, or others with unclean lusts.
Nat. Uttiyeu matcheseonk ne nashpe quahtinittimuk? / Q. What is the duty here commanded?
Namp. Nishkeneunkqheónate nuhhogkanónog asuh onkatogeeg nashpe niskeneunk, que matchekodtantam8ongash. / A. Chastity, to possesse our vessells in holinesse and honour.
Nat. Uttiyeu Swosuk tashe An8team8onk? / Q. What is the eighth Commandement?
Namp. Komm8tohkon. / A. Thou shalt not steal. 
Nat. Uttiyeu Komm8t8onk quahtinittimuk? / Q. What is the stealth here forbidden?
Namp. Neemunumunate onkatogeeg ummaumachiyeum8oash, matta [e]nnanumuk8k, asuh ogkehteauunate nehenwonche nummaumachinonash matta toh hen Ennompaumukqúodtinno , en nuhhogkanonog, asuh onkatogeh. / A. To take away another mans goods, without his leave, or to spend our own without benefit to our selves or others.
Nat. Uttiyeu ne nashpe an8nittumuk? / Q. What is the duty here commanded?
Namp. Sampweseae achuuhtinnate nummaumachiyeumash, wunnadchanumùnate, kah waantamwe ogketeaúunnate. / A. To get our goods honestly, to keep them safely, and to spend them thriftily.
Nat. Uttiyeu Pask8gun tashe An8team8onk? / Q. What is the ninth Commandement?
Namp. Pann8wae wauwaonúhkon ketatteaumunk. / A. Thou shalt not beare false witnesse against thy Neighbor.
Nat. Uttiyeu matcheseonk quahtinittimuk? / What is the sinne here forbidden? 
Namp. Pann8wàe pehtuonate, mat wunnamuhkuttée Unnantamùnnate, asuh keket8kontamùnate, papaume nuhhogkanónog, asuh onkatogeeg. / A. To lie falsly, to thinke or speak untruly of our selves or others.
Nat. Uttiyeu ne nashpe an8nittùmuk? / Q. What is the duty here required?
Namp. Wunnamúhkutteyeuuk, kah wunnomwausseonk. / A. Truth and faithfulness.
Nat. Uttiyeu Piogque An8team8onk? / Q. What is the tenth Commandement?
Namp. Ahchewóntogkon. / A. Thou shalt not covet, &c.
Nat. Uttiyeu Ahchuwontam8onk yeu ut quahtìnittimuk? / Q. What is the coveting here forbidden?
Namp. Ahchuwontamúnate Ummaumachiyeumash onkatogeeg asuh matta tapontam8unate nehenwonche nummaumachinonash. / A. Lust after the things of other men; and want of contentment with our own.
Nat. Sun kenanaweht[ð]oh wame yeush An8team8ongash? / Q. Whether have you kept all these Commandements?
Namp. Matchaog: Neen, kah wame missinninneumog matcheseupanneeg. / A. No, I and all men are sinners.
Nat. Chagua Wutonkquatunk matcheseonk? / Q. What is the wages of sin?
Namp. N[u]pp8wonk, kah Awakompanaonk. / A. Death and damnation.
Nat. Howan nashpe wadchanitteáan? / Q. How look you then to be saved?
Namp. Webe nashpe JESUS CHRIST. / A. Onely by Jesus Christ.
Nat. Howan Jesus Christ? / Q. Who is Jesus Christ?
Namp. Michemohtae wunnaumoniin GOD, noh wutche nuhhogkanonut wosketomp88, onk woh kummanouhukqun, kah k8wadchanukqun. / A. The eternall Son of God, who for our sakes became man, that he might redeem and save us.
Nat. Toh kittin manohukqunane, kah wadchanukqunnane JESUS CHRIST? / Q. How doth Christ redeem and save us? 
Namp. Nashpe wussampwe pomantam8onganit, kah weesogke nupp8onganit, kah wussohsumóe pomantamoe wonk omohkeonganit. / A. By his righteous life, and bitter death, and glorious resurrection to life again.
Nat. Toh kittin nuhwuttachónumun, kah moapp8m[e]n CHRIST ut wunnupp8onganit, kah wutomohkeonganit? / Q. How do we come to have part and fellowship with Christ in his death and Resurrection?
Namp. Nashpe Ummenuhkesue wuttinn8waonk, kah nashauanit Uttiyeush nashpe pas8kqueogish, en Christut, kah ut wuhhogkate wadchanukqueogish. / A. By the power of his Word and Spirit, which brings us to Christ and keeps us in him.
Nat. Chagua Wuttinn8waonk? / Q. What is his Word?
Namp. Quoshodtumwaeninùe, kah Apostlesue 8neetupanatamwe Wussukwhosu[n]ganash, Negonne, kah Wusku Testament, Naumatuonk, kah Wunnaun[c]hem8kaonk. / A. The Holy Scriptures of the Prophets and Apostles, the Old and New Testament, Law and Gospell.
Nat. Uttiyeu nashpe nohtompeantogkae Naumatuonk kuppas8kqunate en Christut? / Q. How doth the Ministery of the Law bring you toward Christ?
Namp. Nashpe n8wahheauwahikqúnate nummatcheseonk, kah Ummusqua[l]tam8onk  GOD nutaiyeuhkônukqun. / A. By bringing me to know my sin, and the wrath of God against me for it.
Nat. Uttoh ut, yeu nashpe kuppas8suka[u] Christoh? / Q. What are you thereby the neerer to Christ?
Namp. Ne nashpe n8waamattam numataanumitteáe enniyeuonk, kah nukquenauhik8onk pohquohwussuaènin. / A. So I come to feele my cursed estate, and need of a Saviour.
Nat. Uttiyeu nashpe wunnaunchem8kae kukk8tomoadtuonk kutaninnumunkqun yeu ut kummataanumitt[e]ae Enniyeuonk? / Q. How doth the Ministery of the Gospell help you in this cursed Estae?
Namp. Nashpe nanom8cheke nutohhohpahukqúnate, kah neit wussuhwhunukqun wutch ne Enniyeuonk. / A. By humbling me yet more, and then raising me up out of this Estate.
Nat. Uttiyeu nashpe wunnaunchem8kae kuhk8tomoadtuonk kumm8cheke hohpahukqun? / Q. How doth the Ministery of the Gospell humble you more?
Namp. Nashpe wahteauwahuwonate Ukkitteamonteanitteaonk JESUS CHRIST, noh weekontamwe napuk wadchanonate matcheseaenuog, kah nummatcheseonk mat n8namptam8onóun, kah nunn8chumweseonk peyauonónate kah ne nashpe n8waamattam nuhhog papaquanne n8wanheit. / A. By revealing the grace of the Lord Jesus, in dying to save sinners: and yet convincing me of my sinne, in not believing on him, and of my utter insufficiency to come to him; and so I feel my self utterly lost.
Nat. Uttiyeu nashpe wunnaunchem8kae kuhk8tomoadtuonk kussuhwhunukqun wutch ne wa[n]hittue Enniyeuonk? / Q. How then doth the Ministerie of the Gospell raise you up out of this lost estate to come unto Christ?
Namp. Nashpe nukkuhk8tomunkqun mishoadtue, kah ummenuhkesúe nupp8wonk CHRIST, kah 8weenauweetue kitteamonteanitteaonk en wanhitcheeg matcheseaenuog, kah nashpe n8wahteauwahikqun Ukkitteamonteanitteàe quoshomuaonk neanesitcheeg, kah nutinninnumunkqun monaneteáe Nashauanit ne nashpe woh nutattúmun CHRIST, kah ukkitteamonteanitteae quoshomuaonk, kah n8weetom. / A. By teaching me the value and the vertue of the death of Christ, and the riches of the grace to los sinners: By revealing the promise of grace to such, and by ministring the Spirit of grace, to apply Christ, and his promise of grace unto myself, and to keep me in him.
Nat. Uttiyeu nashpe monaneteae Nashauanit kutaninnumunk attumunònate CHRIST, kah ummonaneteae quoshomuaonk, kah k8weetòmukq? / Q. How doth the Spirit of grace apply Christ, and his promise of grace unto you, and keep you in him?
Namp. Monaneteae Nashauanit kezteauun wunnamptam8onk ut nuhhogkate attumunonate CHRIST, peantam8onk peantamauônate, aiuskoiantam8onk maunnitteauónate kah, noswehtam8onk noswehtauónate. / A. By begetting in me faith to receive him: Prayer to call upon him: Repentance to mourn after him, and new obedience to serve him.
Nat. Chagua wunnamptam8onk? / Q. What is faith?
Namp. Wunnamptam8onk ne nashauanittue kitteamonteanittuonk ne nashpe nukquenuwáon nuhhog, kah n8namptam JESUS CHRIST, wutch Sampweseonk, kah wadchanittuonk. / A. Faith is a grace of the Spirit; whereby I deny my self, and beleive on Christs righteousnesse and salvation.
Nat. Chagua Peantam8onk? / Q. What is Prayer?
Namp. Peantam8onk ne wehquehtumuwaonk GOD wutch JESUS CHRIST nashpe wutanninúhsuonk 8neetupanatamwe Nashauanit, neaunak wuttenantam8onk God. / A. It is calling upon God in the name of Christ, by the help of the Holy Ghost, according to the will of God.
Nat. Chagua Aiuskoiantam8onk? / Q. What is Repentance?
Namp. Aiuskoiantam8onk ne nashauanittue kitteamonteanitteaonk ne nashpe nishkontam wame Nummatcheseonganunnonash, kah nussamp8onash ut anaquabit GOD, kah nummauunittau CHRIST wutch ahquontamoadtuonk, kah wutch wusku-pomantam8onganit. / A. Repentance is a grace of the Spirit, whereby I loath my sinnes, and my selfe for them, and confesse them before the Lord, and mourne after Christ for the pardon of them, and for grace to serve him in newnesse of life.
Nat. Chagua wusku pomantam8onk? Asuh wusku noswehtam8onk? / Q. What is newnesse of life, or new obedience?
Namp. Wusku-Pomantam8onk ne Monaneteaonk nashauanit ne nashpe nunnúhk[o]n wame nukkone nummatcheseonganunnonash, kah nummatcheseae weetómukeeg, kah nuppomsham ut anaquabit GOD ut w[u]t[t]innowaongane wequai, kah ut 8weetomuaonganit 8neetupanatamweyeuitcheeg. / A. Newnesse of life is a grace of the Spirit, whereby I forsake my former lusts and vaine company, and walk before the Lord in the light of his word, and in the communion of his Saints.
Nat. Chagua Weetomuaonk 8neetupanatamweyeuitcheeg? / Q. What is the Communion of Saints?
Namp. Weetomaonk 8neetupanatamweyeuitcheeg ne Moeuwehkomungane moeuohtóonk ut wunnanittuongash kitteamonteanitteae wunn8waonk, kah menuhketeaongash naut. / A. It is the fellowship of the Chuch in the Clessings of the Covenant of Grace, and the seals thereof.
Nat. Chagua Moeuwehkomunk? / Q. What is the Church?
Namp. Moeuwehkomunk ne mukkinneaonk wunneetupanatamweyeuitcheeg weechaiyeuhtuog nashpe wunn8wàe kenepissuonganit, wowossumonate GOD, kah 8n[e]nehittinaout ut wame 8neetupanatamwe ukkuhk8waongash. / A. It is a Congregation of Saints joyned together in the bond of the Covenant, to worship the Lord and to edifie one another, in all his holy Ordinances.
Nat. Chagua wunn8wae kenepissuonk ne nashpe Moeuwehkumunk w[e]echaiyeùhtumuk? / Q. What is the bond of the Covenant, in which the Church is joyned together?
Namp. Wunn8wae kenepissuonk ne nashpe Moeuwehkomunk weechaiyeúhtumuk, ne Pahke samp8aonk wunn8waonk ne GOD kezteunkup nashpe wussampwutteaháe missinninneumoh God8unate nah en, kah wunneechan8ouh. / A. It is the profession of that Covenant, which God hath made with his faithfull people, to be a God unto them and to their seed.
Nat. Toh hen kishpinnau GOD Ummissinninneumoh yeu ut wunn8waonganit? / Q. What doth the Lord bind his people to in this Covenant? 
Namp. Wuske mágunate wuhhogkauh, kah wunneechan8ooh en Lordut missinninneumunate, kah neit Woeuwehkomungane N[a]htompeantogomoh kah weemattinneunk kodchittônumunate wowossumaonk GOD, kah 8nenehittinnaout. / A. To give up themselves and their seed, first to the Lord to be his people, and then to the Elders and brethren of the Church, to set forward the worship of God, and the mutuall edification.
Nat. Uttiyeu nashpe mághettit wuhhogkauh kah wunneechanoòut en Lordut? / Q. How doe they give up themselves and their seed to the Lord?
Namp. Nashpe wunnamptamoe wuttattumunum8ongan8 JEHOVAH, kah 8wunn8waonk, wutch wuhhogkauh, kah wunneechanôout, kah nashpe uppomshaongan8 neaúnak, kah nashpe wutan8kauwaongan8 wunneechan8ouh ut wame wunn8wae Ummayash. / A. By receiving through faith the Lord and his Covenant, to themselves, and to their seed: And accordingly walking themselves, and training up their children in the wayes of his Covenant.
Nat. Uttiyeu nashpe maghettit wuhhogkauh, kah wunneechanoóuh en Moeuwehkomungane nohtompeantogomoh, kah weemattinneunk? / Q. How doe they give up themselves and their seed to the Elders and Brethren of the Church?
Namp. Nashpe wussamp8aongan8 ummatcheseongan8oash, kah wunnamptam8ongan8, kah wunnoswehtam8ongan8 wunnaunchem8kao[n]k CHRIST, kah ne nashpe nag, kah wunneechan[ó]ouh  attumunum8og en moeuwehkomongane wehtomaonk, kah menuhketeahaongash naut. / A. By confession of their sinnes, and profession of their faith, and of their subjection to the Gospell of Chrsit. And so they and their seed are received into fellowship of the Church and the seals thereof.
Nat. Uttiyeush menuhketeahaongash wunn8waonk, yeuyeu ut wunnaunchem8kae kesukodtash? / Q. What are the seals of the Covenant now in the dayes of the Gospell?
Namp. Kutchessum8onk, kah LORDE mish[a]dtupp8onk. / A. Baptisme and the Lords Supper.
Nat. Toh kutusseaunshit ut Kutchessum8onganit? / Q. What is done for you in Baptisme?
Namp. Ut Kutchessum8onk, nukkutchessum8onk nashpe nippe menuhketeausue kukkinneasuonk nukku[t]sumitteaonk ut 8sqheonganit, kah nashauanit Christoh, kah ne nashpe nunnompe[n]itteaonk en Christut, kah ahquontamoadtuonk, kah uppahkheaonk nummatcheseongash, kah nutomohkeonk wutch wame nutonkapunaongash, kah wonk nutomohkeonk wutch nuppunnate majish ne kesukod. / A. In Baptisme the washing with water is a signe and seale of my washing with the bloud and spirit of Christ, and thereby of my ingrafting into Christ: of the pardon and cleansing of my sinnes: of my rising up out of affliction: and also of my Resurrection from the death at the last day.
Nat. Toh kutusseaunshit ut LORDE Ummishadtupp8onganit? / Q. What is done for you in the Lords Supper?
Namp. Ut LORDE Ummishadtupp8onganit attumunum8onk Sohqunumoe petugqunneeg, kah sohkanumwe Wine ne menuhketeausue kuhkinneasuonk weetomae Nutattumunum8onk wuhhog Christ wutch neen, Sohqshae 8sqheonk Christ wutch neen, kah ne nashpe nunneetuonk ut Christut; ahquontamoadtuonk, kah neetskehettuonk Nummatcheseongash, weetomaonk Wunnashauanitt8moh, nunnummenuhkesuonk, kah nuppomantam8onk ut kitteamonteanitteaonk, kah numm[o]appuonk nashpe Christ ut wussohsumóe appuonganit ut majish Wussittumoe Kesukod. / A. In the Lords Supper the receiving of the bread broken, and the wine powered out, is a signe and seal of my receiving the Communion of the body of Christ shed for me, And therefore of my growth in Christ, of the pardon and healing of my sins; of the fellowship of his Spirit; of my strengthening and quickning in Grace: and of my sitting together with Christ on his Throne of Glory at the last judgement.
Nat. Chagua Omohkeonk wutch Nuppunnate? / Q. What is the Resurrection from the dead, [which was sealed up to you in Baptism?]
Namp. Christ peyont majish 8sittum8onk wame neeg apitcheeg ut weenohkehtu pish wonk omohkeog, naneeswe Sampwesecheeg, kah mat Sampweseecheeg. / A. When Christ shall come to his last Judgement, all that are in the graves shall arise again, both the just and unjust.
Nat. Chagua majish OOsittum8onk? / Q. What is the last Judgement, which is sealed up to you in the Lords Supper?
Namp. Majish ne kesukod wame pish peyauog ut anaquabit 8situm8e appuonganit Christ nompagunumunate wutanakausuongan8oash kah attumunumunate neaunak wutonkquatongan8. / A. At the last day we shall all appear before the judgement-seat of Christ, to give an account of our works, and to receive our reward according to them.
Nat. Chagua wutonkquatunk neit pish attumunumwog? / Q. What is the reward that shall then be given?
Namp. Sampweseecheeg pish auog en micheme pomantam8onganit, kah matcheetukeeg pish nukkonog en michemohtae n8taut, ut kenugke Mattannit, kah Wut-Angelsumoh. / A. The righteous shall go into life eternall, and the wicked shall be cast into everlasting fire with the Devill and his Angells.
UNNEH. / FINIS.