
α.1.1 WUttinn8waongash Nehemiah wunnaumonuh Hachaliah. Kah n$niyeup, Chisleue nepauzsaik, nab neesnechage kodtum8k, ápeon Shushanne mishikkomukqut.
E.1.1 The words of Nehemiah the son of Hachaliah. And it came to pass in the month Chisleu, in the twentieth year, as I was in Shushan the palace,

α.1.2 Hanani pasuk nemat peyan, nagum kah Judae wosketompaog, kah nunnat8tamauóog papaume tómue Jewsog, neg seque missinóhteamukeg, kah papaume Jerusalem, kah nag nuttukquog.
E.1.2 That Hanani, one of my brethren, came, he and certain men of Judah; and I asked them concerning the Jews that had escaped, which were left of the captivity, and concerning Jerusalem.

α.1.3 Ashqunutcheg wutch missinnóonk, na ut wutohtimoinneat, nag mishe unkquanumóog kah spunnamóog: kah wonk Jerusaleme pummeneutunk touwutchahthamun, kah nish naut squontamash n8táe chikohsumunash.
E.1.3 And they said unto me, The remnant that are left of the captivity there in the province are in great affliction and reproach: the wall of Jerusalem also is broken down, and the gates thereof are burned with fire.

α.1.4 Kah n$niyeup, yeush kutt8wongash n8tamon, nummattapip, kah nummauop, kah nummaumuttamup nawhutch kesukodtash, kah mat nummeetsu, kah nuppeantamup ut anaquabit kesukque Manit.
E.1.4 And it came to pass, when I heard these words, that I sat down and wept, and mourned certain days, and fasted, and prayed before the God of heaven,

α.1.5 Kah nussip, k8wehquetumoush, woi Jehovah kesukque Manit, noh masugkenuk kah ûhqueneunkqussue Manit, noh manawehteauont monanitteaonk neh womonukqutcheh, kah kahkinneásinitcheh wutaun8team8ongash.
E.1.5 And said, I beseech thee, O LORD God of heaven, the great and terrible God, that keepeth covenant and mercy for them that love him and observe his commandments:

α.1.6 Yeuyeu kehtauog n8tam8m8utch, & kuskesukquash woshwem8itch, onk woh ken8tam uppeantamóonk kittinneum, ne yeu$yeu án peantamauun anaquabean, kesukquae kah nukkonáe, wutche wunnaumonuh Israel kittinneumog: kah nussamp8aongam ummatcheseongan8oash wunnaumonuh Israel, ni[sh] match[e]néhenagish: naneswe nen kah n8sh wek nummatchesémun.
E.1.6 Let thine ear now be attentive, and thine eyes open, that thou mayest hear the prayer of thy servant, which I pray before thee now, day and night, for the children of Israel thy servants, and confess the sins of the children of Israel, which we have sinned against thee: both I and my father's house have sinned.

α.1.7 Kutannunn8e unnéhennumun, kah matta nanawehteómun ann8team8ongash asuh kuhk8waongash asuh wussittam8ongash, nish ann8nópash kittinneum Moses.
E.1.7 We have dealt very corruptly against thee, and have not kept the commandments, nor the statutes, nor the judgments, which thou commandedst thy servant Moses.

α.1.8 Mehquontash k8wehquetumoush, kutt8wonk ne ann8nop Moses, kussip, panneseóg, kusseahwhunnumw8 kenugke wutohtimoinneat.
E.1.8 Remember, I beseech thee, the word that thou commandedst thy servant Moses, saying, If ye transgress, I will scatter you abroad among the nations:

α.1.9 Qut qushkeóg en nuhhogkat, kah nanawehteauók nutann8team8ongash, kah usseog, tohkônogque, nawhutche kenaau unnuhkónunóg en aongkoue kesukqut, onch na n8ch mianoneau, kah nag pish nuppas8óog, en ayeuonganit, ne pepenam, na nupponamunat n8wesuonk.
E.1.9 But if ye turn unto me, and keep my commandments, and do them; though there were of you cast out unto the uttermost part of the heaven, yet will I gather them from thence, and will bring them unto the place that I have chosen to set my name there.

α.1.10 Kah yeug kittinneumog kah kummissinninneumog, neg pohquohwhonacheg nashpe kummishe menuhkesuonk kah nashpe kummishenutcheg.
E.1.10 Now these are thy servants and thy people, whom thou hast redeemed by thy great power, and by thy strong hand.

α.1.11 Woi Jehovah k8wehquetumoush kehtauog yeuyeu n8taj uppeantamóonk kittinneumog neg kodtantogig quehtamunat k8wesuonk: kah k8wehquetumoush wunniyeuoh kittinneum yeu kesukok, kah wét8om monaneteaonk ut anaquabit yeuoh wosketomp, newutche nen mô ketass8t 8tattattamwáitch kôunúnum.
E.1.11 O LORD, I beseech thee, let now thine ear be attentive to the prayer of thy servant, and to the prayer of thy servants, who desire to fear thy name: and prosper, I pray thee, thy servant this day, and grant him mercy in the sight of this man. For I was the king's cupbearer.

α.2.1 KAh n$niyeup, ut Nisane nepâuzsaut, nabo wunneese kodtum8mit Artaxerxes ketass8t, wine ohtau anaquabit, kah nunneemunum wine, kah nuttinnumauon ketass8t: kah matta nutchadchepshóp ut anaquabit.
E.2.1 And it came to pass in the month Nisan, in the twentieth year of Artaxerxes the king, that wine was before him: and I took up the wine, and gave it unto the king. Now I had not been beforetime sad in his presence.

α.2.2 Newaj ketass8t unnukquée, tohwhutch chepineunkqusséan matta mahchináan? yeu monteag wbe neuan8tamwe metah, neit numm8cheke wabis,
E.2.2 Wherefore the king said unto me, Why is thy countenance sad, seeing thou art not sick? this is nothing else but sorrow of heart. Then I was very sore afraid,

α.2.3 Kah nuttin ketass8t, ketass8t micheme pomantaj: tohwutch matta woh neuanatamweinneunkqussu, keitotan, ne ohtag n8shog 8weenohkeash, mahchum88k, kah nish squontamash n8taut ut mohtuttáash?
E.2.3 And said unto the king, Let the king live for ever: why should not my countenance be sad, when the city, the place of my fathers' sepulchres, lieth waste, and the gates thereof are consumed with fire?

α.2.4 Ketass8t nuttinuk, teaguas k8wehquetum? neit nuppeantamau kesukque Manit.
E.2.4 Then the king said unto me, For what dost thou make request? So I prayed to the God of heaven.

α.2.5 Kah nuttinnomp ketass8t: tapeneog ketass8t, kah kittinneum [na]mehteunk tapene[á]adtuonk ut anaquabean, woh kummoncheáheh en Judah, en keitotanat, na n8shog 8weenohkeash ohtag, onk woh nutayimun.
E.2.5 And I said unto the king, If it please the king, and if thy servant have found favour in thy sight, that thou wouldest send me unto Judah, unto the city of my fathers' sepulchres, that I may build it.

α.2.6 Kah ketass8t nuttinuk, (kah wonk kéhchissonkisq noh kishkappu) toh pish utt8cheyeu8 kuppomusháonk? kah ahquompak wonk kutomponchem? neit ketass8t wuttappeneamun nummoncheáhikqunat, kah nukkuhquttumau ahquompi.
E.2.6 And the king said unto me, (the queen also sitting by him,) For how long shall thy journey be? and when wilt thou return? So it pleased the king to send me; and I set him a time.

α.2.7 Wonk nuttin ketass8t, tapeneog ketass8t, wussukwhongash uninnumaiinneach en nánawunnuénuog nag ogkomut, onk woh nag nukqushkogónukquog, pajeh nuppeyonat Judah.
E.2.7 Moreover I said unto the king, If it please the king, let letters be given me to the governors beyond the river, that they may convey me over till I come into Judah;

α.2.8 Kah wussukwhonk en Asaphut noh nanawehteunk ketass8t wuttouohkomukodt8m, onk woh nuttinnumunk timber, ayeuónat beamsog wutch mishekomukqut ne wadchiik wetuómut, kah wutche keitotanae pummeneutunk, kah wetu né pish petuttei: kah ketass8t n8weet8wómuk, neaunak 8newunnutcheg num-Manitt8m ut nuhhogkat.
E.2.8 And a letter unto Asaph the keeper of the king's forest, that he may give me timber to make beams for the gates of the palace which appertained to the house, and for the wall of the city, and for the house that I shall enter into. And the king granted me, according to the good hand of my God upon me.

α.2.9 Neit nuppeyaon nanawunnuénuog ut ogkomae sepuut, kah nag nuttinnumauóog ketass8t 8sukuhwhongash (kah ketass8t n8weecháhtinuk ayeuhteáe mugquompoh, kah horsesoh na8mukqutcheg.)
E.2.9 Then I came to the governors beyond the river, and gave them the king's letters. Now the king had sent captains of the army and horsemen with me.

α.2.10 Sanballat wut-Horonit, kah Tobiah Ammonite wuttinneumunneunk, n8tamwehettit, m8cheke wunneuantamhukqunnea[u], newutche na wuttit peyon wosketomp natinnehamunat 8niyeuongan8 wunnaumonuh Israel.
E.2.10 When Sanballat the Horonite, and Tobiah the servant, the Ammonite, heard of it, it grieved them exceedingly that there was come a man to seek the welfare of the children of Israel.

α.2.11 Neit nuppeyom Jerusalem, kah na nishikquinuhkon.
E.2.11 So I came to Jerusalem, and was there three days.

α.2.12 Kah nunneepoh nukkonáe, nen kah nawhutch wosketompaog weeche nen, kah matta howan nuttinnóun, ne God ponuk nuttahhut ussenat ut Jerusalem, kah matta puppinashim n8wetomuk8h, webe noh pu[m]pinashim na8mukqueh.
E.2.12 And I arose in the night, I and some few men with me; neither told I any man what my God had put in my heart to do at Jerusalem: neither was there any beast with me, save the beast that I rode upon.

α.2.13 Kah nussohham nukkonáeu, wutch 8nouhkoiyeue squontamut, anaquohtag dragone wuttahhamonk, kah ut anhohkée squontamut, kah nukkehkinneam Jerusaleme pummeneutunkash, nish tauwutchashunkish, kah nish ushquontamash mohtuttaash ut n8taut.
E.2.13 And I went out by night by the gate of the valley, even before the dragon well, and to the dung port, and viewed the walls of Jerusalem, which were broken down, and the gates thereof were consumed with fire.

α.2.14 Neit nukkutchittôusham en tohkekômue squontamut, kah en ketass8t wunnupsumut: kah na matta ayeuonganinno, uttôh woh adt ôs8wushadt puppinashim noh quenapeh.
E.2.14 Then I went on to the gate of the fountain, and to the king's pool: but there was no place for the beast that was under me to pass.

α.2.15 Neit nukonáe nukkuhkukquem ut kishke sepuesuk, kah nukkehkinneam pummeneutunk, kah nukqushkem kah nuppetutteam ut 8nôuhkoiyeue squontamut, kah nukqushkem.
E.2.15 Then went I up in the night by the brook, and viewed the wall, and turned back, and entered by the gate of the valley, and so returned.

α.2.16 Kah nanawunnuenúog matta wahteau8og uttôh âyôi, asuh t[ô]h asée, kah asquam nuttinnóuneau Jewsog, asuh sephausuénuog, asuh kehtauáog, asuh manawunnuénuog, asuh onkatogig neg asécheg anakausuonk.
E.2.16 And the rulers knew not whither I went, or what I did; neither had I as yet told it to the Jews, nor to the priests, nor to the nobles, nor to the rulers, nor to the rest that did the work.

α.2.17 Neit nag nuttinnóog, kenaumuneau, quequenauáu[a]móonk ne áhtauog, utt[ô]h [â]n Jerusalem mahchum8m8uk, kah usquontamash mohtutaash nashpe n8tau: [é]hoh ayimuttuh Jerusaleme pummeneutunk, onk woh matta woh kukkekomitteómun.
E.2.17 Then said I unto them, Ye see the distress that we are in, how Jerusalem lieth waste, and the gates thereof are burned with fire: come, and let us build up the wall of Jerusalem, that we be no more a reproach.

α.2.18 Neit nag nuttinnóog 8newunnutcheg God ne appehtunkqueh, kah wonk ukkutt8wongash ketass8t nish aseupash, kah nag n8waog, neepauwutteuh kah pummeneuteósitteuh, neit nag menehkitteauog wunnutcheganoash wutche yeu wunanakausuonk.
E.2.18 Then I told them of the hand of my God which was good upon me; as also the king's words that he had spoken unto me. And they said, Let us rise up and build. So they strengthened their hands for this good work.

α.2.19 Qut Sanballat wut-Horonite, kah Tobiah Ammonite wuttinneumuneunk, kah Gershem wut-Arabian n8tamwehettit, nummamishananumwehtunkqunnónog, kah nutjishánummukqunónog, kah nag n8wáog, teaguas yeu aseóg? sun kutcheketauómw8 ketass8t?
E.2.19 But when Sanballat the Horonite, and Tobiah the servant, the Ammonite, and Geshem the Arabian, heard it, they laughed us to scorn, and despised us, and said, What is this thing that ye do? will ye rebel against the king?

α.2.20 Neit nag nunnamp8hamauóog, kah nuttinóog, kesukque Manit, noh pish k8niyeuhikqun, newaj nenawun wuttinneumoh, pish nutomohkemun, kah n8weekitteamun: qut kenaau matta k8chippiyeumeumw8, asuh k8sampwiyeumeumw8, asuh mehquontamóonk ut Jerusalem.
E.2.20 Then answered I them, and said unto them, The God of heaven, he will prosper us; therefore we his servants will arise and build: but ye have no portion, nor right, nor memorial, in Jerusalem.

α.3.1 NEit Eliashib kehche sephausuénin, weeche neepomau wematoh sephausuénúh, kah nag ayimwog shepse squont, nag 8neetupanatamw[á]htineau, kah wutushquontámuhkóneau, wehque Meahhe qunuhquikomukqut 8neetupanatamwahtineau, wehque Hananeelle qunuhquikomukqut.
E.3.1 Then Eliashib the high priest rose up with his brethren the priests, and they builded the sheep gate; they sanctified it, and set up the doors of it; even unto the tower of Meah they sanctified it, unto the tower of Hananeel.

α.3.2 Kah asuhkunk Jerichoe wosketompuh wekitteaog: kah nag asuhkunkquog Zaccur wunnaumonuh Imri weekitteau.
E.3.2 And next unto him builded the men of Jericho. And next to them builded Zaccur the son of Imri.

α.3.3 Qut namohse usquont wunnaumonuh Hassenaah wekitteaog, noh wonk wánsumont beamsoh, kah wunohtou squotnamash, kah locksash, kah barsash.
E.3.3 But the fish gate did the sons of Hassenaah build, who also laid the beams thereof, and set up the doors thereof, the locks thereof, and the bars thereof.

α.3.4 Kah nag asuhkunkquog Merimoth wunnaumonuh Urijah, wunnaumonuh Koz, onch[e]hteau: kah nag asuhkongquog Meshullam wunnaumonuh Berechiah, wunnaumonuh Meshezabeel: kah asuhkunkquog Zadokoh wunnaumonuh Baana, onchehteau.
E.3.4 And next unto them repaired Meremoth the son of Urijah, the son of Koz. And next unto them repaired Meshullam the son of Berechiah, the son of Meshezabeel. And next unto them repaired Zadok the son of Baana.

α.3.5 Kah nag asuhkunkquog Tekoitsoh onchehteúhsuog, qut ahtûhshkauoh, matta uppondamauóuh wussittuppukan8óut wutanakausuonk Lord.
E.3.5 And next unto them the Tekoites repaired; but their nobles put not their necks to the work of their LORD.

α.3.6 Kah wonk nukkône squont Jehojadah wunnaumonuh Paseah, kah Meshullam wunnaumonuh Besodajah: nag wunussumáog beamsoh, kah wunohtóog nish ushquontamash, kah locksash, kah nish barsash.
E.3.6 Moreover the old gate repaired Jehoiada the son of Paseah, and Meshullam the son of Besodeiah; they laid the beams thereof, and set up the doors thereof, and the locks thereof, and the bars thereof.

α.3.7 Kah nag asuhkongquog Melatiahoh uk-Gibeonit, kah Jadon um-Meronothit, Gibeone wosketompaog, kah wutch mizpah, wehque wutappuonganit nanawunn[a]enin wutashin ogkomae.
E.3.7 And next unto them repaired Melatiah the Gibeonite, and Jadon the Meronothite, the men of Gibeon, and of Mizpah, unto the throne of the governor on this side the river.

α.3.8 Noh asuhkunk Uzziel wunnaumonuh Harhajah, onchteausu, Gold anakausuen: wonk noh ahsuhkoue onchehteomuk Hannaniah, wunnaumonuh Apothecary, kah nag pummeneutoog Jerusalem wehque mishe kishkinneutunkanit.
E.3.8 Next unto him repaired Uzziel the son of Harhaiah, of the goldsmiths. Next unto him also repaired Hananiah the son of one of the apothecaries, and they fortified Jerusalem unto the broad wall.

α.3.9 Neg asuhkaue onchehteomukquog, Rephajehoh wunnaumonuh Hur, pohshe nanawunuk Jerusalem.
E.3.9 And next unto them repaired Rephaiah the son of Hur, the ruler of the half part of Jerusalem.

α.3.10 Kah asuhkaue onchehteomuk Juda$Jahoh wunnaumonuh Harumaph, papiuhsukeh wekit: kah asuhkaue oncheteauomuk Hattush wunnaumonuh Hashabniah.
E.3.10 And next unto them repaired Jedaiah the son of Harumaph, even over against his house. And next unto him repaired Hattush the son of Hashabniah.

α.3.11 Malchijah wunnaumonuh Harim, kah Hashub, wunnaumonuh Pahath-Moab, onchehteauog onkatog kodchuhki, kah sabassumwe qunuhquikomuk.
E.3.11 Malchijah the son of Harim, and Hashub the son of Pahathmoab, repaired the other piece, and the tower of the furnaces.

α.3.12 Kah noh asuhkaue onchehteauomuk Shallumoh wunnaumonuh Halloesh, nanauunuk pohshe Jerusalem, nagum kah wuttaunoh.
E.3.12 And next unto him repaired Shallum the son of Halohesh, the ruler of the half part of Jerusalem, he and his daughters.

α.3.13 OOnouhkoi squont Hamin wutonchitteauun, kah wadohkitcheg Zanoah, nag wutayimuneau, kah wunohtoog nish uhsquontamash, nish locksash, kah nish barsash, kah nequt muttannungane ishquanogkod wôskeche neutunkan, wehque anohkee squontamut.
E.3.13 The valley gate repaired Hanun, and the inhabitants of Zanoah; they built it, and set up the doors thereof, the locks thereof, and the bars thereof, and a thousand cubits on the wall unto the dung gate.

α.3.14 Qut anohkee usquont Malchiah wutonchehteauun, wunnaumonuh Rechab, noh nanawunuk nawhutch ut Beth-Haccarem, wutayimun kah wunohtau squontamash, nish locksash, kah nish barsash
E.3.14 But the dung gate repaired Malchiah the son of Rechab, the ruler of part of Bethhaccerem; he built it, and set up the doors thereof, the locks thereof, and the bars thereof.

α.3.15 Qut tohkekommue squont shallum wunnaumonuh Col-hozeh noh nawhutch nanawunuk ut Mizpah, wutonchehteauun: wutayimun, kah wutogquodtumun, kah wunohto nish ushquontamash nish locksash, kah nish barsash, kah pummeneutunk ut Silaae nuppissepagwut, kishke ketass8t wutchippeneutunkanit, kah wehque stairsut nish womushishunkish wutch wutotanat David.
E.3.15 But the gate of the fountain repaired Shallun the son of Colhozeh, the ruler of part of Mizpah; he built it, and covered it, and set up the doors thereof, the locks thereof, and the bars thereof, and the wall of the pool of Siloah by the king's garden, and unto the stairs that go down from the city of David.

α.3.16 Asuhkaue onchehteau8muk Nehemiah wunnaumonuh Azbuk, no nanawunuk pohshe ut Bethzur, wehque piuhsuke 8weenohkit David, kah nippissepog ne ayimukup, kah wehque wekit noh manuhkesit.
E.3.16 After him repaired Nehemiah the son of Azbuk, the ruler of the half part of Bethzur, unto the place over against the sepulchres of David, and to the pool that was made, and unto the house of the mighty.

α.3.17 Noh asuhkaue onchehteau8muk Levitsoh, Rehum wunnaumonuh Bani: nahohtoeu onchteauomuk Aashabiah, noh pohshe nanawunuk ut Reilah, ut wutchippiyeumut.
E.3.17 After him repaired the Levites, Rehum the son of Bani. Next unto him repaired Hashabiah, the ruler of the half part of Keilah, in his part.

α.3.18 Noh asuhkaue onchehteauomuk wematoh, Bani wunnaumonuh Henadad, noh nanawunuk pohshe Keilah.
E.3.18 After him repaired their brethren, Bavai the son of Henadad, the ruler of the half part of Keilah.

α.3.19 Kah Nahohtoeu onchehteau8muk Ezer wunnaumonuh Jeshua, Mizpahe nanawunnuenin, onkatuk kodchuhki piuhsuke ahhut kuhkuhquemuk kenauwamée kommukqut.
E.3.19 And next to him repaired Ezer the son of Jeshua, the ruler of Mizpah, another piece over against the going up to the armoury at the turning of the wall.

α.3.20 Noh asuhkunk, Baruch wunnaumonuh Zabbi menuhke onchehteo8 onkatuk kodchuhki, wutch waj quttukqshunk wehque squontamut wekit Eliashib negonne sephausuen.
E.3.20 After him Baruch the son of Zabbai earnestly repaired the other piece, from the turning of the wall unto the door of the house of Eliashib the high priest.

α.3.21 Noh asuhkaue onchehteau8muk Merimoth wunnaumonuh Uriah, wunnaumonuh Koz, onkatuk kodchuhki, wutch squontamut wekit Eliashib, wehque wehqshik wek Eliashib
E.3.21 After him repaired Meremoth the son of Urijah the son of Koz another piece, from the door of the house of Eliashib even to the end of the house of Eliashib.

α.3.22 Kah asuhkaue onchehteau8muk sephausu[é]núh, mukoshquttae wosketompaog.
E.3.22 And after him repaired the priests, the men of the plain.

α.3.23 Kah nahohtôeu onchehteau8muk Benjaminoh, kah Hashub, piuhsuke wek8óut: nahohtôe onchehteau8muk Azariahoh wunnaumonuh Maasejah, wunnaumonuh Ananiah, kishke wekit.
E.3.23 After him repaired Benjamin and Hashub over against their house. After him repaired Azariah the son of Maaseiah the son of Ananiah by his house.

α.3.24 Nahohtôeu onchehteau8muk Binnui wunnaumonuh Henadad onkatuk kodchuhki, wutch wekit Azariah, ut adt quttukqshunk, adt naiyagk.
E.3.24 After him repaired Binnui the son of Henadad another piece, from the house of Azariah unto the turning of the wall, even unto the corner.

α.3.25 Palal wunnaumonuh Uzai, piuhsuke adt quttukshunk, kah qunuhquikomuk, ne poquodchit ketass8t ukqunuhquikomukqut poquadchit ketass8t ukqunuhquikomukqut ne kishke kuppishagkinnittue chippinneutunkanit: asuhkunk Pedajah wunnaumonuh Parosh.
E.3.25 Palal the son of Uzai, over against the turning of the wall, and the tower which lieth out from the king's high house, that was by the court of the prison. After him Pedaiah the son of Parosh.

α.3.26 Wonk Nethinimsog wutohtuog Ophel, wehque piuhsuke nippée squontamut, nogque wutchepwoiyeu, kah qunuhquikomuk ne poquodchiyeu.
E.3.26 Moreover the Nethinims dwelt in Ophel, unto the place over against the water gate toward the east, and the tower that lieth out.

α.3.27 Nag asuhkaue onchteau8mukquog Tekoitsoh onkatuk kodchuhkoi piuhsuke mishe qunuhquikomukqut ne poquodchitohtag, wehque Ophelle chippinneutunkanit.
E.3.27 After them the Tekoites repaired another piece, over against the great tower that lieth out, even unto the wall of Ophel.

α.3.28 Wutch waabe horsese squontamut sephausuenuog wutonchteauuneau, nishnoh pasuk piuhsuke wekit.
E.3.28 From above the horse gate repaired the priests, every one over against his house.

α.3.29 Noh asuhkaue oncheteau Zadok wunnaumonuh Immer, piuhsuke wekit, nahohtoeu oncheteau8muk Shemajah wuñaumonuh Shechaniah, nanauuhteunk wutchepwoisquont.
E.3.29 After them repaired Zadok the son of Immer over against his house. After him repaired also Shemaiah the son of Shechaniah, the keeper of the east gate.

α.3.30 Nahohtôeu onchehteau8muk Hananiah wunnaumonuh Shelemiah, kah Hanun noh nequtta adtahs8it wunnaumonuh Zaleph, onkatuk kodchuhki: nahohtoeu onchehteauómuk Meshullam, wunnaumonuh Berechiah, piuhsuke wutchamberumut.
E.3.30 After him repaired Hananiah the son of Shelemiah, and Hanun the sixth son of Zalaph, another piece. After him repaired Meshullam the son of Berechiah over against his chamber.

α.3.31 Nah asuhkaue onchehteauómuk Malchijah wunnaumonuh golde anakausuwaenin, wehque Nethinimse ayeuonganit, kah anaqushaenutu: piuhsuke Miphkade squontamut, kah wehque adt kuhkuhquemuk adt naiyagk.
E.3.31 After him repaired Malchiah the goldsmith's son unto the place of the Nethinims, and of the merchants, over against the gate Miphkad, and to the going up of the corner.

α.3.32 Kah nashaue ahhut kuhkuhquemuk adt naiyagk wehque sheepse squontamut, golde anakausuenuog, kah anaqushaénuog wutonchehteauuneau.
E.3.32 And between the going up of the corner unto the sheep gate repaired the goldsmiths and the merchants.

α.4.1 QUt nniyeup, Sanballat n8tog nutáyimumun pummeneutunk, musquantam, kah m8cheke jishanitteau, kah momontauau Jewsoh
E.4.1 But it came to pass, that when Sanballat heard that we builded the wall, he was wroth, and took great indignation, and mocked the Jews.

α.4.2 Kah keket8kau ut anaquabenit wematoh, kah ukkenauwameumoh Samaria, kah n8wau, toh usseog yeug n8chumwe Jewsog? sun wonkon8sunúhkauaog wuhhogkauh? sun woh sephausuog? sun woh ukkesteauuneau pasuk kesukod? sun woh nemunumwog qussukquanash wutch numwonkquaut, nish chagohtagish?
E.4.2 And he spake before his brethren and the army of Samaria, and said, What do these feeble Jews? will they fortify themselves? will they sacrifice?  will they make an end in a day? will they revive the stones out of the heaps of the rubbish which are burned?

α.4.3 Kah Tobiah wut-Ammonit uppas8sukunkquoh, kah n8wau, ne ayimmohettit, wonkqussis kuhkuhqueit, woh tauwutchohkom ukqussukquannutunkan8.
E.4.3 Now Tobiah the Ammonite was by him, and he said, Even that which they build, if a fox go up, he shall even break down their stone wall.

α.4.4 N8tash woi num-Manitt8mun, newutche nutjishanumunitteamun, kah quinupinush wutushpunadtam8ongan8 en nehenwonche uppuhkuk8óut, kah neg magush en sequttahham8onganit ut missinae ohkit.
E.4.4 Hear, O our God; for we are despised: and turn their reproach upon their own head, and give them for a prey in the land of captivity:

α.4.5 Kah puttoghum8hkon ummatcheseongan8, kah uppaneseongan8 ahque jishkhamunach ut anaquabean: newutche kumm8m8sqhikquog ut anaquabhettit wekitteaenuog.
E.4.5 And cover not their iniquity, and let not their sin be blotted out from before thee: for they have provoked thee to anger before the builders.

α.4.6 Neit nutayimumun pummeneutunk, kah wame pummeneutunk waadjisheau, ne papuhshe: newutche missinninnuog ahchu anakausuog
E.4.6 So built we the wall; and all the wall was joined together unto the half thereof: for the people had a mind to work.

α.4.7 Qut nniyeup, Sanballat kah Tobiah, kah Arabiansog, kah Ammonitsog kah Ashdoditsog, n8tamwehettit Jerusaleme pummeneutongash kesteausuash, kah sohquagish n8che kuppohhôsuash, neit m8cheke musquanittamwog.
E.4.7 But it came to pass, that when Sanballat, and Tobiah, and the Arabians, and the Ammonites, and the Ashdodites, heard that the walls of Jerusalem were made up, and that the breaches began to be stopped, then they were very wroth,

α.4.8 Kah wame neg moáe wunn8waog, peyonat, kah ayeukontamunat Jerusalem, kah 8tamehtinneaóont.
E.4.8 And conspired all of them together to come and to fight against Jerusalem, and to hinder it.

α.4.9 Qut nuppeantamauómun God, kah nutaskwhounónog kesukodae kah nukonáe, newutche nag.
E.4.9 Nevertheless we made our prayer unto our God, and set a watch against them day and night, because of them.

α.4.10 Kah Judah n8wau, ummenuhkesuongan8 neg weassukeg mahtsheau, kah monat sequhkuttag, newaj n8nanumweog ayimun qussukquaneneutunk.
E.4.10 And Judah said, The strength of the bearers of burdens is decayed, and there is much rubbish; so that we are not able to build the wall.

α.4.11 Kah ayeuqueagig n8waog, matta pish wahteau8og, asuh naum8og nô pajeh kuppeyonanonut wunnashaum8óut, kah kenushóunónog, kah netahshehteauunat anakausuonk.
E.4.11 And our adversaries said, They shall not know, neither see, till we come in the midst among them, and slay them, and cause the work to cease.

α.4.12 Kah nniyeup, Jewsog neg na kishke wadohkitcheg, paáhettit nuttugqunonog piogqut nompe, wutche wame ayeuonganehtu, uttoh waj qushkeog en nuhhogkanonut, nag pish kukquentunk8óog.
E.4.12 And it came to pass, that when the Jews which dwelt by them came, they said unto us ten times, From all places whence ye shall return unto us they will be upon you.

α.4.13 Newaj ponog, agwée ayeuonganit, ogkomáe pummeneutunkanit, kah qunuhqui ayeuonganit, nuttinne ponoog missinninn[ù]og neaunak wutteateashiyeuongan8oash, nashpe wuttogkodtegash, kah ukqunuhtugk8oash, kah wutahtompeuh.
E.4.13 Therefore set I in the lower places behind the wall, and on the higher places, I even set the people after their families with their swords, their spears, and their bows.

α.4.14 Kah nátauwompip, kah neepóp, kah nuttinnomp áhtúhskauwáog, kah nanawunnuáenuog, kah onkatogig missinninnúog, ahque nag qush8k: mehquanumok Lord, noh masugkenuk, kah uhqueneunkqussit, & ayeuhteaunsheuk kematt8óog, kenaumonaóog kah kuttaunoóog, kummittamwuss8oog, kah kek8oash.
E.4.14 And I looked, and rose up, and said unto the nobles, and to the rulers, and to the rest of the people, Be not ye afraid of them: remember the LORD, which is great and terrible, and fight for your brethren, your sons, and your daughters, your wives, and your houses.

α.4.15 Kah nniyeup nummatwomunonog n8tamwehettit n8wahteauunan, kah God monteagwunnehteóou ukken8nittuongan8, nukqushkemun wame nenawun en pummenutonganit, nish$noh pasuk en wutanakausuonganit.
E.4.15 And it came to pass, when our enemies heard that it was known unto us, and God had brought their counsel to nought, that we returned all of us to the wall, every one unto his work.

α.4.16 Kah n$niyeup, nawutch n8cheu, pohshe nuttinneumog anakausuog ut anakausuonganit, kah onkatogig pohsheyeuitcheg, kenunnumwog qunuhtugquash, ogqunnegash kah ahtompeh, kah haburgeonsash, kah nanawunnuenuog, ongkaue neepoog ut wame wekit Judah.
E.4.16 And it came to pass from that time forth, that the half of my servants wrought in the work, and the other half of them held both the spears, the shields, and the bows, and the habergeons; and the rulers were behind all the house of Judah.

α.4.17 Neg pameneutausitcheg ut pameneutonkanit, kah weasukeg, kah yeug weassuonganehteacheg, pasuk menutcheg anakausuohtau, kah onkatuk ukkenauwameonk ohteau.
E.4.17 They which builded on the wall, and they that bare burdens, with those that laded, every one with one of his hands wrought in the work, and with the other hand held a weapon.

α.4.18 Newutche wekitteaenuog nish$noh pasuk puttukquobpissu wuttogkodteg, kah ne wuttin wekuhkon, kah noh papequohtunk monopuhpeg, noh weechiyeumuk.
E.4.18 For the builders, every one had his sword girded by his side, and so builded. And he that sounded the trumpet was by me.

α.4.19 Kah nuttin ahtuhskauaog, kah nanawunuenuog kah onkatogig missinninnuog, anakausuonk missi, kah kishki, kah nutchadchabapimun ut woskecheneutunkan; nunnana8sukôadtimun.
E.4.19 And I said unto the nobles, and to the rulers, and to the rest of the people, The work is great and large, and we are separated upon the wall, one far from another.

α.4.20 Newutche uttoh adt n8tamog wuttauatonkqussum8 monopuhpeg, na$ut wame peyaausinan, kum$Manitt8mun pish kutayeuwehteaunshikqun.
E.4.20 In what place therefore ye hear the sound of the trumpet, resort ye thither unto us: our God shall fight for us.

α.4.21 Nemehkuh nutanakausimun ut anakausuonganit, kah nag pohshe, kenunnumwog qunnuhtukquash, wutch nompoaeu, nô pajeh anogqsog nogqussehettit.
E.4.21 So we laboured in the work: and half of them held the spears from the rising of the morning till the stars appeared.

α.4.22 Wonk ne nan ahquompak nuttinomp missinninnuog, nish$noh pasuk weesequom8monch wuttinneumoh, anome Jerusalem, onk woh nukkonae k8wadchanukqunnonog, kah woh anakausuog kesukodaeu.
E.4.22 Likewise at the same time said I unto the people, Let every one with his servant lodge within Jerusalem, that in the night they may be a guard to us, and labour on the day.

α.4.23 Neit matta nen, asuh neematog, asuh nuttinneumog, asuh wadchanuae wosketompaog, neg asukkiitcheg, wanne howan neenawun, nutamaunum8mun nuthogk8ununonash, webe nish$noh pasuk ukkodtannumunash, wutche kutchissittoonk.
E.4.23 So neither I, nor my brethren, nor my servants, nor the men of the guard which followed me, none of us put off our clothes, saving that every one put them off for washing.

α.5.1 KAh wosketompaog kah ummittamwuss8oh ayeuuhkonittue mishe mauuniitteauaog Jewsoh weemat8uh.
E.5.1 And there was a great cry of the people and of their wives against their brethren the Jews.

α.5.2 Newutche nawhutch, n8waog nenawun nunnaumononog kah nuttaununonog numm8nam[ū], newutche nunnemunnumumun weatchiminneásh, onk woh nummeetsimun, kah woh nuppomantamumun
E.5.2 For there were that said, We, our sons, and our daughters, are many: therefore we take up corn for them, that we may eat, and live.

α.5.3 Nawhutch wonk an8wacheg, nukkinnohtohsimun, nutohkenonash, n8weenominneohteuhkonunash, kah nekinonash, onk woh nutattóomun weatchiminneash, newutche mahshagqueneaonk.
E.5.3 Some also there were that said, We have mortgaged our lands, vineyards, and houses, that we might buy corn, because of the dearth.

α.5.4 Nawhutche wonk n8waog nunnogkuhkomun teaguas, wutche ketass8t ompwunnaonganit, wutche nutohkeunonash, kah n8weenominneohtekononash.
E.5.4 There were also that said, We have borrowed money for the king's tribute, and that upon our lands and vineyards.

α.5.5 Qut onch nutuhquabin neaneyeu8 wutuhquabeu neemattinonog: & nunneechanunnonog onátuhheyeou8oh wunneechan8out, kah kusseh nuttaununonog missinnainneat, wuttinneuminneat, kah nawhutch nuttaununonog mahche missinno8og, kah n8nanumumun pohquohwhunonat, newutche onkatogig ohtoog nutohkenonash kah n8wenominneohtekonunonash.
E.5.5 Yet now our flesh is as the flesh of our brethren, our children as their children: and, lo, we bring into bondage our sons and our daughters to be servants, and some of our daughters are brought unto bondage already: neither is it in our power to redeem them; for other men have our lands and vineyards.

α.5.6 Kah numm8cheke musquantamup, n8tamon ummauongan8, kah yeush kutt8wongash.
E.5.6 And I was very angry when I heard their cry and these words.

α.5.7 Neit nen nunnehenwonche natwontam, kah nutaushkom ahtuhshkauaog, kah nanawunnuenuog, kah nag nuttinoog, kutchekee nemunnumumw8 ontsompadtamoonk nish$noh pasuk wutch wematut: kah nutayeuuhkonittue ponumauoog mishe moeonk.
E.5.7 Then I consulted with myself, and I rebuked the nobles, and the rulers, and said unto them, Ye exact usury, every one of his brother. And I set a great assembly against them.

α.5.8 Kah nag nuttinoog, nenawun, neane tapenumog, tomwehheonan Jewse neemattinnonog, neg magumukeg en pen8wohteahtu kah sun woh kenaau kummagum8 kematt8oog? asuh sun nag woh magunnunk en kuhhogkaout: neit chequnappuog, kah wanne teag namehteauoog namp8hamwohtinat.
E.5.8 And I said unto them, We after our ability have redeemed our brethren the Jews, which were sold unto the heathen; and will ye even sell your brethren? or shall they be sold unto us? Then held they their peace, and found nothing to answer.

α.5.9 Kah nussip, matta wunnegenunn8 ne aseog: suñummatta kutahchue pomushomw8 qushaōganit kum$Manitt8mũ, newutche wutushpunadtam8ongan8 num̃atwomog?
E.5.9 Also I said, It is not good that ye do: ought ye not to walk in the fear of our God because of the reproach of the heathen our enemies?

α.5.10 Wonk nen kah nematog, kah nuttinneumog, woh nutchekee unwontamauounonog teaguash, kah weatchimineash, k8wehquetumauunumw8 amaunumuttah yeu ontsampadtamoonk.
E.5.10 I likewise, and my brethren, and my servants, might exact of them money and corn: I pray you, let us leave off this usury.

α.5.11 K8wehquetumaunuumw8 yeu kesukok nompe aninnumok, wutohkeimooash, 8weenominneohtekon8oash, Oliveohteakon8oash, kah wek8oash, kah wonk noqut pásuk8e chippag, teaguas, kah weatchiminneash, wine kah pummee, nish chekee amaunumauogish.
E.5.11 Restore, I pray you, to them, even this day, their lands, their vineyards, their oliveyards, and their houses, also the hundredth part of the money, and of the corn, the wine, and the oil, that ye exact of them.

α.5.12 Neit nag n8waog, nunnompe unninnumaonanonash, kah wanne teag n8n8wannanonog, ne nutussenan an8waan, neit n8wehkum sephausuenuog, kah nutchadchekeyeuwahheonaout, woh wutussenaout neaunak yeu quoshowaonk.
E.5.12 Then said they, We will restore them, and will require nothing of them; so will we do as thou sayest. Then I called the priests, and took an oath of them, that they should do according to this promise.

α.5.13 Kah nuttattauwhoteap wussaie numm8nak, kah nussip, nene God tattauwohteaj nish$noh wosketompuh wutch wekit, kah wutch wutanakausuonganit, noh matta aseik yeu quoshowaonk, yeu pish in tatt[a]uuhkon, kah sequnau, kah wame mukkinneunk n8waog Amen, kah woweenomaog Jehovahoh, kah missinninnuog usseog neaunak yeu quoshauwaonk.
E.5.13 Also I shook my lap, and said, So God shake out every man from his house, and from his labour, that performeth not this promise, even thus be he shaken out, and emptied. And all the congregation said, Amen, and praised the LORD. And the people did according to this promise.

α.5.14 Wonk wutch na ahquompak adt kehtimimuk nunnanawunuenuuneat ut Judae ohkit wutch nesehchage ukkodtum8mut, pajeh shwinchage kah neese ukkodtum8mit, Artaxerxes ketass8t, nabo neese kodtum8k, nen kah neematog, matta nummeech8mun nanawunnuénin nuppetukqunneg.
E.5.14 Moreover from the time that I was appointed to be their governor in the land of Judah, from the twentieth year even unto the two and thirtieth year of Artaxerxes the king, that is, twelve years, I and my brethren have not eaten the bread of the governor.

α.5.15 Qut negonnáe nanawunnuwaenúog, neg negonuhkiitcheg, ôadtehteaháog missinninnúh, kah wunnemunnumauóuh petukqunneg, kah wine, chaubok yauunchage silvere shekelsash, nux, wuttinneumoh, nanawunáog missinninnúh: qut ne mat nutussein, newutche nukqusháonk God.
E.5.15 But the former governors that had been before me were chargeable unto the people, and had taken of them bread and wine, beside forty shekels of silver; yea, even their servants bare rule over the people: but so did not I, because of the fear of God.

α.5.16 Nux kah wonk, nunnagwutteahteop pummeneutunkane anakausuonk, kah matta nutattoómun ohke: kah wame nuttinneumog, na wuttin miyaéneau en anakausuonganit.
E.5.16 Yea, also I continued in the work of this wall, neither bought we any land: and all my servants were gathered thither unto the work.

α.5.17 Kah wonk na wutapineau ut nuttableumut, nequt pasuk88og, kah napanna tahshinchagkussog Jewsog, kah nanawunnuenúog, chaubussitcheg yeug paúhónukqueagig, wutch kenugke penuwohteáut, neg weenuhkunkqueagig. 
E.5.17 Moreover there were at my table an hundred and fifty of the Jews and rulers, beside those that came unto us from among the heathen that are about us.

α.5.18 Kah ne asekesukokish quagwashwehtamiimuk, pasuk ox, nequtta tasuog pepenauutcheg shepsog, wonk puppinshasog nukquagquoshwehtonteanunk, kah pasukqut piogkukquinne, m8che eiyane wine; quot onch matta n8wehquetum8 nanawunnuáe petukqunnunk, newutche missinnóoonk wussaume tuhkequan ut missinninnùtu.
E.5.18 Now that which was prepared for me daily was one ox and six choice sheep; also fowls were prepared for me, and once in ten days store of all sorts of wine: yet for all this required not I the bread of the governor, because the bondage was heavy upon this people.

α.5.19 Mehquanumeh num-Manitt8m, wutche wanegik, wame neanheog yeug missinninnúog.
E.5.19 Think upon me, my God, for good, according to all that I have done for this people.

α.6.1 KAh nniyeup Sanballat kah Tobiah, kah Geshem wut-Arabian, kah onkatogig nummatwomunonog, n8tamwehettit nukkesteoh pummeneutunk, & wanne na ohtanno touwutchai (tohkônogque asquam n8nohtó8un kuppuhh8unash ut squontamehtu.
E.6.1 Now it came to pass when Sanballat, and Tobiah, and Geshem the Arabian, and the rest of our enemies, heard that I had builded the wall, and that there was no breach left therein; (though at that time I had not set up the doors upon the gates;)

α.6.2 Neit Sanballat kah Geshem negont8waog en nuhhogkat, n8waog, peyaush, nogushkôadtitteuh, ut otanamesehtu, ut Onoe mukoshquttaut, qut nag nukkodwoskehukquog.
E.6.2 That Sanballat and Geshem sent unto me, saying, Come, let us meet together in some one of the villages in the plain of Ono. But they thought to do me mischief.

α.6.3 Kah nutann8nomp ann8naenúog nah en nussip, nummishanakaus newaj matta w8mussu: toh wutch woh anakausuonk netahsheyeu88k, nukkodtumon k8womsúonununnaóont?
E.6.3 And I sent messengers unto them, saying, I am doing a great work, so that I cannot come down: why should the work cease, whilst I leave it, and come down to you?

α.6.4 Qut nag neyauut negont8waog en nuhhogkat; kah nenan nuttinnamp8hamau[ó]neau.
E.6.4 Yet they sent unto me four times after this sort; and I answered them after the same manner.

α.6.5 Neit Sanballat ann8nau wuttinneumoh en nuhhogkat, nenan nompe napanna tahshit wôshinausu wussukwhonk ut wuñutcheganit
E.6.5 Then sent Sanballat his servant unto me in like manner the fifth time with an open letter in his hand;

α.6.6 Ne ut wussukwhosu; weogquttumun ut kenugke pen8wohteaut, kah Gashmu n8wau, ken kah Jewsog kukkodcheketamumw8: ne$waj ayiman pummeneutunk, onk woh ken nag ukkehtass8tamóm8uh, neaunak yeush kutt8wongash.
E.6.6 Wherein was written, It is reported among the heathen, and Gashmu saith it, that thou and the Jews think to rebel: for which cause thou buildest the wall, that thou mayest be their king, according to these words.

α.6.7 Kah wonk kukkehtim quoshodtumwaenuog kuhk8tomwohkonat papaume ken ut Jerusalem, n8wonat, ketass8twam88 ut Judah: kah yeuyeu pish unaunchem8kauon ketass8t neaunak yeush kutt8wongash, newutche yeuyeu peyaush, kah moeu ken8nittitteuh.
E.6.7 And thou hast also appointed prophets to preach of thee at Jerusalem, saying, There is a king in Judah: and now shall it be reported to the king according to these words. Come now therefore, and let us take counsel together.

α.6.8 Neit negont8wam en wuhhogkat, nussip, wanne nish nnán8ash ne an8waan, qut nish kuppogkodtantamunash wutch nehenwonche kuttahhut.
E.6.8 Then I sent unto him, saying, There are no such things done as thou sayest, but thou feignest them out of thine own heart.

α.6.9 Newutche nag wame n8wabesuhukqunónog; n8waog, wunnutchegan88ash pish n8chamwiash wutch anakausuonk ne woh kesteómuk[.] newutche yeuyeu woi God menehketeaush nunnutchega[n]sh.
E.6.9 For they all made us afraid, saying, Their hands shall be weakened from the work, that it be not done. Now therefore, O God, strengthen my hands.

α.6.10 Ompetak nuppeam wekit Shemajah, wunnaumonuh Delajah, wunnaumonuh Mehetabel, noh kophausit, kah n8wau, nogishkôuttitteuh ut wekit God, anóme temple, kah kuppuhhamuttuh temple squontamash, newutche nag kenonche nushikquog, nux nukkonáe kenonche nushikquog.
E.6.10 Afterward I came unto the house of Shemaiah the son of Delaiah the son of Mehetabeel, who was shut up; and he said, Let us meet together in the house of God, within the temple, and let us shut the doors of the temple: for they will come to slay thee; yea, in the night will they come to slay thee.

α.6.11 Kah nussip, sun woh nen n8sem[?] kah howan noh yanéyeuit nuhhog, woh petutteadt templeut uppohquohwuttauuneat keteaonk? matta nuppetutteam.
E.6.11 And I said, Should such a man as I flee? and who is there, that, being as I am, would go into the temple to save his life? I will not go in.

α.6.12 Kah kusseh, n8wahteoh God matta wutann8nuh: qut noh nutayeuuhkonittue ken8nukqun yeu quoshodtumòonk: newutche Tobiah kah Sanballat wutonkquttauoópuh.
E.6.12 And, lo, I perceived that God had not sent him; but that he pronounced this prophecy against me: for Tobiah and Sanballat had hired him.

α.6.13 Newaj ann8nit, woh n8wabissinneat, kah woh ne nutussen, kah woh nummatchesem, onk woh teag n8ch matchenukquog, onk woh nutushpunámukquog.
E.6.13 Therefore was he hired, that I should be afraid, and do so, and sin, and that they might have matter for an evil report, that they might reproach me.

α.6.14 Num$Manitt8m mehquanum Tobiah kah Sanballat neaunak yeush wutanakausuongan8oash, kah mittamwossisse quoshodtumwaen Noadiah, kah onkatogig quoshodtumwaénuog, neg kod wabesuhukqueaneg.
E.6.14 My God, think thou upon Tobiah and Sanballat according to these their works, and on the prophetess Noadiah, and the rest of the prophets, that would have put me in fear.

α.6.15 Nemehkuh pummeneutunk pakojteausu, nesnehchadtikqunhog kah napanna Elulle nepâuz, napanna tahshinchadtikkesukquae kah nees.
E.6.15 So the wall was finished in the twenty and fifth day of the month Elul, in fifty and two days.

α.6.16 Kah nniyeup, wame nummatwomunnónog n8tamwehettit, kah wame penuwohteaog neg wéenuhkongqueagig namohettit, m8cheke wuttamanatamwog ut nehenwonche wuskesuk8[ó]ut, newutche wahteauog yeu anakausuonk nussen nashpe num-Manitt8mun.
E.6.16 And it came to pass, that when all our enemies heard thereof, and all the heathen that were about us saw these things, they were much cast down in their own eyes: for they perceived that this work was wrought of our God.

α.6.17 Wonk, ut yeush kesukodtash, Judae ahtûhskauáog, nag negonshhuwaog monatash wussukwhongash en Tobiahut, kah Tobiah 8sukkuhwhongash nag uppeyaónukqunnáoash.
E.6.17 Moreover in those days the nobles of Judah sent many letters unto Tobiah, and the letters of Tobiah came unto them.

α.6.18 Newutche monáog ut Judah chadchekéimoncheg: newutche neh ahpenú[hh]cheh Shechaniah, wunnaumonuh Arah, kah Johananoh wunnaumonuh, wetau8mau wuttaunoh Meshullam, wunnaumonuh Berechiah.
E.6.18 For there were many in Judah sworn unto him, because he was the son in law of Shechaniah the son of Arah; and his son Johanan had taken the daughter of Meshullam the son of Berechiah.

α.6.19 Wonk weogquttumwog 8neseongash ut anaquabeh, kah wuttinóuh nukkutt8wongash: Tobiah negonshhuau wussukwongash n8wabissuhikqunat.
E.6.19 Also they reported his good deeds before me, and uttered my words to him. And Tobiah sent letters to put me in fear.

α.7.1 KAh n$niyeup pummeneutunk ayimuk, kah n8nohtop squontamash, kah na[naus]quontamácheg, kah Levitsog k[eht]imóog.
E.7.1 Now it came to pass, when the wall was built, and I had set up the doors, and the porters and the singers and the Levites were appointed,

α.7.2 Neit nummeechumuhkon neemat Hanani, kah Hananiah nanawunnuen ut mishe komukqut, ut Jerusalem (newutche noh pabuht[á]numwenin, kah aneuukqushomomau onkatogeh en Godoh)
E.7.2 That I gave my brother Hanani, and Hananiah the ruler of the palace, charge over Jerusalem: for he was a faithful man, and feared God above many.

α.7.3 Kah nag nuttinnóog, Jerusaleme squontamash ahque woshwunnumunach, nô pajeh kussohtáut, kah ash nag na neepauwéhettit, yanittannumwéhettich, kah kuppâhhamwéhettich, kah kehtim8k askuhwhosuog wadohkitcheg Jerusalem: nish$noh pasuk wutaskuhwheteaonganit, kah nishnoh pasuk piuhsuke wekit.
E.7.3 And I said unto them, Let not the gates of Jerusalem be opened until the sun be hot; and while they stand by, let them shut the doors, and bar them: and appoint watches of the inhabitants of Jerusalem, every one in his watch, and every one to be over against his house.

α.7.4 Kah keitotan missi kah kishki, kah missinninnúog na wuttit ogguhsineau, kah wetuomash matta kesteausin8ash.
E.7.4 Now the city was large and great: but the people were few therein, and the houses were not builded.

α.7.5 Kah num-Manitt8m ponam nuttahut, miyanónat ahtûhskauáog kah nananuwacheg, kah missinninnúog, onk woh nag ogkemóog nashpe wutontseongan8, kah nunnamteoh mehquontamóe wussukwhonk, wutontseongan8 neg negonne kuhkuhquecheg, na nuttit namehteanun wussukwhosu.
E.7.5 And my God put into mine heart to gather together the nobles, and the rulers, and the people, that they might be reckoned by genealogy. And I found a register of the genealogy of them which came up at the first, and found written therein,

α.7.6 Yeug wutohtimóinne wunnaumoneunk, neg sohhogig wutch missinnáinneat, yeug monchanómukuppanneg, neh Nebuchadnezzar Babylone ketass8t, monchanumpoh, kah nag wonk peyaog Jerusalem, kah Judah, nish$noh pasuk en wutotanat.
E.7.6 These are the children of the province, that went up out of the captivity, of those that had been carried away, whom Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon had carried away, and came again to Jerusalem and to Judah, every one unto his city;

α.7.7 Neg weeche peyau8moncheg Zerubbabeloh, Jeshuah, Nehemiah, Azariah, Raamiah, Nahamani, Mordecai, Bilshan, Mispereth, Bigvai, Nehum, Baanah, wutteash88onk 8wosketomp8moh Israelle missinninnuog.
E.7.7 Who came with Zerubbabel, Jeshua, Nehemiah, Azariah, Raamiah, Nahamani, Mordecai, Bilshan, Mispereth, Bigvai, Nehum, Baanah. The number, I say, of the men of the people of Israel was this;

α.7.8 Wunnaumonuh Parosh, neese muttannonganog, nequt pasuk, nesausuk tahshinchag kussuog, kah neesuog.
E.7.8 The children of Parosh, two thousand an hundred seventy and two.

α.7.9 Wunnaumonuh Shephatiah, nishwe pasuk88og, nesausuktahshinchag kussuog, kah neesuog.
E.7.9 The children of Shephatiah, three hundred seventy and two.

α.7.10 Wunnaumonuh Arah, nequtta tahshe pasuk88og, napanna tahshinchag kussuog, kah neesuog.
E.7.10 The children of Arah, six hundred fifty and two.

α.7.11 Wunnaumonuh Pahath-Moab, wutch kenugke wunnaumonuh[,] Jeshua, kah Joab, neese muttannonganog, kah shwosuk tahshe pasuk88og, kah nabo shwosuk.
E.7.11 The children of Pahathmoab, of the children of Jeshua and Joab, two thousand and eight hundred and eighteen.

α.7.12 Wunnaumonuh Elam, nequt muttannonganog, neese pasuk88og, napanna tahshinchag kussuog, kah yauog.
E.7.12 The children of Elam, a thousand two hundred fifty and four.

α.7.13 Wunnaumonuh Zattu, shwosuk tahshe pasuk88og, yauunchage, kah napanna tahsuog.
E.7.13 The children of Zattu, eight hundred forty and five.

α.7.14 Wunnaumonuh Zaccai, nesausuk tahshe pasuk88og, kah nequtta tahshinchag kussuog.
E.7.14 The children of Zaccai, seven hundred and threescore.

α.7.15 Wunnaumonuh Binnui, nequtta tahshe pasuk88og, yauunchage kah shwosuk tahsuog.
E.7.15 The children of Binnui, six hundred forty and eight.

α.7.16 Wunnaumonuh Bebai, nequtta tahshe pasuk88og, neesneechag kah shwosuk tahsuog.
E.7.16 The children of Bebai, six hundred twenty and eight.

α.7.17 Wunnaumonuh Azgad, neese muttannonganog, nishwe pasuk88og, neesnehchag kussuog kah nishuog.
E.7.17 The children of Azgad, two thousand three hundred twenty and two.

α.7.18 Wunnaumonuh Adonikam, nequtta tahshe pasuk88og, nequtta tahshinchag, kah nesausuk.
E.7.18 The children of Adonikam, six hundred threescore and seven.

α.7.19 Wunnaumonuh Bigvai, neese muttannonganog, nequtta tahshinchag, kah nesausuk tahsuog.
E.7.19 The children of Bigvai, two thousand threescore and seven.

α.7.20 Wunnaumonuh Adin, nequtta tahshe pasuk88og napanna tahshinchag, kah napanna tahsuog.
E.7.20 The children of Adin, six hundred fifty and five.

α.7.21 Wunnaumonuh Ater wutch Hezechiah, pask8gun tahshinchag, kah shwosuk tahsuog.
E.7.21 The children of Ater of Hezekiah, ninety and eight.

α.7.22 Wunnaumonuh Hashum, nishwe pasuk88og, neesnehchag kah shwosuk tahsuog.
E.7.22 The children of Hashum, three hundred twenty and eight.

α.7.23 Wunnaumonuh Bezai, nishwe pasuk88og, neesneechag kussog kah yauog.
E.7.23 The children of Bezai, three hundred twenty and four.

α.7.24 Wunnaumonuh Hariph, nequt pasuk, kah nabonees.
E.7.24 The children of Hariph, an hundred and twelve.

α.7.25 Wunnaumonuh Gibeon, pask8gun tahshinchag kah napanna tahsuog,
E.7.25 The children of Gibeon, ninety and five.

α.7.26 Bethleheme wosketompaog, kah Netophah, nequt pasuk, shwosuk tahshinchag, kah shwosuk tahsuog.
E.7.26 The men of Bethlehem and Netophah, an hundred fourscore and eight.

α.7.27 Anathothe wosketompaog, nequt pasuk, neesnehchag kah shwosuk tahsuog.
E.7.27 The men of Anathoth, an hundred twenty and eight.

α.7.28 Bethazmavethe, wosketompaog yauunchage kah nees8og.
E.7.28 The men of Bethazmaveth, forty and two.

α.7.29 Kirjathjearime, Chephirahe, kah Beerothe wosketompaog, nesausuk tahshe pasuk88og, yauunchage kussuog, kah nishuog.
E.7.29 The men of Kirjathjearim, Chephirah, and Beeroth, seven hundred forty and three.

α.7.30 Ramahe, kah Gabae wosketompaog, nequtta tahshe pasuk88og, neesnehchag kah pasuk.
E.7.30 The men of Ramah and Gaba, six hundred twenty and one.

α.7.31 Michmase wosketompaog, nequt pasuk, neesnehchag kussuog, kah neesuog.
E.7.31 The men of Michmas, an hundred and twenty and two.

α.7.32 Bethele kah Ai wosketompaog, nequt pasuk neesnehchag kussuog, kah nishuog.
E.7.32 The men of Bethel and Ai, an hundred twenty and three.

α.7.33 Onkatuk Neboe wosketompaog, napanna tahshinchag kussuog kah neesuog.
E.7.33 The men of the other Nebo, fifty and two.

α.7.34 Onkatuk Elame wunnaumonuh, nequt muttannonganog, neese pasuk88og, napannatahshinchag kussuog, kah yauog.
E.7.34 The children of the other Elam, a thousand two hundred fifty and four.

α.7.35 Wunnaumonuh Harim, nishwe pasuk88og, kah neesnehchag kussuog.
E.7.35 The children of Harim, three hundred and twenty.

α.7.36 Wunnaumonuh Jericho, nishwe pasuk88og, yauunchage, k[á]h napanna tahsuog.
E.7.36 The children of Jericho, three hundred forty and five.

α.7.37 Wunnaumonuh Lod, Hadid, kah Ono, nesausuk tahshe pasuk88og, neesnehchag kah pasuk.
E.7.37 The children of Lod, Hadid, and Ono, seven hundred twenty and one.

α.7.38 Wunnaumonuh Senaah, nishwe muttannonganog, pask8gun tahshe pasuk88og, kah nishwinchag.
E.7.38 The children of Senaah, three thousand nine hundred and thirty.

α.7.39 Sephausuenuog, wunnaumonuh Jedaiah, wutch wekit Jeshua, pask8gun tahshe pasuk88og, nesausuk tahshinchag, kah nishnog.
E.7.39 The priests: the children of Jedaiah, of the house of Jeshua, nine hundred seventy and three.

α.7.40 Wunnaumonuh Immer, nequt muttannonganog napanna tahshinchag kussuog kah nees8og.
E.7.40 The children of Immer, a thousand fifty and two.

α.7.41 Wunnaumonuh Pashur, nequt muttannonganog, neese pasuk88og, yauunchage kah nesausuk tahsuog.
E.7.41 The children of Pashur, a thousand two hundred forty and seven.

α.7.42 Wunnaumonuh Harim, nequt muttannonganog, kah nabo nesausuk tahsuog.
E.7.42 The children of Harim, a thousand and seventeen.

α.7.43 Levitsog: wunnaumonuh Jeshua, Kadmiel, wunnaumonuh Hodevah, nesausuk tahshinchag, kah yauog.
E.7.43 The Levites: the children of Jeshua, of Kadmiel, and of the children of Hodevah, seventy and four.

α.7.44 Ket8homwaenuog: wunnaumonuh Asaph, nequt pasuk, yauunchage kah shwosuk tahsuog.
E.7.44 The singers: the children of Asaph, an hundred forty and eight.

α.7.45 Nanausquontamwaenuog: wunnaumonuh Shallum, wunnaumonuh Ater, wunnaumonuh Talmon, wunnaumonuh Akkub, wunnaumonuh Hatita, wunnaumonuh Shobai, nequt pasuk, nishwinchag kah shwosuk tahsuog.
E.7.45 The porters: the children of Shallum, the children of Ater, the children of Talmon, the children of Akkub, the children of Hatita, the children of Shobai, an hundred thirty and eight.

α.7.46 Nethinimsog: wunnaumonuh Ziha, wunnaumonuh Hashupha, wunnaumonuh Tabaoth.
E.7.46 The Nethinims: the children of Ziha, the children of Hashupha, the children of Tabbaoth,

α.7.47 Wunnaumonuh Kiros, wunnaumonuh Sia, wunnaumonuh Padon,
E.7.47 The children of Keros, the children of Sia, the children of Padon,

α.7.48 Wunnaumonuh Lebana, wunnaumonuh Hagaba, wunnaumonuh Shalmai,
E.7.48 The children of Lebana, the children of Hagaba, the children of Shalmai,

α.7.49 Wunnaumonuh Hanan, wunnaumonuh Giddel, wunnaumonuh Gahaz.
E.7.49 The children of Hanan, the children of Giddel, the children of Gahar,

α.7.50 Wunnaumonuh Reajah, wunnaumonuh Rezin, wunnaumonuh Nekoda.
E.7.50 The children of Reaiah, the children of Rezin, the children of Nekoda,

α.7.51 Wunnaumonuh Gazzam, wunnaumonuh, Phaseah.
E.7.51 The children of Gazzam, the children of Uzza, the children of Phaseah,

α.7.52 Wunnaumonuh Besai, wunnaumonuh Meunim, wunnaumonuh Nephishesim.
E.7.52 The children of Besai, the children of Meunim, the children of Nephishesim,

α.7.53 Wunnaumonuh Bakbuk, wunnaumonuh Hakupha, wunnaumonuh Harhur.
E.7.53 The children of Bakbuk, the children of Hakupha, the children of Harhur,

α.7.54 Wunnaumonuh Bassith, wunnaumonuh Mehida, wunnaumonuh Harsha.
E.7.54 The children of Bazlith, the children of Mehida, the children of Harsha,

α.7.55 Wunnaumonuh Barkos, wunnaumonuh Sisera wunnaumonuh Tamah.
E.7.55 The children of Barkos, the children of Sisera, the children of Tamah,

α.7.56 Wunnaumonuh Neziah, wunnaumonuh Hatiphah.
E.7.56 The children of Neziah, the children of Hatipha.

α.7.57 Wunnaumonuh wuttineumoh Solomon wunnaumonuh Sotai, wunnaumonuh Sophereth, wunnaumonuh Perida.
E.7.57 The children of Solomon's servants: the children of Sotai, the children of Sophereth, the children of Perida,

α.7.58 Wunnaumonuh Jaala, wunnaumonuh Darkon, wunnaumonuh Giddel.
E.7.58 The children of Jaala, the children of Darkon, the children of Giddel,

α.7.59 Wunnaumonuh Shephatiah, wunnaumonuh Hattil, wunnaumonuh Pochereth, Zebaim, wunnaumonuh Amon.
E.7.59 The children of Shephatiah, the children of Hattil, the children of Pochereth of Zebaim, the children of Amon.

α.7.60 Wame Nethinnimsog, kah wunnaumonuh wuttineumoh Solomon, nishwe pasuk88og, pask8gun tahshinchagkussuog, kah neesuog.
E.7.60 All the Nethinims, and the children of Solomon's servants, were three hundred ninety and two.

α.7.61 Yeug neg kuhkuhquecheg wutch Tel-Melah, Telharesha, Cherub, Addon, kah Immer, qut matta nahtitteau8og 8sh8oh wek asuh wunneechan8oh, uttoh wuttin Israelluinneau.
E.7.61 And these were they which went up also from Telmelah, Telharesha, Cherub, Addon, and Immer: but they could not shew their father's house, nor their seed, whether they were of Israel.

α.7.62 Wunnaumonuh Delajah, wunnaumonuh Tobiah, wunnaumonuh Nekoda, nequtta tahshe pasuk88og, yauunchag kussuog, kah neesuog.
E.7.62 The children of Delaiah, the children of Tobiah, the children of Nekoda, six hundred forty and two.

α.7.63 Kah wutch sephausuenuog, wunnaumonuh Habajah, wunnaumonuh Koz, wunnaumonuh Barzillai, noh wâmittamwossissit pasuk8 wuttaunoh Barzillai uk-Gileadit, kah uss8wesu ne as8wesinit.
E.7.63 And of the priests: the children of Habaiah, the children of Koz, the children of Barzillai, which took one of the daughters of Barzillai the Gileadite to wife, and was called after their name.

α.7.64 Yeug nattinnehamwog uttoh adtanussuhkuhwhosik 8wesuongan8oash, kenugke neg ogkemitcheg neaunak uppometuongan8óut, qut matta namehteauouun, newaj ogque nishkheóog, amaunóog wutch sephausuenuuneat.
E.7.64 These sought their register among those that were reckoned by genealogy, but it was not found: therefore were they, as polluted, put from the priesthood.

α.7.65 Kah Tirshatha nah wuttinuh, meech8hteogk wanetupanatamweyeu8gish, nô pajeh sephausuénin neepauit, nashpe Urim kah Thummim.
E.7.65 And the Tirshatha said unto them, that they should not eat of the most holy things, till there stood up a priest with Urim and Thummim.

α.7.66 Mamusse mukkinneonk môeu yauunchage kah neese muttannonganogkussuog, nishwe pasuk88og, kah nequtta tahshinchag kussuog.
E.7.66 The whole congregation together was forty and two thousand three hundred and threescore,

α.7.67 Chaubsitcheg wuttiñeumuneunk kah ummaidumoh, neg nesausuk tahshe muttannonganogkussuog, nishwe pasuk88og, nishwinchag kah nesausuk tahsuog, kah ut kenugke nag neese pasuk88og, yauunchag kah napanna tahsuog ket8homáe wósketompaog, kah ket8homáe mittamwossissog.
E.7.67 Beside their manservants and their maidservants, of whom there were seven thousand three hundred thirty and seven: and they had two hundred forty and five singing men and singing women.

α.7.68 Wut-horsesumoh nesausuk tahshe pasuk88og nishwinchag kah nequtta tahsuoh, um-mulesumoh neese pasuk88oh, yauunchage kah napanna tahsuoh.
E.7.68 Their horses, seven hundred thirty and six: their mules, two hundred forty and five:

α.7.69 Uk-Camelsumoh yaue pasuk88oh nishwinchag kah napanna tahsuoh, nequtta tahshe muttannonganogkussuog assesog kah neesneechag.
E.7.69 Their camels, four hundred thirty and five: six thousand seven hundred and twenty asses.

α.7.70 Kah nawhutche kehche wut8shineunk nanowe mag8og wutche anakausuonk Tirshatha mag8 nompak8unehtu nequt muttannonganogkodtash golde dramsash, napanna tahshinchagkodtash basonsash, napanna tahshe pasuk88oash kah nishwinchagkodtash sephausuaenue hogk8unash.
E.7.70 And some of the chief of the fathers gave unto the work. The Tirshatha gave to the treasure a thousand drams of gold, fifty basons, five hundred and thirty priests' garments.

α.7.71 Kah nawhutche kehche wut8shinneunk nanowe mag8og anakausue nompakouunehtu, neesneechagkodtash golde dramsash, kah neese muttannonganogkodtash, kah neese pasuk88ash poundt88ash silver.
E.7.71 And some of the chief of the fathers gave to the treasure of the work twenty thousand drams of gold, and two thousand and two hundred pound of silver.

α.7.72 Kah ne onkatogig missinninnuog mag8og neesneechag muttannonganash golde dramsash, & neese muttannonganash poundtuoash silver, kah nequtta tahshinchagkodtash sephausuenue hogk8unash.
E.7.72 And that which the rest of the people gave was twenty thousand drams of gold, and two thousand pound of silver, and threescore and seven priests' garments.

α.7.73 Nemehkuh sephausuenuog, kah Levitsog kah nanausquontamwaenu[o]g, kah ket8ham8acheg, kah nawhutche missinninnuog kah Nethinimsog, kah wame Israel ayeupanneg wutohtanehtu: kah nesausuk adtahs8it nepauz paom8uk, wunnaumonuh Israel appupanneg wutohtanehtu.
E.7.73 So the priests, and the Levites, and the porters, and the singers, and some of the people, and the Nethinims, and all Israel, dwelt in their cities; and when the seventh month came, the children of Israel were in their cities.

α.8.1 KAh wame missinninnúog miyaéog. onatuh pasuk wosketomp, en taumaogquehtu anaquohtag nippée ushquont, kah nag ken8náog Ezraoh noh Scribe, paudtauonat wuttinnaumatue up-b8kum Moses, ne Jehovah ánann8nont Israeloh.
E.8.1 And all the people gathered themselves together as one man into the street that was before the water gate; and they spake unto Ezra the scribe to bring the book of the law of Moses, which the LORD had commanded to Israel.

α.8.2 Kah Ezra sephausuen paudtau naumatuonk anaquohtag mukkinnéonk, naneeswe wosketompaog, kah mittamwussissog, kah wame neg wohwohtamwe n8togig, ut negonne kesukok nesausuk adtahs8it nepauz.
E.8.2 And Ezra the priest brought the law before the congregation both of men and women, and all that could hear with understanding, upon the first day of the seventh month.

α.8.3 Kah na wuttit ogketamun, anaquohtag toumáog ne anaquohtag nippée squont, wutch nompoáeu, nô pajeh pohshequaadt, anaquabhettit wosketompaog kah mitamwussissog, káh yeug wohwohtogig, kah wame wuhtauog8ash missinninnúog menuhke n8tamwog unnaumatue b8k.
E.8.3 And he read therein before the street that was before the water gate from the morning until midday, before the men and the women, and those that could understand; and the ears of all the people were attentive unto the book of the law.

α.8.4 Kah Ezra noh Scribe neepau ut mehtugque pulpit, ne ayimwèhettit newutch, kah ut kishke wuhhogkat neepau Mattithiah, kah Shema, kah Anajah, kah Urijah, kah Hilkiah, kah Maaseiah, wuttinnohkôunit, kah ummenadcheanit Pedajah, kah Mishael, kah Milchiah, kah Hashum, kah Hashbadana, Zechariah, kah Meshullam.
E.8.4 And Ezra the scribe stood upon a pulpit of wood, which they had made for the purpose; and beside him stood Mattithiah, and Shema, and Anaiah, and Urijah, and Hilkiah, and Maaseiah, on his right hand; and on his left hand, Pedaiah, and Mishael, and Malchiah, and Hashum, and Hashbadana, Zechariah, and Meshullam.

α.8.5 Kah Ezra woshwunnum b8k, anaquabhettit wame missinninnúog, (newutche noh anuúhquappumau wame missinninnuh) kah woshwunuk, wame missinninnúog neepôog.
E.8.5 And Ezra opened the book in the sight of all the people; (for he was above all the people;) and when he opened it, all the people stood up:

α.8.6 Kah Ezra wunnanumau Jehovahoh mishe Manit: kah wame missinninnuog namp8hamwog, Amen, Amen, tashinumóhettit wunnutchegan8oash, kah nauwanumwog uppuhkuk8oash, kah wowussum8og Jehovahoh, wuskesuk8oash en ohkekontu.
E.8.6 And Ezra blessed the LORD, the great God. And all the people answered, Amen, Amen, with lifting up their hands: and they bowed their heads, and worshipped the LORD with their faces to the ground.

α.8.7 Wonk Jeshua, kah Bani, kah Sherebiah, Jamin, Akkub, Shabbethai, Hodijah, Maasejah, Kelita, Azariah, Jozabad, Hanun, Pelajah, kah Levitsog wohtamwáheaog missinninnúh naumatuonk, kah missinninnúog appuog wutappuongan8óut.
E.8.7 Also Jeshua, and Bani, and Sherebiah, Jamin, Akkub, Shabbethai, Hodijah, Maaseiah, Kelita, Azariah, Jozabad, Hanan, Pelaiah, and the Levites, caused the people to understand the law: and the people stood in their place.

α.8.8 Kah ogketamwog wuttinaumatue b8kum God, pahke; kah wuttinóuh unnauwuttam8onk, kah 8wahtamwaheóuh ne ogketamwehettit.
E.8.8 So they read in the book in the law of God distinctly, and gave the sense, and caused them to understand the reading.

α.8.9 Kah Nehemiah noh Tirshatha, kah Ezra sephausuen noh Scribe, kah Levitsog neg kohk8tomauoncheg missinninnúh, unnáog wame missinninnúh, yeu kesukok wunneetupanatamweyeu8 en Jehovah ut kum-Manitt8m8óut, mauûhteogk, asuh maumuttamuhteok, newutche wame missinninnúog mauog n8tamwehettit unnaumatue kutt8wongash.
E.8.9 And Nehemiah, which is the Tirshatha, and Ezra the priest the scribe, and the Levites that taught the people, said unto all the people, This day is holy unto the LORD your God; mourn not, nor weep. For all the people wept, when they heard the words of the law.

α.8.10 Neit nah wuttinuh, monchek, meech8k wees, wuttattam8k weekog, kah negonshhu8k chadchaubiyeuash en nag, wanne teag quagquoshwehtam8gig: newutche yeu kesukok wunneetupanatamweyeu8 en Jehovahut; kah neuantam8hteógk, newutche weekontam8[ó]nogkut Jehovah ne kummenuhkesuonganun.
E.8.10 Then he said unto them, Go your way, eat the fat, and drink the sweet, and send portions unto them for whom nothing is prepared: for this day is holy unto our LORD: neither be ye sorry; for the joy of the LORD is your strength.

α.8.11 Neit Levitsog, chekepéhteáog wame missinninnúh, n8waog, chequnappek, newutche yeu kesukok wunneetupanatamweyeu8, kah ahque neuanatam8k.
E.8.11 So the Levites stilled all the people, saying, Hold your peace, for the day is holy; neither be ye grieved.

α.8.12 Kah wame missinninnúog moncheog meetsineat, kah wuttattamunat, kah negonshhuónat chippiyeuash, kah mishe muskouantamunat, newutche wohtamwog kutt8wongash, nish wahteauwáhetcheh.
E.8.12 And all the people went their way to eat, and to drink, and to send portions, and to make great mirth, because they had understood the words that were declared unto them.

α.8.13 Kah ut nahohtôeu kesukok, miyaéog kehche mut8shineunk wame missinninnúog, sephausuenuog, kah Levitsog, en Ezra noh Scribe, wahteauunat naumatue kutt8wongash.
E.8.13 And on the second day were gathered together the chief of the fathers of all the people, the priests, and the Levites, unto Ezra the scribe, even to understand the words of the law.

α.8.14 Kah namehteauog wussukwhosu ut wuttinnaumatuonganit, ne Jehovah ann8nompoh nashpe Moses, wunnaumonuh Israel woh ayeuog nepéekomukquehtu, ut mishadtupp8onganit nesausuk adtahs8it neepáuz.
E.8.14 And they found written in the law which the LORD had commanded by Moses, that the children of Israel should dwell in booths in the feast of the seventh month:

α.8.15 Onk woh wutamaúmuwónaóont, kah 8wahteauwaheonaóont, ut wame wutotanaóont, ut Jerusalem, n8wahettich, sohham8k en wadchuut, kah neemskom8k olive wuttuhqunash, kah palme wuttuhqunash, kah myrtle wuttuhqunash, kah pine wuttuhqunash, kah kuppontukqunash, nepéekomukquhkónat neansukwhosik.
E.8.15 And that they should publish and proclaim in all their cities, and in Jerusalem, saying, Go forth unto the mount, and fetch olive branches, and pine branches, and myrtle branches, and palm branches, and branches of thick trees, to make booths, as it is written.

α.8.16 Neit missinninnúog sohhamwog kah uppaudtináoash, kah nepéekomukquhkkog, nish$noh pasuk ut 8woskeche kommukqut, kah ut wutchippinneutunkan8óut, kah ut chippinneutunkanit ut wekit God, kah ut nippee squontame toumaogut, kah Ephraimme squontame toumaogqut.
E.8.16 So the people went forth, and brought them, and made themselves booths, every one upon the roof of his house, and in their courts, and in the courts of the house of God, and in the street of the water gate, and in the street of the gate of Ephraim.

α.8.17 Kah wame mukkinneonk neg wonk paoncheg wutch missinnáinneat, nepéekomukquehteáog, kah appuog agwe nepéekomukquehtu: newutche nadteuh ukkesukodtumash Joshuah wunnaumonuh Nun, pajeh yeu kesukok, wunnaumonuh Israel matta ne wutusseineau: newutche na mishe weekontamweonganu8.
E.8.17 And all the congregation of them that were come again out of the captivity made booths, and sat under the booths: for since the days of Jeshua the son of Nun unto that day had not the children of Israel done so. And there was very great gladness.

α.8.18 Kah wonk asekesukokish, wutch negonne kesukok, wehque maumachish kesukok, ogketam b8ke wuttinnaumatuonganit God; kah nag nesausuk tashikquinne mishadtup8og, kah shwosuk adtahshikquinukok: neit wunneetupanatamoeonganú8, neaunak.
E.8.18 Also day by day, from the first day unto the last day, he read in the book of the law of God. And they kept the feast seven days; and on the eighth day was a solemn assembly, according unto the manner.

α.9.1 KAh nesnehchadtequinhog kah yau, yeuoh nepâuz, wunnaumonuh Israel mat meetsée miyaéog, nashpe man8tiónak, kah ohke ponum[ó]og.
E.9.1 Now in the twenty and fourth day of this month the children of Israel were assembled with fasting, and with sackclothes, and earth upon them.

α.9.2 Kah 8skannemuneoh Israel chippeog wutch wame pen8wohteáut, kah neepóog, kah samp8aóntamwog ummatcheseongan88oash, kah uppannéseongan8oash 8sh8oh.
E.9.2 And the seed of Israel separated themselves from all strangers, and stood and confessed their sins, and the iniquities of their fathers.

α.9.3 Kah nag neepóog wutayeuongan8óut, kah ogketamwog up-b8ke unnaumatuonk Jehovah um-Manitt8m8uh, ut yaue chippiyeue kesukodtut, kah yauut chippiyeuut samp8áog, kah wowussumaog Jehovahoh um-Manitt8m8oh.
E.9.3 And they stood up in their place, and read in the book of the law of the LORD their God one fourth part of the day; and another fourth part they confessed, and worshipped the LORD their God.

α.9.4 Neit neepóog ut Levitse appuonganit, Jeshua, kah Bani, Kadmiel, Shebianiah, Bunni, Sheebiah, Bani, Chenani, kah mishont8áe mauunnitteauog Jehovahoh, um-Manitt8m8oh.
E.9.4 Then stood up upon the stairs, of the Levites, Jeshua, and Bani, Kadmiel, Shebaniah, Bunni, Sherebiah, Bani, and Chenani, and cried with a loud voice unto the LORD their God.

α.9.5 Neit Levitsog, Jeshua, kah Kadmiel, Bani, Hashabniah, Sherebiah, Hodijah, Shebaniah, Pethahiah, n8waog, neepau8k, kah wunnanum8k Jehovah kum-Manitt8mw8, micheme kah micheme, kah wunánittamunach kussohsumóewesuonk, ne ánue mishehteómuk onk nish wame wunnanittam8ongash kah woweenodtum8ongash.
E.9.5 Then the Levites, Jeshua, and Kadmiel, Bani, Hashabniah, Sherebiah, Hodijah, Shebaniah, and Pethahiah, said, Stand up and bless the LORD your God for ever and ever: and blessed be thy glorious name, which is exalted above all blessing and praise.

α.9.6 Ken, ken webe kut-Jehovahyeu, ken kukkesteoh kesuk, ukkesuk8m8ash kesukquog, kah wame ukkenauwameumoh, ohke, kah wame nish na ohtagish, kehtahhanash, kah wame nish na ohtagish, kah ken k8wadchanóog wame, kah kesukque kenauwameonk k8wowussumuk.
E.9.6 Thou, even thou, art LORD alone; thou hast made heaven, the heaven of heavens, with all their host, the earth, and all things that are therein, the seas, and all that is therein, and thou preservest them all; and the host of heaven worshippeth thee.

α.9.7 Ken Jehovah Manit, pepen8adt Abram, kah kussohh8wun wutch Ur ut Caldees, kah kuttiss8wen Abraham.
E.9.7 Thou art the LORD the God, who didst choose Abram, and broughtest him forth out of Ur of the Chaldees, and gavest him the name of Abraham;

α.9.8 Kenampteóh ut wuttahhut, pábahtanittuonk ut anaquabean, kah k8n8woneau kittinnumauónat Canaanitse ohke Hittitse, Amoritse, kah Perizzitse, kah Jebusitse, kah Girgashitse, en 8skanémunit, kah kutussen kuttinn8waongash, newutche kussampweusseaénúh,
E.9.8 And foundest his heart faithful before thee, and madest a covenant with him to give the land of the Canaanites, the Hittites, the Amorites, and the Perizzites, and the Jebusites, and the Girgashites, to give it, I say, to his seed, and hast performed thy words; for thou art righteous:

α.9.9 Kah kenaumup, wutunkquanum8ongan8 ut Egypt, kah ken8tamup ummauongan8 ut kishke msque kehtahhanit.
E.9.9 And didst see the affliction of our fathers in Egypt, and heardest their cry by the Red sea;

α.9.10 Kah kenatitteóp kuhkinneasuongash, kah monchanatam8ongash ut Pharohut, kah ut wuttinneumut, kah ut wame missininnúut, ut wutohkeit: newutche k8wahteòh nag uppéhtuánumwe unnéheópuh: ne kenashpe 8wesuonganin, neane yeu kesukok.
E.9.10 And shewedst signs and wonders upon Pharaoh, and on all his servants, and on all the people of his land: for thou knewest that they dealt proudly against them. So didst thou get thee a name, as it is this day.

α.9.11 Kah kuppohshinumup kehtoh ut nag anaquabhettit, newaj pannupwusháhettit ut nôeu ketahhannit, nunnabohteaiyeuut, kah neg n8swehtauóncheg, kuttinnohkónunk m8nôiyeutu onatuh qussuk ut mishe nippeit.
E.9.11 And thou didst divide the sea before them, so that they went through the midst of the sea on the dry land; and their persecutors thou threwest into the deeps, as a stone into the mighty waters.

α.9.12 Wonk kesukodáe kenashpe sogkompagunôóg mahtokqse neepattuhquonk, kah nukkonáe, nashpe n8t[â]e nepattuhquonk, k8wequassumauóneau en mayut ne woh aáhettit.
E.9.12 Moreover thou leddest them in the day by a cloudy pillar; and in the night by a pillar of fire, to give them light in the way wherein they should go.

α.9.13 Wonk k8wómus ut wadchuut Sinai, kah nag k8ch ken8nóog kesukqut, kah kittinunnumauóog sampwe wussittum8ongash, kah wunamuhkutéye unnaumatuongash, wunne kuhk8waonganash kah ann8team8ongash.
E.9.13 Thou camest down also upon mount Sinai, and spakest with them from heaven, and gavest them right judgments, and true laws, good statutes and commandments:

α.9.14 Kah nag k8wahteauwaheopanneg, k8neetupanatamwe Sabbathom, kah nag kutann8nópanneg, kuhk8tomwehteaongash, kukkuhk8waongash, kah naumatuongash, nashpwe wunnutcheganit Moses kittinneum.
E.9.14 And madest known unto them thy holy sabbath, and commandedst them precepts, statutes, and laws, by the hand of Moses thy servant:

α.9.15 Kah nag kutassamópaneg petukquneg wutch kesukqut, wutche ukkodtupp8ongan8, kah kussohh8wuttóp nippe wutch qussukquanit, wutche ukkôhkutt8n8ongan8: kah kukquoshaumópanneg, woh uppetukóntamunaóont, ohtauunat ohke, ne chadchekeimop kittinnumauónaóont.
E.9.15 And gavest them bread from heaven for their hunger, and broughtest forth water for them out of the rock for their thirst, and promisedst them that they should go in to possess the land which thou hadst sworn to give them.

α.9.16 Qut nag, kah n8shinónog pittuánumweusséog, kah nag menehksittippukunáog: kah wanne n8tam8og kutann8team8ongash.
E.9.16 But they and our fathers dealt proudly, and hardened their necks, and hearkened not to thy commandments,

α.9.17 Kah sokenamwog nosweetamunat, kah matta wuttuppóntam8unáoash monchanatam8onganash, nish aseumpash kenugke nag: qut nag cheketamwehettit, ayeuáog mugquompoh, qushkenat en ummissinnóunneaout wonk: qut ken God, kukkógkinne ahquontam, kukkogkittumonteanitteam, kah kummonánitteam, chehchéke kummusquantam, kah kummishe womoaus, kah matta kutohquánumópanneg.
E.9.17 And refused to obey, neither were mindful of thy wonders that thou didst among them; but hardened their necks, and in their rebellion appointed a captain to return to their bondage: but thou art a God ready to pardon, gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness, and forsookest them not.

α.9.18 Nux, ayimauáhettit wuhhogkauh sabassumwe calfoh, kah an8wahettit, yeuoh kum-manitt8m, noh waj sohh8wunukquean wutch Egypt, kah máhshe m8m8sk8ahettit.
E.9.18 Yea, when they had made them a molten calf, and said, This is thy God that brought thee up out of Egypt, and had wrought great provocations;

α.9.19 Qut onch ken, ut m8cheke ne kummonánitteaonganit, matta nag kutohquanumópanneg ut touohkomukqut: mahtokqse neepattuhquonk matta nukkonnuk8og kesukodáe, wussagkompagunukqunnaóont, en mayut, kah matta n8tae neepattuhquonk nukkonáeu, 8weequassumauónat, kah en mayut ne woh aáhettit.
E.9.19 Yet thou in thy manifold mercies forsookest them not in the wilderness: the pillar of the cloud departed not from them by day, to lead them in the way; neither the pillar of fire by night, to shew them light, and the way wherein they should go.

α.9.20 Kah wonk kittinnumauópanneg k8ne nushauonguh, kukkuhk8tamauônat, kah matta kukkogkonnumauóog kum-mannáhum wutch wutt8n8óut, kah kittinnumauóog nippe wutch ukkonkutt8n8onkan8.
E.9.20 Thou gavest also thy good spirit to instruct them, and withheldest not thy manna from their mouth, and gavest them water for their thirst.

α.9.21 Nux yauunchage kodtumwáe kummô menehkehéoog ut touohkomuk, newaj monteag quenauwehukquéhetteg, wuthogk8un8oash matta nukkó[n]ei[nn]8ash, kah wusseet8ash matta mogqueen8ash.
E.9.21 Yea, forty years didst thou sustain them in the wilderness, so that they lacked nothing; their clothes waxed not old, and their feet swelled not.

α.9.22 Nano kuttinnumauópanneg, ass8tam8ongash kah wutohtimóneash, kah kutchadchapenumauópanneg ut p8tsá[i]yeuut, newaj ahtauhettit Si[h]onne ohke, kah wutohke Heshbonne ketass8t, kah wutoh[k] Og Bashanne ketass8t.
E.9.22 Moreover thou gavest them kingdoms and nations, and didst divide them into corners: so they possessed the land of Sihon, and the land of the king of Heshbon, and the land of Og king of Bashan.

α.9.23 Kah wonk kummuttaánheomp wunneechan8oh, onatuh kesukque anogqsit, kah nag kuppas8ópanneg ohkeit, papaume nequoshómop 8sh8oh, uppetakonaóont wutahtauunnaóont.
E.9.23 Their children also multipliedst thou as the stars of heaven, and broughtest them into the land, concerning which thou hadst promised to their fathers, that they should go in to possess it.

α.9.24 Neit wunnaumonuh Israel petutteopanneg, kah ahto8panneg ohke, kah kussohkauomp ut anaquabhettit, wadohkitcheg ne ohkeit, Cananitsog; kah nag kummagunapanneg en wunnutchegan8out, weech ukkehtass8tam8m8oh, kah missinninnuog ne ohkeit, woh nah wuttinheonaoont ne unnantamohettit.
E.9.24 So the children went in and possessed the land, and thou subduedst before them the inhabitants of the land, the Canaanites, and gavest them into their hands, with their kings, and the people of the land, that they might do with them as they would.

α.9.25 Kah nag sohkomwog menuhkitotanash, kah weesohkee, kah ohtoog wetuomash nanumwohteau wame eiyanaumachiash, kuttahhamwe wuttahhamongash, weenominneohtekonash kah Oliveohteakonash: kah meechumuhtugquash monatash; neit meetsupanneg, kah wamep8panneg, kah wowonogk8panneg, kah tapeneamwog kummishe wunneetuonk.
E.9.25 And they took strong cities, and a fat land, and possessed houses full of all goods, wells digged, vineyards, and oliveyards, and fruit trees in abundance: so they did eat, and were filled, and became fat, and delighted themselves in thy great goodness.

α.9.26 Qut onch kuppannesetunkquog, kah kutcheketunkquog, kah kittinnaumatuonguh ompamuhteopanneg, kah nag nushaog kukquoshodtumwaeneumoh, neh wauwaonukquehetticheh, ukquinnupinonaoont, en kuhhogkat, kah nag mishe m8m8squeusseupann[é]g.
E.9.26 Nevertheless they were disobedient, and rebelled against thee, and cast thy law behind their backs, and slew thy prophets which testified against them to turn them to thee, and they wrought great provocations.

α.9.27 Newaj mag8op ut wunnutchegan8out ummatwom8oh, nag umm8m8sqheopuh, kah wadtamehpunahettit, mauunnitteunkquean, nag ken8tauopanneg wutch kesukqut, kah neaunak kuteiyane monaneteaonk, kuttinnumauopanneg tomhuaenuh, nag pohquohwhunoncheg wutch wunnutchegan8out ummatwom8uh.
E.9.27 Therefore thou deliveredst them into the hand of their enemies, who vexed them: and in the time of their trouble, when they cried unto thee, thou heardest them from heaven; and according to thy manifold mercies thou gavest them saviours, who saved them out of the hand of their enemies.

α.9.28 Qut mahche anwósinnehettit, wonk matcheseupanneg ut anaquabean, newaj nukkonap ut wunnutchegan8out ummatwom8uh, newaj nah nanawunnahetteup: qut onch qushkehettit, kah mauunnitteunkquean, nag ken8tauoog wutch kesukqut, kah m8chekit kuppohquohwhunopanneg; neaunak kummonaneteaongash.
E.9.28 But after they had rest, they did evil again before thee: therefore leftest thou them in the land of their enemies, so that they had the dominion over them: yet when they returned, and cried unto thee, thou heardest them from heaven; and many times didst thou deliver them according to thy mercies;

α.9.29 Kah nag k8wauwounopanneg, onk woh kuppas8onaoont kuttinnaumatuonganit, qut pittuanumwe usseog, kah matta n8tamoog kutann8team8ongash, qut panneussehtamuppanneg k8sittum8ongash (nish wosketomp usseit, pish nish wun[aa]shpe pomantamunash) kah amaumuppanneg wuttugku: kah menehksittippukanopanneg, kah matta n8tamopanneg.
E.9.29 And testifiedst against them, that thou mightest bring them again unto thy law: yet they dealt proudly, and hearkened not unto thy commandments, but sinned against thy judgments, (which if a man do, he shall live in them;) and withdrew the shoulder, and hardened their neck, and would not hear.

α.9.30 Qut onch m8cheke kodtumwae kukkechetuhhonopanneg, kah k8wauwounopanneg, nashpe kenashauanitt8 ut kukquoshodtumwaenutu: qut matta n8tam8panneg newaj nag mag8an en wunnutchegan8out missinninnuog ne ut ohkeit.
E.9.30 Yet many years didst thou forbear them, and testifiedst against them by thy spirit in thy prophets: yet would they not give ear: therefore gavest thou them into the hand of the people of the lands.

α.9.31 Qut wutche kummishe monaneteaonk, matta kuppapaquanne mahtupanopanneg, asuh kutohquanumopanneg, newutche ken, kitteamonteanuenu kah kummonaneteaenuh.
E.9.31 Nevertheless for thy great mercies' sake thou didst not utterly consume them, nor forsake them; for thou art a gracious and merciful God.

α.9.32 Newutche yeuyeu woi God, masugkenue, manuhkesit, kah unkqueneunkqussue Manit, noh wadchanuk wunn8waonk kah monaneteaonk, wame wutamehpunaonk peasikitch ut anaquabean, ne nohkuhkongqueogkup, kah nukketass8tamomunonog nussontimomunonog, kah nussephausuenumunonog, kah nukquosh[o]dtumwaenumunonog, kah n8shinonog, kah wame kummissinninneumog, nadteuh pomantog noh Assyriae ketass8t pajeh yeu kesukok.
E.9.32 Now therefore, our God, the great, the mighty, and the terrible God, who keepest covenant and mercy, let not all the trouble seem little before thee, that hath come upon us, on our kings, on our princes, and on our priests, and on our prophets, and on our fathers, and on all thy people, since the time of the kings of Assyria unto this day.

α.9.33 Qut ken, kussampweusseaénuh, ut wame nish nohkuhkauáhetteagish, newutche kussampweusseaen, qut nummatchesemun.
E.9.33 Howbeit thou art just in all that is brought upon us; for thou hast done right, but we have done wickedly:

α.9.34 Kah nukketass8tamómunónog, nussontimósumunónog, nussephausueneumunónog, asuh n8shun[o]og, matta nanawehteau8og kittinnaumatuonk, asuh matta kukkeitamóog kutann8team8ongash, kah k8wauwaongash, nish nashpe wauwaónóp.
E.9.34 Neither have our kings, our princes, our priests, nor our fathers, kept thy law, nor hearkened unto thy commandments and thy testimonies, wherewith thou didst testify against them.

α.9.35 Newutche nag k8tinninneumuhkongk8og ut wutass8tam8ongan8óut, kah ut kummishe wunneetowonganit, nish nag anumauácheh, kah ut k8nogque mishe kishkéeu ohkeit, ne nag anumauóp ut anaquabhettit, kah matta qushkéog wutch ummatcheseaeu anakausuongan8óut.
E.9.35 For they have not served thee in their kingdom, and in thy great goodness that thou gavest them, and in the large and fat land which thou gavest before them, neither turned they from their wicked works.

α.9.36 Kusseh, nenawun wuttinneumunneunk yeu kesukok, kah papaume ohke, ne anumauóp n8shunónog, meechinat ne na adtannegik, kah ne na ut wunnegik, kusseh nenawun wuttinneumunneunk naut.
E.9.36 Behold, we are servants this day, and for the land that thou gavest unto our fathers to eat the fruit thereof and the good thereof, behold, we are servants in it:

α.9.37 Kah m8cheke k8tinnekheaog, kehtass8tamwoh, neg ponácheg nanawunukqúnnanónut, newutche nummatcheseonganunonash: kah wonk nanawunnáog nuhhogkanónoh, kah neetasseumunónoh nukkodnéheáhetticheh, kah nenawun numm8cheke quehqu[è] nauánumumun.
E.9.37 And it yieldeth much increase unto the kings whom thou hast set over us because of our sins: also they have dominion over our bodies, and over our cattle, at their pleasure, and we are in great distress.

α.9.38 Kah newutche wame yeush, nutayimumun papaume wunn8waonk, kah n8sukúhhumunan, kah nussontimómunónog, kah nul-Levitsumunónog, kah nussephausueneumunónog, wus-sealhamuneau.
E.9.38 And because of all this we make a sure covenant, and write it; and our princes, Levites, and priests, seal unto it.

α.10.1 KAh yeug nag sealhamautcheg, Nehemiah wut-Tirshatha, wunnaumonuh Hachaliah, kah Zidkijah,
E.10.1 Now those that sealed were, Nehemiah, the Tirshatha, the son of Hachaliah, and Zidkijah,

α.10.2 Serajah, Azariah, Jeremiah,
E.10.2 Seraiah, Azariah, Jeremiah,

α.10.3 Pashur, Amáriah, Malchiah,
E.10.3 Pashur, Amariah, Malchijah,

α.10.4 Hattush, Shebaniah, Malluch,
E.10.4 Hattush, Shebaniah, Malluch,

α.10.5 Harim, Merimoth, Obadiah,
E.10.5 Harim, Meremoth, Obadiah,

α.10.6 Daniel, Ginnethon, Baruch,
E.10.6 Daniel, Ginnethon, Baruch,

α.10.7 Meshullam, Abijah, Mijamin,
E.10.7 Meshullam, Abijah, Mijamin,

α.10.8 Maaziah, Bilgai, Shemajah: yeug sephausuenuog.
E.10.8 Maaziah, Bilgai, Shemaiah: these were the priests.

α.10.9 Kah Levitsog naneeswe Jeshua wunnaumonuh Azaniah, Binnui wutch wunnaumonuh Henadad, Kadmiel.
E.10.9 And the Levites: both Jeshua the son of Azaniah, Binnui of the sons of Henadad, Kadmiel;

α.10.10 Kah weematoh, Shebaniah, Hodijah, Kelita, Pelajah, Hanan,
E.10.10 And their brethren, Shebaniah, Hodijah, Kelita, Pelaiah, Hanan,

α.10.11 Micah, Rehob, Hashabiah,
E.10.11 Micha, Rehob, Hashabiah,

α.10.12 Zaccur, Sherebiah, Shebniah,
E.10.12 Zaccur, Sherebiah, Shebaniah,

α.10.13 Hodajah, Bani, Beninu.
E.10.13 Hodijah, Bani, Beninu.

α.10.14 Keiche missinninnuog: Parosh, Pahath-Mab, Elam, Zatthu, Bani,
E.10.14 The chief of the people; Parosh, Pahathmoab, Elam, Zatthu, Bani,

α.10.15 Bunni, Azgad, Bebai,
E.10.15 Bunni, Azgad, Bebai,

α.10.16 Adonijah, Bigvai, Adin,
E.10.16 Adonijah, Bigvai, Adin,

α.10.17 Ater, Hizkijah, Azzur,
E.10.17 Ater, Hizkijah, Azzur,

α.10.18 Hodiah, Hashum, Bezai,
E.10.18 Hodijah, Hashum, Bezai,

α.10.19 Hariph, Anathoth, Nebai,
E.10.19 Hariph, Anathoth, Nebai,

α.10.20 Magpiash, Meshullam, Hezir,
E.10.20 Magpiash, Meshullam, Hezir,

α.10.21 Meshezabeel, Zadok, Jaddua,
E.10.21 Meshezabeel, Zadok, Jaddua,

α.10.22 Pelatiah, Hanan, Anajah,
E.10.22 Pelatiah, Hanan, Anaiah,

α.10.23 Hosheah, Hananiah, Hashub,
E.10.23 Hoshea, Hananiah, Hashub,

α.10.24 Hallohesh, Pileha, Shobek,
E.10.24 Hallohesh, Pileha, Shobek,

α.10.25 Rehum, Hashabnah, Maasejah,
E.10.25 Rehum, Hashabnah, Maaseiah,

α.10.26 Kah Ahijah, Hanan, Anan,
E.10.26 And Ahijah, Hanan, Anan,

α.10.27 Malluch, Harim, Baanah.
E.10.27 Malluch, Harim, Baanah.

α.10.28 Kah onkatogig missinninnuog, sephausuénuog, Levitsog, nanausquontam[á]cheg, ket8hamáenúog, Nethinimsog, kah wame nag chapecheg wutch ohkée missinninnúut, en wuttinnaumatuonganit God, ummittamwuss8oh, wunnaumonáuh, kah wuttaun8oh, nishnoh pasuk neg wahteunkeg, kah wohwohtogig.
E.10.28 And the rest of the people, the priests, the Levites, the porters, the singers, the Nethinims, and all they that had separated themselves from the people of the lands unto the law of God, their wives, their sons, and their daughters, every one having knowledge, and having understanding;

α.10.29 Nag môsogquehtauáog weemat8oh, wutahtuskauóm8uh, kah petutteaog mattánittuonganit, kah chadchekeyeuwaonganit, pomushonat God wuttinaumatuonganit, ne anumauut[ea]p Moses wuttinneumoh God, kah kuhkinneasineat, kah ussenat, wame wutann8team8ongash Lord num-Manitt8mun, kah 8sittum8ongash, kah ukkuhk8waongash.
E.10.29 They clave to their brethren, their nobles, and entered into a curse, and into an oath, to walk in God's law, which was given by Moses the servant of God, and to observe and do all the commandments of the LORD our Lord, and his judgments and his statutes;

α.10.30 Kah matta n8weetau[â]dtehheónanónut nuttaunonoh en ne ohkèe missiñinnúut, asuh matta n8weetauadheomun wuttaun8oh nunnaumonanónog.
E.10.30 And that we would not give our daughters unto the people of the land, not take their daughters for our sons:

α.10.31 Kah missinninnúog ne ohkeit paudtauéhettit kodtauwompasuongash, asuh ne teagwe meechum Sabbath$dayeu kodtauwompásinneat, ne matta nutádtóumounnanónut Sabbath$dayeu, asuh wunneetupanatamwe kesukodtut, kah woh nukkodtumumun, nesausuk adtahshinn88k kodtum8, & wutchekée ôadtehteaheóunóut nish$noh unnontuhquahwhuttuonk.
E.10.31 And if the people of the land bring ware or any victuals on the sabbath day to sell, that we would not buy it of them on the sabbath, or on the holy day: and that we would leave the seventh year, and the exaction of every debt.

α.10.32 Wonk nutáyimómun kuhk8waongash, kutóadtéhteahikqunánonut asekodtum8gish, nishwe chippiyeuut shekel, wutche wowussumáonk ut wekit God.
E.10.32 Also we made ordinances for us, to charge ourselves yearly with the third part of a shekel for the service of the house of our God;

α.10.33 Wutche nahtitteae petukqunneg, kah wutche nagwutteae meetsue mag8onk, kah wutche nagwutteae chikohtae mag8onk, saSabbath$dayeu, wuske nepâusaut, wutche kuhk8wáe mishadtupp8ongash, kah wutche waneetupanatamweyeu8gish, kah wutch matcheseáe mag8ongash, wunohteaheónat Israel, kah wutche wame ne anakausuonk ut wekit num-Manitt8mun.
E.10.33 For the shewbread, and for the continual meat offering, and for the continual burnt offering, of the sabbaths, of the new moons, for the set feasts, and for the holy things, and for the sin offerings to make an atonement for Israel, and for all the work of the house of our God.

α.10.34 Kah nuttittanóadtimunónop ut kenugke sephausuenuut, kah Levitsut, kah missinninnúhtu, wutche mehtugque mag8onk, paudtauunat, en wekit num-Manitt8mun, neaunak week8óash n8shunónog, ut kukquttumóe ahquompiyeuut, ásekodtum8kish, chikohsumunat ut wut-altarumut Jehovah, num-Manitt8mun neansukwhosik ut naumatuonganit.
E.10.34 And we cast the lots among the priests, the Levites, and the people, for the wood offering, to bring it into the house of our God, after the houses of our fathers, at times appointed year by year, to burn upon the altar of the LORD our God, as it is written in the law:

α.10.35 Kah paudtauunat kákeneumuneash nutohkeinónut, kah negonneyeu8ash wame metugque meechummuongash, ásekodtum8gish en wekit Jehovah.
E.10.35 And to bring the firstfruits of our ground, and the firstfruits of all fruit of all trees, year by year, unto the house of the LORD:

α.10.36 Kah wonk mohtommegitcheg nunnaumonanónog, kah neetasséum[un]ónog (neansukwhosik ut naumatuonganit) kah negonnekitcheg ut nutherdsumunónut, kah ut nufflocksumunónut, paudtauunat wekit num-Manitt8mun, en sephausuénuut, neg wadtinninneumuhkontogig ut wekit num-Manitt8mun.
E.10.36 Also the firstborn of our sons, and of our cattle, as it is written in the law, and the firstlings of our herds and of our flocks, to bring to the house of our God, unto the priests that minister in the house of our God:

α.10.37 Kah woh nuppaudtomun negonne tuttóhpitchóhkoneg, kah nummag8onganunonash, nish$noh eiyane mehtugquee meechummuongash, wine, kah pummee en sephausuenúut, ut chambersut ut wekit num-Manitt8mun, kah piogque chippagish wutch nutohkenónut, en Levitsut, onk woh Levitsog ohtóog piogque chippagish, ut wame nutohketeae otananónut.
E.10.37 And that we should bring the firstfruits of our dough, and our offerings, and the fruit of all manner of trees, of wine and of oil, unto the priests, to the chambers of the house of our God; and the tithes of our ground unto the Levites, that the same Levites might have the tithes in all the cities of our tillage.

α.10.38 Kah sephausuen wunnaumonuh Aaron, noh pish weetomau Levitsoh, Levitsog neemenummohettit piogque chippagish, kah Levitsog pish paudtóog, papiogque chippagish papiokquokish, en wekit kum-Manitt8mun, en chambersut nompak8inne kommukqut.
E.10.38 And the priest the son of Aaron shall be with the Levites, when the Levites take tithes: and the Levites shall bring up the tithe of the tithes unto the house of our God, to the chambers, into the treasure house.

α.10.39 Newutche wunnaumonuh Israel, kah wunnaumonuh Levi, nag pish paudtóog weatchiminne mag8onk, kah wuske wine kah pummée, en chambersut, uttoh ohtag sanctuarie auwohteaongash, kah sephausuenuog neg wadtininneumuhkausitcheg, kah nanausquontamenuog, kah ket8hamáenuog, kah matta pish nutohquontam8mun num-Manitt8mun wek.
E.10.39 For the children of Israel and the children of Levi shall bring the offering of the corn, of the new wine, and the oil, unto the chambers, where are the vessels of the sanctuary, and the priests that minister, and the porters, and the singers: and we will not forsake the house of our God.

α.11.1 
E.11.1 And the rulers of the people dwelt at Jerusalem: the rest of the people also cast lots, to bring one of ten to dwell in Jerusalem the holy city, and nine parts to dwell in other cities.

α.11.2 
E.11.2 And the people blessed all the men, that willingly offered themselves to dwell at Jerusalem.

α.11.3 
E.11.3 Now these are the chief of the province that dwelt in Jerusalem: but in the cities of Judah dwelt every one in his possession in their cities, to wit, Israel, the priests, and the Levites, and the Nethinims, and the children of Solomon's servants.

α.11.4 
E.11.4 And at Jerusalem dwelt certain of the children of Judah, and of the children of Benjamin. Of the children of Judah; Athaiah the son of Uzziah, the son of Zechariah, the son of Amariah, the son of Shephatiah, the son of Mahalaleel, of the children of Perez;

α.11.5 
E.11.5 And Maaseiah the son of Baruch, the son of Colhozeh, the son of Hazaiah, the son of Adaiah, the son of Joiarib, the son of Zechariah, the son of Shiloni.

α.11.6 
E.11.6 All the sons of Perez that dwelt at Jerusalem were four hundred threescore and eight valiant men.

α.11.7 
E.11.7 And these are the sons of Benjamin; Sallu the son of Meshullam, the son of Joed, the son of Pedaiah, the son of Kolaiah, the son of Maaseiah, the son of Ithiel, the son of Jesaiah.

α.11.8 
E.11.8 And after him Gabbai, Sallai, nine hundred twenty and eight.

α.11.9 
E.11.9 And Joel the son of Zichri was their overseer: and Judah the son of Senuah was second over the city.

α.11.10 
E.11.10 Of the priests: Jedaiah the son of Joiarib, Jachin.

α.11.11 
E.11.11 Seraiah the son of Hilkiah, the son of Meshullam, the son of Zadok, the son of Meraioth, the son of Ahitub, was the ruler of the house of God.

α.11.12 
E.11.12 And their brethren that did the work of the house were eight hundred twenty and two: and Adaiah the son of Jeroham, the son of Pelaliah, the son of Amzi, the son of Zechariah, the son of Pashur, the son of Malchiah.

α.11.13 
E.11.13 And his brethren, chief of the fathers, two hundred forty and two: and Amashai the son of Azareel, the son of Ahasai, the son of Meshillemoth, the son of Immer,

α.11.14 
E.11.14 And their brethren, mighty men of valour, an hundred twenty and eight: and their overseer was Zabdiel, the son of one of the great men.

α.11.15 
E.11.15 Also of the Levites: Shemaiah the son of Hashub, the son of Azrikam, the son of Hashabiah, the son of Bunni;

α.11.16 
E.11.16 And Shabbethai and Jozabad, of the chief of the Levites, had the oversight of the outward business of the house of God.

α.11.17 
E.11.17 And Mattaniah the son of Micha, the son of Zabdi, the son of Asaph, was the principal to begin the thanksgiving in prayer: and Bakbukiah the second among his brethren, and Abda the son of Shammua, the son of Galal, the son of Jeduthun.

α.11.18 
E.11.18 All the Levites in the holy city were two hundred fourscore and four.

α.11.19 
E.11.19 Moreover the porters, Akkub, Talmon, and their brethren that kept the gates, were an hundred seventy and two.

α.11.20 
E.11.20 And the residue of Israel, of the priests, and the Levites, were in all the cities of Judah, every one in his inheritance.

α.11.21 
E.11.21 But the Nethinims dwelt in Ophel: and Ziha and Gispa were over the Nethinims.

α.11.22 
E.11.22 The overseer also of the Levites at Jerusalem was Uzzi the son of Bani, the son of Hashabiah, the son of Mattaniah, the son of Micha. Of the sons of Asaph, the singers were over the business of the house of God.

α.11.23 
E.11.23 For it was the king's commandment concerning them, that a certain portion should be for the singers, due for every day.

α.11.24 
E.11.24 And Pethahiah the son of Meshezabeel, of the children of Zerah the son of Judah, was at the king's hand in all matters concerning the people.

α.11.25 
E.11.25 And for the villages, with their fields, some of the children of Judah dwelt at Kirjatharba, and in the villages thereof, and at Dibon, and in the villages thereof, and at Jekabzeel, and in the villages thereof,

α.11.26 
E.11.26 And at Jeshua, and at Moladah, and at Bethphelet,

α.11.27 
E.11.27 And at Hazarshual, and at Beersheba, and in the villages thereof,

α.11.28 
E.11.28 And at Ziklag, and at Mekonah, and in the villages thereof,

α.11.29 
E.11.29 And at Enrimmon, and at Zareah, and at Jarmuth,

α.11.30 
E.11.30 Zanoah, Adullam, and in their villages, at Lachish, and the fields thereof, at Azekah, and in the villages thereof. And they dwelt from Beersheba unto the valley of Hinnom.

α.11.31 
E.11.31 The children also of Benjamin from Geba dwelt at Michmash, and Aija, and Bethel, and in their villages.

α.11.32 
E.11.32 And at Anathoth, Nob, Ananiah,

α.11.33 
E.11.33 Hazor, Ramah, Gittaim,

α.11.34 
E.11.34 Hadid, Zeboim, Neballat,

α.11.35 
E.11.35 Lod, and Ono, the valley of craftsmen.

α.11.36 
E.11.36 And of the Levites were divisions in Judah, and in Benjamin.

α.12.1 
E.12.1 Now these are the priests and the Levites that went up with Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, and Jeshua: Seraiah, Jeremiah, Ezra,

α.12.2 
E.12.2 Amariah, Malluch, Hattush,

α.12.3 
E.12.3 Shechaniah, Rehum, Meremoth,

α.12.4 
E.12.4 Iddo, Ginnetho, Abijah,

α.12.5 
E.12.5 Miamin, Maadiah, Bilgah,

α.12.6 
E.12.6 Shemaiah, and Joiarib, Jedaiah,

α.12.7 
E.12.7 Sallu, Amok, Hilkiah, Jedaiah. These were the chief of the priests and of their brethren in the days of Jeshua.

α.12.8 
E.12.8 Moreover the Levites: Jeshua, Binnui, Kadmiel, Sherebiah, Judah, and Mattaniah, which was over the thanksgiving, he and his brethren.

α.12.9 
E.12.9 Also Bakbukiah and Unni, their brethren, were over against them in the watches.

α.12.10 
E.12.10 And Jeshua begat Joiakim, Joiakim also begat Eliashib, and Eliashib begat Joiada,

α.12.11 
E.12.11 And Joiada begat Jonathan, and Jonathan begat Jaddua.

α.12.12 
E.12.12 And in the days of Joiakim were priests, the chief of the fathers: of Seraiah, Meraiah; of Jeremiah, Hananiah;

α.12.13 
E.12.13 Of Ezra, Meshullam; of Amariah, Jehohanan;

α.12.14 
E.12.14 Of Melicu, Jonathan; of Shebaniah, Joseph;

α.12.15 
E.12.15 Of Harim, Adna; of Meraioth, Helkai;

α.12.16 
E.12.16 Of Iddo, Zechariah; of Ginnethon, Meshullam;

α.12.17 
E.12.17 Of Abijah, Zichri; of Miniamin, of Moadiah, Piltai:

α.12.18 
E.12.18 Of Bilgah, Shammua; of Shemaiah, Jehonathan;

α.12.19 
E.12.19 And of Joiarib, Mattenai; of Jedaiah, Uzzi;

α.12.20 
E.12.20 Of Sallai, Kallai; of Amok, Eber;

α.12.21 
E.12.21 Of Hilkiah, Hashabiah; of Jedaiah, Nethaneel.

α.12.22 
E.12.22 The Levites in the days of Eliashib, Joiada, and Johanan, and Jaddua, were recorded chief of the fathers: also the priests, to the reign of Darius the Persian.

α.12.23 
E.12.23 The sons of Levi, the chief of the fathers, were written in the book of the chronicles, even until the days of Johanan the son of Eliashib.

α.12.24 
E.12.24 And the chief of the Levites: Hashabiah, Sherebiah, and Jeshua the son of Kadmiel, with their brethren over against them, to praise and to give thanks, according to the commandment of David the man of God, ward over against ward.

α.12.25 
E.12.25 Mattaniah, and Bakbukiah, Obadiah, Meshullam, Talmon, Akkub, were porters keeping the ward at the thresholds of the gates.

α.12.26 
E.12.26 These were in the days of Joiakim the son of Jeshua, the son of Jozadak, and in the days of Nehemiah the governor, and of Ezra the priest, the scribe.

α.12.27 
E.12.27 And at the dedication of the wall of Jerusalem they sought the Levites out of all their places, to bring them to Jerusalem, to keep the dedication with gladness, both with thanksgivings, and with singing, with cymbals, psalteries, and with harps.

α.12.28 
E.12.28 And the sons of the singers gathered themselves together, both out of the plain country round about Jerusalem, and from the villages of Netophathi;

α.12.29 
E.12.29 Also from the house of Gilgal, and out of the fields of Geba and Azmaveth: for the singers had builded them villages round about Jerusalem.

α.12.30 
E.12.30 And the priests and the Levites purified themselves, and purified the people, and the gates, and the wall.

α.12.31 
E.12.31 Then I brought up the princes of Judah upon the wall, and appointed two great companies of them that gave thanks, whereof one went on the right hand upon the wall toward the dung gate:

α.12.32 
E.12.32 And after them went Hoshaiah, and half of the princes of Judah,

α.12.33 
E.12.33 And Azariah, Ezra, and Meshullam,

α.12.34 
E.12.34 Judah, and Benjamin, and Shemaiah, and Jeremiah,

α.12.35 
E.12.35 And certain of the priests' sons with trumpets; namely, Zechariah the son of Jonathan, the son of Shemaiah, the son of Mattaniah, the son of Michaiah, the son of Zaccur, the son of Asaph:

α.12.36 
E.12.36 And his brethren, Shemaiah, and Azarael, Milalai, Gilalai, Maai, Nethaneel, and Judah, Hanani, with the musical instruments of David the man of God, and Ezra the scribe before them.

α.12.37 
E.12.37 And at the fountain gate, which was over against them, they went up by the stairs of the city of David, at the going up of the wall, above the house of David, even unto the water gate eastward.

α.12.38 
E.12.38 And the other company of them that gave thanks went over against them, and I after them, and the half of the people upon the wall, from beyond the tower of the furnaces even unto the broad wall;

α.12.39 
E.12.39 And from above the gate of Ephraim, and above the old gate, and above the fish gate, and the tower of Hananeel, and the tower of Meah, even unto the sheep gate: and they stood still in the prison gate.

α.12.40 
E.12.40 So stood the two companies of them that gave thanks in the house of God, and I, and the half of the rulers with me:

α.12.41 
E.12.41 And the priests; Eliakim, Maaseiah, Miniamin, Michaiah, Elioenai, Zechariah, and Hananiah, with trumpets;

α.12.42 
E.12.42 And Maaseiah, and Shemaiah, and Eleazar, and Uzzi, and Jehohanan, and Malchijah, and Elam, and Ezer. And the singers sang loud, with Jezrahiah their overseer.

α.12.43 
E.12.43 Also that day they offered great sacrifices, and rejoiced: for God had made them rejoice with great joy: the wives also and the children rejoiced: so that the joy of Jerusalem was heard even afar off.

α.12.44 
E.12.44 And at that time were some appointed over the chambers for the treasures, for the offerings, for the firstfruits, and for the tithes, to gather into them out of the fields of the cities the portions of the law for the priests and Levites: for Judah rejoiced for the priests and for the Levites that waited.

α.12.45 
E.12.45 And both the singers and the porters kept the ward of their God, and the ward of the purification, according to the commandment of David, and of Solomon his son.

α.12.46 
E.12.46 For in the days of David and Asaph of old there were chief of the singers, and songs of praise and thanksgiving unto God.

α.12.47 
E.12.47 And all Israel in the days of Zerubbabel, and in the days of Nehemiah, gave the portions of the singers and the porters, every day his portion: and they sanctified holy things unto the Levites; and the Levites sanctified them unto the children of Aaron.

α.13.1 
E.13.1 On that day they read in the book of Moses in the audience of the people; and therein was found written, that the Ammonite and the Moabite should not come into the congregation of God for ever;

α.13.2 
E.13.2 Because they met not the children of Israel with bread and with water, but hired Balaam against them, that he should curse them: howbeit our God turned the curse into a blessing.

α.13.3 
E.13.3 Now it came to pass, when they had heard the law, that they separated from Israel all the mixed multitude.

α.13.4 
E.13.4 And before this, Eliashib the priest, having the oversight of the chamber of the house of our God, was allied unto Tobiah:

α.13.5 
E.13.5 And he had prepared for him a great chamber, where aforetime they laid the meat offerings, the frankincense, and the vessels, and the tithes of the corn, the new wine, and the oil, which was commanded to be given to the Levites, and the singers, and the porters; and the offerings of the priests.

α.13.6 
E.13.6 But in all this time was not I at Jerusalem: for in the two and thirtieth year of Artaxerxes king of Babylon came I unto the king, and after certain days obtained I leave of the king:

α.13.7 
E.13.7 And I came to Jerusalem, and understood of the evil that Eliashib did for Tobiah, in preparing him a chamber in the courts of the house of God.

α.13.8 
E.13.8 And it grieved me sore: therefore I cast forth all the household stuff to Tobiah out of the chamber.

α.13.9 
E.13.9 Then I commanded, and they cleansed the chambers: and thither brought I again the vessels of the house of God, with the meat offering and the frankincense.

α.13.10 
E.13.10 And I perceived that the portions of the Levites had not been given them: for the Levites and the singers, that did the work, were fled every one to his field.

α.13.11 
E.13.11 Then contended I with the rulers, and said, Why is the house of God forsaken? And I gathered them together, and set them in their place.

α.13.12 
E.13.12 Then brought all Judah the tithe of the corn and the new wine and the oil unto the treasuries.

α.13.13 
E.13.13 And I made treasurers over the treasuries, Shelemiah the priest, and Zadok the scribe, and of the Levites, Pedaiah: and next to them was Hanan the son of Zaccur, the son of Mattaniah: for they were counted faithful, and their office was to distribute unto their brethren.

α.13.14 
E.13.14 Remember me, O my God, concerning this, and wipe not out my good deeds that I have done for the house of my God, and for the offices thereof.

α.13.15 
E.13.15 In those days saw I in Judah some treading wine presses on the sabbath, and bringing in sheaves, and lading asses; as also wine, grapes, and figs, and all manner of burdens, which they brought into Jerusalem on the sabbath day: and I testified against them in the day wherein they sold victuals.

α.13.16 
E.13.16 There dwelt men of Tyre also therein, which brought fish, and all manner of ware, and sold on the sabbath unto the children of Judah, and in Jerusalem.

α.13.17 
E.13.17 Then I contended with the nobles of Judah, and said unto them, What evil thing is this that ye do, and profane the sabbath day?

α.13.18 
E.13.18 Did not your fathers thus, and did not our God bring all this evil upon us, and upon this city? yet ye bring more wrath upon Israel by profaning the sabbath.

α.13.19 
E.13.19 And it came to pass, that when the gates of Jerusalem began to be dark before the sabbath, I commanded that the gates should be shut, and charged that they should not be opened till after the sabbath: and some of my servants set I at the gates, that there should no burden be brought in on the sabbath day.

α.13.20 
E.13.20 So the merchants and sellers of all kind of ware lodged without Jerusalem once or twice.

α.13.21 
E.13.21 Then I testified against them, and said unto them, Why lodge ye about the wall? if ye do so again, I will lay hands on you. From that time forth came they no more on the sabbath.

α.13.22 
E.13.22 And I commanded the Levites that they should cleanse themselves, and that they should come and keep the gates, to sanctify the sabbath day. Remember me, O my God, concerning this also, and spare me according to the greatness of thy mercy.

α.13.23 
E.13.23 In those days also saw I Jews that had married wives of Ashdod, of Ammon, and of Moab:

α.13.24 
E.13.24 And their children spake half in the speech of Ashdod, and could not speak in the Jews' language, but according to the language of each people.

α.13.25 
E.13.25 And I contended with them, and cursed them, and smote certain of them, and plucked off their hair, and made them swear by God, saying, Ye shall not give your daughters unto their sons, nor take their daughters unto your sons, or for yourselves.

α.13.26 Sunnummatta Solomon Israelle ketass8t macheseus nashpe yeush? qut onch ut kenugke monatash wutohtimóneash, wanne ketass8t wuttinnauoh, noh womononcheh God, kah God ukketass8tamwáheuh ut wame Israel: qut onch pen8wohte[á]e mittamwussissog ummatcheseáheuh.
E.13.26 Did not Solomon king of Israel sin by these things? yet among many nations was there no king like him, who was beloved of his God, and God made him king over all Israel: nevertheless even him did outlandish women cause to sin.

α.13.27 Neit sun woh kukkuhkeitauunúmun, yeu ussenat mishe machuk, pannesehtauónat num-Manitt8mun, pen8wohteáe wut8hkauónat?
E.13.27 Shall we then hearken unto you to do all this great evil, to transgress against our God in marrying strange wives?

α.13.28 Kah pasuk wunnaumonuh Jojada, wunnaumonuh Eliashib, kehche sephausuen, wesseenumukqutcheh Sanballat wut-Horonite: newaj áma8hkauog.
E.13.28 And one of the sons of Joiada, the son of Eliashib the high priest, was son in law to Sanballat the Horonite: therefore I chased him from me.

α.13.29 Nag mehquanum woi num-Manitt8m, newutche nishk[e]hteauog sephausuénuonk, kah sephausuénue kah Levitse wunn8waonk.
E.13.29 Remember them, O my God, because they have defiled the priesthood, and the covenant of the priesthood, and of the Levites.

α.13.30 Yeu nuttin pahkheónéau wutch wame penuwohteaut, kah nukkuhquttum sephausuénue kah Levitse wunohtoongash, nishnoh pasuk 8tamanatam8onganit.
E.13.30 Thus cleansed I them from all strangers, and appointed the wards of the priests and the Levites, every one in his business;

α.13.31 Kah wutche mehtugque mag8ongash, kah wutche kakeneumuneash. mehquanumeh woi num-Manitt8m wutch wanegik.
E.13.31 And for the wood offering, at times appointed, and for the firstfruits. Remember me, O my God, for good.