
α.1.1 UT shwosuk adtahs8it nepauz, ut nahohtôeu ukkodtum8mut Darius wuttinn8waonk Jehovah peyaonuk Zechariuh wunnaumonuh Barachiah, wunnaumonuh Iddo quoshodtumwaen, n8wau,
E.1.1 In the eighth month, in the second year of Darius, came the word of the LORD unto Zechariah, the son of Berechiah, the son of Iddo the prophet, saying,

α.1.2 Jehovah mishe unkquánum8p wutche k8sh8óog.
E.1.2 The LORD hath been sore displeased with your fathers.

α.1.3 Newutche nag us, yeu wussin Jehovah ayeuhteaunit, quinnuppek en nuhhogkat wussin Jehovah ayeuteaunit, kah pish nen nukqushkem en kuhhogkaóut, wussin Jehovah ayeuhteaunit.
E.1.3 Therefore say thou unto them, Thus saith the LORD of hosts; Turn ye unto me, saith the LORD of hosts, and I will turn unto you, saith the LORD of hosts.

α.1.4 Tatuppéyeuwéhteok k8sh8wóog neh negonne quoshodtumwaenuog mashont8wanumauwahetteupoh n8wahettit yeu wussin Jehovah ayeuhteaunit eyeu quinnuppek wutch kummatchemayeuóut kah wutch kummatcheseongan8óut: qut nag matta n8tam8og, asuh nukkeitunk8og wussin Jehovah.
E.1.4 Be ye not as your fathers, unto whom the former prophets have cried, saying, Thus saith the LORD of hosts; Turn ye now from your evil ways, and from your evil doings: but they did not hear, nor hearken unto me, saith the LORD.

α.1.5 K8sh8óoh uttoh wutapineau? kah quoshodtumwaenu[ó]g, sun nag micheme pomantamwog?
E.1.5 Your fathers, where are they? and the prophets, do they live for ever?

α.1.6 Qut nukkutt8wongash kah nukkuhk8waongash nish ann8nogkupash nuttinneumog quoshodtumwaenuog, sunnummatta menuhkenau8sáhhaneg k8sh8wôh? kah nag qushkeog kah n8waog, ne anantog Jehovah ayeuhteaunit kuttinhikqunnanónut, neaunak kummay[n]ónash, kah neaunak nutusseonganónash, ne kittinhikqunan.
E.1.6 But my words and my statutes, which I commanded my servants the prophets, did they not take hold of your fathers? and they returned and said, Like as the LORD of hosts thought to do unto us, according to our ways, and according to our doings, so hath he dealt with us.

α.1.7 Ut neesneechadtikqunhog kah yautikquinne nepauz, nabonogquttit nepauz, noh hennau Sebat, noh wutohtoeu kodtum8 Darius, wuttinn8waonk Jehovah peyaonuk Zechariah wunnaumonuh Barachiah, wunnaumonuh Iddo quoshodtumwaen, n8wau,
E.1.7 Upon the four and twentieth day of the eleventh month, which is the month Sebat, in the second year of Darius, came the word of the LORD unto Zechariah, the son of Berechiah, the son of Iddo the prophet, saying,

α.1.8 Nukkonaeu nunnaumup kah kusseh, wosketomp nayeumuk musquesu horsesoh, kah neepau ut kenugke myrtlsehtugqut nish ohtagish 8nóuhkoiyeuut: kah uppusquanayeu appuoh nushúoh msque horsesoh chohchohkesu, kah wompesu.
E.1.8 I saw by night, and behold a man riding upon a red horse, and he stood among the myrtle trees that were in the bottom; and behind him were there red horses, speckled, and white.

α.1.9 Neit nussip, woi nul-Lordum teagwassinish yeush: kah angel noh kéket8hkiit, nuttinuk, kenahtinush yeug howaneg.
E.1.9 Then said I, O my lord, what are these? And the angel that talked with me said unto me, I will shew thee what these be.

α.1.10 Kah wosketomp noh neepauit kenugke myrtlsehtugqut, namp8ham kah n8wau, yeug nag Jehovah ann8noncheh papaumshonât papashpe ohkeit.
E.1.10 And the man that stood among the myrtle trees answered and said, These are they whom the LORD hath sent to walk to and fro through the earth.

α.1.11 Kah nag namp8hamauáog wut-angelumoh Jehovah noh neepauit kenugke myrtlesehtugquash, kah n8wau, nuppapaumshamun ohke: kah kusseh, wame ohke chequnohteau, kah anwohsin8m8.
E.1.11 And they answered the angel of the LORD that stood among the myrtle trees, and said, We have walked to and fro through the earth, and, behold, all the earth sitteth still, and is at rest.

α.1.12 Neit wut-angelumoh Jehovah namp8h[a]mwoh, kah n8wau, woi Jehovah ayeuhteaunit, toh utt8che matta kummonanumoh Jerusalem, k[á]h Judae keitotanash, nish waj musquantamópash nequttatahshinchage kah piogque kodtum8?
E.1.12 Then the angel of the LORD answered and said, O LORD of hosts, how long wilt thou not have mercy on Jerusalem and on the cities of Judah, against which thou hast had indignation these threescore and ten years?

α.1.13 Kah Jehovah namp8hamauau angeloh, neh kéket8hkunkqueaneh, nashpe wunne kutt8wongash, kah taphettue kutt8ongash.
E.1.13 And the LORD answered the angel that talked with me with good words and comfortable words.

α.1.14 Neit angel noh keket8hkiit, nuttinuk, mishont8ash, n8wash, yeu wussin Jehovah ayeuhteaunit, nen numm8sitteam wutch Jerusalem kah wutch Zion, nashpe mishe m8summuáonk.
E.1.14 So the angel that communed with me said unto me, Cry thou, saying, Thus saith the LORD of hosts; I am jealous for Jerusalem and for Zion with a great jealousy.

α.1.15 Kah nummishe musquanum penuohteaog neg manunniitcheg: newutch ohguhse n8nhetteap, kah nag kutchittoeu aninnumwontamwog wutonkquanum8ongan8.
E.1.15 And I am very sore displeased with the heathen that are at ease: for I was but a little displeased, and they helped forward the affliction.

α.1.16 Newaj yeu n8wadt Jehovah, nen nukqushkem en Jerusalem nashpe monaneteaongash: neek na pish ut ayimun, wussin Jehovah ayeuhteaunit, kah pemuneat pish summagunumun ut woskeche Jerusalem.
E.1.16 Therefore thus saith the LORD; I am returned to Jerusalem with mercies: my house shall be built in it, saith the LORD of hosts, and a line shall be stretched forth upon Jerusalem.

α.1.17 Ashpummee mishont8ash, yeu wussin Jehovah ayeuhteaunit, nut8tanash nashpe wunneguk, pish wonk seséahausu, kah Jehovah pish ashpummee tapeteau Zion, kah pish ashpumm[e]e pepenam Jerusalem.
E.1.17 Cry yet, saying, Thus saith the LORD of hosts; My cities through prosperity shall yet be spread abroad; and the LORD shall yet comfort Zion, and shall yet choose Jerusalem.

α.1.18 Neit nuttahshinumup nuskesukquash, kah nunnaumup, kah kusseh yauog askonog.
E.1.18 Then lifted I up mine eyes, and saw, and behold four horns.

α.1.19 Kah nuttinomp angel noh keket8kiit, teagwassinish yeush? kah namp8hamunkup, yeug askonog seahwhoncheg Judahoh, Israeloh, kah Jerusalemoh.
E.1.19 And I said unto the angel that talked with me, What be these? And he answered me, These are the horns which have scattered Judah, Israel, and Jerusalem.

α.1.20 Kah Jehovah nahtinuk yauóh wekitteaénúh.
E.1.20 And the LORD shewed me four carpenters.

α.1.21 Neit nussip, yeug toh nonche usséog? kah kutt8, n8wau, yeug askonog seahwhoncheg Judahoh, new[á]j matta howan tahshinum8p uppuhkuk: qut yeug wutche peyaog wabeseheónat, pogkenonat penuwohteau askonog, neg tahshinoncheg wutaskonoh ut ohkit Judah seáhhamunat.
E.1.21 Then said I, What come these to do? And he spake, saying, These are the horns which have scattered Judah, so that no man did lift up his head: but these are come to fray them, to cast out the horns of the Gentiles, which lifted up their horn over the land of Judah to scatter it.

α.2.1 WOnk nuttahshinnum nuskesukquash, kah nunnatauwomp, kah kusseh, wosketomp quttuhwhegane pemuneat ohteau wunnutcheganit.
E.2.1 I lifted up mine eyes again, and looked, and behold a man with a measuring line in his hand.

α.2.2 Neit nussip, tohnoh kutton, kah nuttinuk, quttuhhumunat Jerusalem naumunat toh kishkag kah toh sohteag.
E.2.2 Then said I, Whither goest thou? And he said unto me, To measure Jerusalem, to see what is the breadth thereof, and what is the length thereof.

α.2.3 Kah kusseh, angel noh kéket8hkiit sohham, kah onkatuk angel sohham noh wunnogskauoh.
E.2.3 And, behold, the angel that talked with me went forth, and another angel went out to meet him,

α.2.4 Kah wuttinuh, kogquish, ken8s yeuoh wuskenin, n8wash, Jerusalem pish wutohkein onatuh matta pummen[ú]tausue otanash, newutche mataánukeg wosketompaog, kah puppinashimwog na$ut.
E.2.4 And said unto him, Run, speak to this young man, saying, Jerusalem shall be inhabited as towns without walls for the multitude of men and cattle therein:

α.2.5 Newutche nen, wussin Jehovah, pish nuttátupéhtau ut wuhhogkat n8taen[u]tunkanit waeenu, kah sohsumóonk ut wunnashaumut.
E.2.5 For I, saith the LORD, will be unto her a wall of fire round about, and will be the glory in the midst of her.

α.2.6 Chuh, chuh, sohham8k wutchiph8ak wutch nanummiyeue ohkeit, wussin Jehovah: newutch kutogque seahwhunnumw8 yaue kesukque wababit, wussin Jehovah.
E.2.6 Ho, ho, come forth, and flee from the land of the north, saith the LORD: for I have spread you abroad as the four winds of the heaven, saith the LORD.

α.2.7 Pohquahwus kuhhog, woi Zion, ken wadohkean ut wuttauna[t] Babylon.
E.2.7 Deliver thyself, O Zion, that dwellest with the daughter of Babylon.

α.2.8 Newutche yeu wussin Jehovah ayeuhteaunit, asuhkaue wussohsumoonk, nutann8nuk en wutohtimóineat neg woskhikqueógig: newutche noh masinukqueóg mussinnum ummówuskésuk8m.
E.2.8 For thus saith the LORD of hosts; After the glory hath he sent me unto the nations which spoiled you: for he that toucheth you toucheth the apple of his eye.

α.2.9 Newutche kusseh, nag nunnunukkinnumauóog nunnutcheg, kah nag pish tohqun[à]og wuttinnúmuneuh: kah pish k8wahteomw8, Jehovah ayeuhteaunit nutann8nuk.
E.2.9 For, behold, I will shake mine hand upon them, and they shall be a spoil to their servants: and ye shall know that the LORD of hosts hath sent me.

α.2.10 Ket8humash kah weekontash woi wuttaunoh Zion: newutche kusseh, nuppeam, kah nuttai ut kenashomut, wussin Jehovah.
E.2.10 Sing and rejoice, O daughter of Zion: for, lo, I come, and I will dwell in the midst of thee, saith the LORD.

α.2.11 Kah monatash wutohtimóneash pish môsogquehtauwáog Jehovah [ne] kesukoh, kah neg pish nummissinninnumunneunk: kah nuttai ut kenashómut, kah pish k8wahteoh Jehovah ayeuhteaunit nutann8nuk en kuhhogkat.
E.2.11 And many nations shall be joined to the LORD in that day, and shall be my people: and I will dwell in the midst of thee, and thou shalt know that the LORD of hosts hath sent me unto thee.

α.2.12 Kah Jehovah pish ohtau Judah wuttaihe, ut wunneetupanatamwe ohkeit, kah pish wonk nuppepenam Jerusalem.
E.2.12 And the LORD shall inherit Judah his portion in the holy land, and shall choose Jerusalem again.

α.2.13 Cheq[u]nappek, woi wame weyaus, ut anaquabit Jehovah: newutche noh waabu wutch wunneetupanatamwe ayeuonganit.
E.2.13 Be silent, O all flesh, before the LORD: for he is raised up out of his holy habitation.

α.3.1 KAh nunnahtimuk Joshua kehche sephausuen[,] neepau ut anaquabit wutangelum Jehovah, kah Satan neepau wuttinnohk[ô]unit wutayeuhkonukqunat.
E.3.1 And he shewed me Joshua the high priest standing before the angel of the LORD, and Satan standing at his right hand to resist him.

α.3.2 Kah Jehovah unnau mattanitt8h, Jehovah [á]ushkomukqush, woi mattannit, Jehovah noh pepenog Jerusalem áushkomukqush, sun yeu matta pohqut amaunumuk wutch n8taut?
E.3.2 And the LORD said unto Satan, The LORD rebuke thee, O Satan; even the LORD that hath chosen Jerusalem rebuke thee: is not this a brand plucked out of the fire?

α.3.3 Kah Joshua hogk8 nishkeneunkquodte hogk8unash, kah neepau anaquabit angel.
E.3.3 Now Joshua was clothed with filthy garments, and stood before the angel.

α.3.4 Kah namp8ham, kah unnau yeuh neepaunitcheh anaquabit n8wau, amaunumók nishkeneunkquodte wuthogk8unash. Kah wuttinuh, kusseh, kuppaumushahúkqueh[e]sh kummatcheseonk, kah kuthogquanesh ós8wunnumwe hogk8unash.
E.3.4 And he answered and spake unto those that stood before him, saying, Take away the filthy garments from him. And unto him he said, Behold, I have caused thine iniquity to pass from thee, and I will clothe thee with change of raiment.

α.3.5 Kah nussip, ponumunach wanegik muhpuhkukqut ahhogtag, ut uppuhkukqut, neit upponamauóuh wanegik muhpuhkukqut ahhohtag ut uppuhkukqut, kah wuthogquanóuh hogk8unash kah wutanegelumoh Jehovah kehchekompau.
E.3.5 And I said, Let them set a fair mitre upon his head. So they set a fair mitre upon his head, and clothed him with garments. And the angel of the LORD stood by.

α.3.6 Kah wutangelumoh Jehovah chetimau: Joshuahoh n8wau,
E.3.6 And the angel of the LORD protested unto Joshua, saying,

α.3.7 Yeu wussin Jehovah ayeuhteaunit, pomusháan nummayit, nanawehteau[a]n nukkuhk8waongash, neit pish wonk k8sittum nek, kah pish wonk kenanawehteoh nutchippinnutungash, kah kittinnumaush ayeuongash pomushonat ut kenugke yeug kehchekompauitcheg.
E.3.7 Thus saith the LORD of hosts; If thou wilt walk in my ways, and if thou wilt keep my charge, then thou shalt also judge my house, and shalt also keep my courts, and I will give thee places to walk among these that stand by.

α.3.8 Eyeu n8tash, woi Joshua kehche sephausuen, ken kah we[e]chayeumukqueaneg, neg apitcheg anaquabean: newutche nag wosketompaog ummonchanatamuneau: newutche kusseh nussohh8un nuttinneum WUDTUHK.
E.3.8 Hear now, O Joshua the high priest, thou, and thy fellows that sit before thee: for they are men wondered at: for, behold, I will bring forth my servant the BRANCH.

α.3.9 Newutche kusseh, qussuk ne ponamomp anaquabit Joshua: ut pasuk qussuk pish nesausuk tashishkesukquom8, kusseh nukkogoxum ne kogoxum8onk, wussin Jehovah ayeuhteaunit, kah pish nutontahtoh ummatcheseonk na ohke pasuk kesukod.
E.3.9 For behold the stone that I have laid before Joshua; upon one stone shall be seven eyes: behold, I will engrave the graving thereof, saith the LORD of hosts, and I will remove the iniquity of that land in one day.

α.3.10 Ne kesukok, n8wau Jehovah ayeuhteaunit, pish k8wehkomómw8 nishnoh wosketomp weetatteamungu[h] ut agwe weenomwussippogqut, kah agwe figsuhtugqut.
E.3.10 In that day, saith the LORD of hosts, shall ye call every man his neighbour under the vine and under the fig tree.

α.4.1 KAh angel noh keket8hkiit, wonk peyau kah nutt8hkinuk, onatuh wosketomp t8hke[i]t:
E.4.1 And the angel that talked with me came again, and waked me, as a man that is wakened out of his sleep.

α.4.2 Kah nuttinuk, teagwas kenaum? kah nussip, nunnatauwompip, kah kusseh golde wequananteganuhtug, kah 8nauag ohteau woskeche, kah nesausuk tahshinash lampsash naut, kah nesausuk tahshinash papómpuhkagish en enadtuh tahshe lampsut, nish ohtagish woskeche.
E.4.2 And said unto me, What seest thou? And I said, I have looked, and behold a candlestick all of gold, with a bowl upon the top of it, and his seven lamps thereon, and seven pipes to the seven lamps, which are upon the top thereof:

α.4.3 Kah neesinash oliveuhtugquash kishohteau, pasuk wutohteau enniñohkôuneiyeu ne aht8chag, kah onkatog menadchéinniyeu.
E.4.3 And two olive trees by it, one upon the right side of the bowl, and the other upon the left side thereof.

α.4.4 Neit nunamp8hamup kah nukken8nomp [à]ngel noh keket8hkiit, nussip, teagwassinish yeush nussontimom?
E.4.4 So I answered and spake to the angel that talked with me, saying, What are these, my lord?

α.4.5 Neit angel noh keket8hkiit, namp8ham kah nuttinuk, sun mo k8wahteo yeush teagwasinish? kah nussip matta, nussontimom.
E.4.5 Then the angel that talked with me answered and said unto me, Knowest thou not what these be? And I said, No, my lord.

α.4.6 Neit namp8ham kah nukken8nuk, yeu wuttinn8waonk Jehovah en Zerubbabelut, n8wau, matta nashpe menuhkesuonk, asuh nashpe missugken8onk, qut nashpe nunnashauanitt8m wussin Jehovah ayeuhteaunit.
E.4.6 Then he answered and spake unto me, saying, This is the word of the LORD unto Zerubbabel, saying, Not by might, nor by power, but by my spirit, saith the LORD of hosts.

α.4.7 Howan ken woi mishadchu? ut anaquabit Zerubbabel pish kummukoshqutteau, kah noh pish sohh8wutteau uppuhkuk8e qussuk nashpe mishont8wáonk, uttammohettit, kitteamonteanitteáonk, kitteamonteanitteaonk.
E.4.7 Who art thou, O great mountain? before Zerubbabel thou shalt become a plain: and he shall bring forth the headstone thereof with shoutings, crying, Grace, grace unto it.

α.4.8 Nano wuttinn8waonk Jehovah nuppeyaonuk n8wau,
E.4.8 Moreover the word of the LORD came unto me, saying,

α.4.9 Wunnutchegash Zerubbabel wunnohtou quenohtag yeu weetu: wunnutchegash pish wonk uppogkodchehteauwunin; kah pish k8wahteoh Jehovah áyeuhteaunit nutann8nuk en kuhhogkaout.
E.4.9 The hands of Zerubbabel have laid the foundation of this house; his hands shall also finish it; and thou shalt know that the LORD of hosts hath sent me unto you.

α.4.10 Newutche howan jishontog ukkesukodtum8 papeásikish? newutche nag pish weekontamwog kah pish naumwog qutompaghumuk, ut wunnutcheganit Zerubbabel, weeche yeug enada adtahsuutcheg: nag wuskesukquash Jehovah, nish papaumushóm8ukish mamusse ohkeit.
E.4.10 For who hath despised the day of small things? for they shall rejoice, and shall see the plummet in the hand of Zerubbabel with those seven; they are the eyes of the LORD, which run to and fro through the whole earth.

α.4.11 Neit nunnamp8ham, kah nuttinop, teagwassinish yeush neesinash olivuhtugquash, ut nunuhkôuñe wequananteganuhtugqut, kah ut menadcheinniyeu.
E.4.11 Then answered I, and said unto him, What are these two olive trees upon the right side of the candlestick and upon the left side thereof?

α.4.12 Kah wonk nunnamp8hamup, kah nuttinop, teagwas nish neenash olivuhtugque wutuhqunash, nish papashpe neesinash golde puhpuhkiyeuash, sequemoash golde pummee wutch wuhhogkaóut?
E.4.12 And I answered again, and said unto him, What be these two olive branches which through the two golden pipes empty the golden oil out of themselves?

α.4.13 Kah noh nunnamp8hamunk, kah n8wau, sun mo k8wahteau yeush teagwasinish? kah nissip matta nussontimom.
E.4.13 And he answered me and said, Knowest thou not what these be? And I said, No, my lord.

α.4.14 Neit n8wau, yeug nees8og saséqunutcheg neg kehchekompauitcheg Lordut mamusse ohkeit.
E.4.14 Then said he, These are the two anointed ones, that stand by the LORD of the whole earth.

α.5.1 NEit nukquinnupep, kah nuttahshinumup nuskesukquash, kah natauwompip, kah kusseh pt8ém8e tuttuppéquianausik,
E.5.1 Then I turned, and lifted up mine eyes, and looked, and behold a flying roll.

α.5.2 Kah nuttinuk, teagwas kenaum? kah nunnamp8hamup nunnaum pt8ém8e tuttuppinnausik, ne sahteag neesneechagishquanogkod, kah ne koshkag piogquishquanogkod.
E.5.2 And he said unto me, What seest thou? And I answered, I see a flying roll; the length thereof is twenty cubits, and the breadth thereof ten cubits.

α.5.3 Neit nuttinuk, yeu matanittuonk, ne sohham8m8uk en woskeche mamusse ohkeit: newutche nishnoh pasuk noh komm8tuk pish tummetahwhou onatuh wuttuhsh wutch, neaunak, nishnoh pasuk noh chadchekeyeuadt pish tummetahwhau onatuh na nogque wutch, neaunak.
E.5.3 Then said he unto me, This is the curse that goeth forth over the face of the whole earth: for every one that stealeth shall be cut off as on this side according to it; and every one that sweareth shall be cut off as on that side according to it.

α.5.4 Kah nussohh8wuttauun wussin Jehovah ayeuhteaunit, kah pish petutteam8 wekit komm8towaenin, kah en wekit noh pann8wae chadchekeyeuadt nashpe n8wesuonk, kah ne pish ôohteau nashaue wekit, kah pish mohtutteau, kah weeche timber kah hassunash nish na ohtagish.
E.5.4 I will bring it forth, saith the LORD of hosts, and it shall enter into the house of the thief, and into the house of him that sweareth falsely by my name: and it shall remain in the midst of his house, and shall consume it with the timber thereof and the stones thereof.

α.5.5 Neit Angel noh keket8hkiit sohham kah nutannuk, tohshinush yeuyeu kuskesukquash, kah naish teagwas yeu sohham8m8uk.
E.5.5 Then the angel that talked with me went forth, and said unto me, Lift up now thine eyes, and see what is this that goeth forth.

α.5.6 Kah nussip, ne teagwas? kah n8wop, yeu ephah, ne sohham8m8uk, wonk n8wau, yeu tatuppeyeu8onk papashpe wame ohkeit.
E.5.6 And I said, What is it? And he said, This is an ephah that goeth forth. He said moreover, This is their resemblance through all the earth.

α.5.7 Kah kusseh, naut waápém8 tuhkequane kodchuhki mahmuttattag: kah yeuoh mittamwossis apit nashaue ephah.
E.5.7 And, behold, there was lifted up a talent of lead: and this is a woman that sitteth in the midst of the ephah.

α.5.8 Kah n8wau, yeu matchet8wonk, kah wuttinnuhkon nashaue ephahut, kah penuhteau tuhkequanne mahmuttattag ut wutt8nit.
E.5.8 And he said, This is wickedness. And he cast it into the midst of the ephah; and he cast the weight of lead upon the mouth thereof.

α.5.9 Neit nuttahshinumup nuskesukquash kah natauwompip, kah kusseh na 8ch sohhamuneau neesuog mittamwossissog, kah wuttin appu wunnuppohwhunit (newutche nag ogqunuppohwhunáog storkut) kah nag tahshinnumwog ephah ut nashaue ohkeit, kah kesukqut.
E.5.9 Then lifted I up mine eyes, and looked, and, behold, there came out two women, and the wind was in their wings; for they had wings like the wings of a stork: and they lifted up the ephah between the earth and the heaven.

α.5.10 Neit nuttinnomp angel noh keket8hkiit, tónnoh yeug ununneéteaog epha[p]?
E.5.10 Then said I to the angel that talked with me, Whither do these bear the ephah?

α.5.11 Kah nuttinuk, weekikontamunat ut Shináre ohkeit, kah ne pish menehketeauun kah na pish ponamun ut nehenwonceh quequenohtog.
E.5.11 And he said unto me, To build it an house in the land of Shinar: and it shall be established, and set there upon her own base.

α.6.1 KAh nukquinnupep, kah nuttahshinumup nusk[e]sukquash, kah natauwompip, kah kusseh, yauunash chariotsash sohham8m8ash wutch nashaue neenash wadchuash, kah wadchuash brasseyeu8ash.
E.6.1 And I turned, and lifted up mine eyes, and looked, and, behold, there came four chariots out from between two mountains; and the mountains were mountains of brass.

α.6.2 Ut negonohtag chariot mosque horsesu8, kah nahohtôeu chariot moe horsesu8.
E.6.2 In the first chariot were red horses; and in the second chariot black horses;

α.6.3 Kah ut nashwenu8k chariot womphorsesu8, kah yauenú8k chariot chohchohkesuog kah menuhkesuog horsesuog.
E.6.3 And in the third chariot white horses; and in the fourth chariot grisled and bay horses.

α.6.4 Neit nunnamp8ham, kah nuttin angel noh keket8hkiit, tagwassinish yeush nussontimom?
E.6.4 Then I answered and said unto the angel that talked with me, What are these, my lord?

α.6.5 Kah Angel namp8ham kah nuttinuk, yeug yauog kesukque nashauonganog, neg sohhogeg wutch neepauinneat anaquabit Lord ut wame ohkeit.
E.6.5 And the angel answered and said unto me, These are the four spirits of the heavens, which go forth from standing before the LORD of all the earth.

α.6.6 M8e horsesog na$ut, nag sohhamwog en nanummiyeue ohkeit, kah wompésitcheg nah wutasuhkaue sohham8móuh, kah chohchohkésitcheg sohhamwog nogque en sowanohkomukqut.
E.6.6 The black horses which are therein go forth into the north country; and the white go forth after them; and the grisled go forth toward the south country.

α.6.7 Kah menuhkesuog sohhamwog, kah kod|moncheog, onk woh papaumshaog papashpe ohkeit: kah noh n8wau, monchek papaumshak papashpe ohkeit. Neit papannupwushaog ohkeit.
E.6.7 And the bay went forth, and sought to go that they might walk to and fro through the earth: and he said, Get you hence, walk to and fro through the earth. So they walked to and fro through the earth.

α.6.8 Neit nummishont8ánumunk, kah nukken8nuk, n8wau, kusseh, yeug nogque nanumohkeit aoncheg, mánunapheaog nunnashauanitt8moh, ut nanummohkeit.
E.6.8 Then cried he upon me, and spake unto me, saying, Behold, these that go toward the north country have quieted my spirit in the north country.

α.6.9 Kah wuttinn8waonk Jehovah nup[p]eyaonuk n8wau.
E.6.9 And the word of the LORD came unto me, saying,

α.6.10 Neemun nawhutche missinóog, wutch Heldai, wutch Tobijah, kah wutch Jetajeh, neg wágeg Babylon, kah ken peyaush ne nan kesukok, kah petutteash wekit Josiah wunnaumonuh Zephaniah.
E.6.10 Take of them of the captivity, even of Heldai, of Tobijah, and of Jedaiah, which are come from Babylon, and come thou the same day, and go into the house of Josiah the son of Zephaniah;

α.6.11 Neit neemunush silver kah Gold, kah chetuhquabehteush, kah ponsh uppuhkukqut Joshua wunnaumonuh Josedech kehche sephausuen.
E.6.11 Then take silver and gold, and make crowns, and set them upon the head of Joshua the son of Josedech, the high priest;

α.6.12 Kah noh ken8s, n8wash, yeu wussin Jehovah ayeuhteaunit n8wau, kusseh, wosketomp noh ahennit WUTTUHK kah noh pish neetu wutch wutayeuonganit, kah noh pish ayim|wuttemplum Jehovah
E.6.12 And speak unto him, saying, Thus speaketh the LORD of hosts, saying, Behold the man whose name is The BRANCH; and he shall grow up out of his place, and he shall build the temple of the LORD:

α.6.13 Noh pish ayim wuttemplum Jehovah, kah noh pish tahshinum sohsumoonk, kah pish appu, kah nanawunnuau ut wutappuonganit, kah noh pish sephausuenu8 ut wuttappuonganit, kah wunohteae kogohqutteam8onk pish ohteau ut wunnashomuout naneeswe.
E.6.13 Even he shall build the temple of the LORD; and he shall bear the glory, and shall sit and rule upon his throne; and he shall be a priest upon his throne: and the counsel of peace shall be between them both.

α.6.14 Kah chetuhquabeash nish pish wuttaiheash, Helem, kah Tobijah, kah Jedajah, kah Hen wunnaumonuh Zephaniah, wutche mehquontamoonk ut wut-Templumut Jehovah.
E.6.14 And the crowns shall be to Helem, and to Tobijah, and to Jedaiah, and to Hen the son of Zephaniah, for a memorial in the temple of the LORD.

α.6.15 Kah neg nóadtit apitcheg pish peyaog kah pish wekitteaog ut wut-Templumut Jehovah, kah pish k8wahteomw8, Jehovah ayeuhteaunit nutann8nuk en kuhhogkaout, kah yeu pish nnih menuhke n8swehtamog 8wadtauatônkqussuonk Jehovah kum-Manitt8mw8.
E.6.15 And they that are far off shall come and build in the temple of the LORD, and ye shall know that the LORD of hosts hath sent me unto you. And this shall come to pass, if ye will diligently obey the voice of the LORD your God.

α.7.1 KAh nniyeup ut weyaue kodtum8mut Darius, wuttinn8waonk Jehovah peyaonuk Zachariah ut yaue qunuhhog, pasuk8gun adtahs8it nepauz ut chisleu.
E.7.1 And it came to pass in the fourth year of king Darius, that the word of the LORD came unto Zechariah in the fourth day of the ninth month, even in Chisleu;

α.7.2 Ann8teamohettit en weekit God Sherezer, kah Regem-Melech kah wuttinneum8uh, peantamunat ut anaquabit Jehovah.
E.7.2 When they had sent unto the house of God Sherezer and Regemmelech, and their men, to pray before the LORD,

α.7.3 Kah ken8nonat sephausuenuog neg apitcheg wekit Jehovah ayeuhteaunit, kah quoshodtumwaenuog, n8waog sun woh nummoh ut napanna adtahs8it nepauz, nutchippinnonat nuhhog, ne asee m8cheke kodtumwae?
E.7.3 And to speak unto the priests which were in the house of the LORD of hosts, and to the prophets, saying, Should I weep in the fifth month, separating myself, as I have done these so many years?

α.7.4 Neit wuttinn8waonk Jehovah ayeuhteaunit nuppeyaonuk, n8wa[u],
E.7.4 Then came the word of the LORD of hosts unto me, saying,

α.7.5 Ken8s wame ohkee missinninnuog kah sephausuenúog, n8wagk, mat|meetseog kah mauóg napanna ad[a]hs8it, kah nesausuk adtahs8it nepauz, nesausuk tahshinchage kodtumwaeu, kah sun mat|kummeetsúm8wóus wutche nen, nux wutche nen?
E.7.5 Speak unto all the people of the land, and to the priests, saying, When ye fasted and mourned in the fifth and seventh month, even those seventy years, did ye at all fast unto me, even to me?

α.7.6 Kah meetseog, kah wuttattamóg, sunnummatta kummeechumw8 wutch kuhhogkaóut, kah k8tattamwous wutch kuhhogkaóut?
E.7.6 And when ye did eat, and when ye did drink, did not ye eat for yourselves, and drink for yourselves?

α.7.7 Sunnummatta woh ken8tam8mw8 kutt8wongash nish Jehovah mahshont 8w[a]óntogkupash nashpe negonae quoshodtumwaenúog, Jerusalem wadohtimuk, kah waniit, kah ukkeitotanash waéenu, wadohkeh[é]ttit sowaniyeué mukoshquttáut.
E.7.7 Should ye not hear the words which the LORD hath cried by the former prophets, when Jerusalem was inhabited and in prosperity, and the cities thereof round about her, when men inhabited the south and the plain?

α.7.8 Kah wuttinn8waonk Jehovah peyaonuk Zechariah, n8wau,
E.7.8 And the word of the LORD came unto Zechariah, saying,

α.7.9 Yeu wussin Jehovah ayeuhteaunit, n8wau, ussek sampwe wussittumoonk, kah kitteamonteanumonch, kah monanumonch nish$noh howan weematoh.
E.7.9 Thus speaketh the LORD of hosts, saying, Execute true judgment, and shew mercy and compassions every man to his brother:

α.7.10 Kah sunukkutchuhwhóhkon sekousq asuh touwies, pen8wot, asuh matcheku, kah kenaau howan matchenanumuhkeitch weematoh ut wuttahhut.
E.7.10 And oppress not the widow, nor the fatherless, the stranger, nor the poor; and let none of you imagine evil against his brother in your heart.

α.7.11 Qut nag sekenamwog kuhkeihtamun, kah amaunumwog wuttugkeu; kah kuppéhtauógkaéog, onk woh mo n8tam8og.
E.7.11 But they refused to hearken, and pulled away the shoulder, and stopped their ears, that they should not hear.

α.7.12 Nux, nag wuttahhou ogquehteauog Adamante qussukquanit, ishkont woh n8tamwog naumatuonk, kah ukkutt8wongash nish Jehvoah ayeuhteaunit ann8teamwutche ut wunnashauanitt8moh nashpe kehche quoshódtumwaenuog: newaj mishe musquantam8onk 8m88uk wutch Jehovah ayeuhteaunit.
E.7.12 Yea, they made their hearts as an adamant stone, lest they should hear the law, and the words which the LORD of hosts hath sent in his spirit by the former prophets: therefore came a great wrath from the LORD of hosts.

α.7.13 Newaj yeuyeu mahche n$noh, neane wéhkomont, kah matta n8tamoog, ne ne wehquetumuneau, kah nen matta n8tauoog n8wau Jehovah ayeuhteaunit.
E.7.13 Therefore it is come to pass, that as he cried, and they would not hear; so they cried, and I would not hear, saith the LORD of hosts:

α.7.14 Qut nag nuss[é]ahwhoog nashpe pemsquoh ut kenugke wame wutahtimóneash, neh matta wahheáhettégeh: yeu ne ohke touishin asuhkaue nag, newaj matta howan pannupwushau, asuh qushkeu: newutche nag touishitteoog wunohke.
E.7.14 But I scattered them with a whirlwind among all the nations whom they knew not. Thus the land was desolate after them, that no man passed through nor returned: for they laid the pleasant land desolate.

α.8.1 WOnk wuttinn8waonk Jehovah ayeu[h]teaunit nuppeyaónuk, n8wau,
E.8.1 Again the word of the LORD of hosts came to me, saying,

α.8.2 Yeu wussin Jehovah ayeuhteaunit, numm8summáap Zion nashpe mishe m8summu[à]onk: kah n8ch m8summuonah nashpe mishe chenauausuonk.
E.8.2 Thus saith the LORD of hosts; I was jealous for Zion with great jealousy, and I was jealous for her with great fury.

α.8.3 Yeu wussin Jehovah, nen nukqushkem en Zion, kah pish nutai nashaue Jerusalem, kah Jerusalem pish hettamun, wunnamuhkutée otan, kah 8wadch8m Jehovah ayeuhteaunit, wunneetupanatamwe wadchu.
E.8.3 Thus saith the LORD; I am returned unto Zion, and will dwell in the midst of Jerusalem: and Jerusalem shall be called a city of truth; and the mountain of the LORD of hosts the holy mountain.

α.8.4 Yeu wussin Jehovah ayeuhteaunit, kutchisog kah kutchissquaog pish wonk ayeuog ut Jerusalemme toumaogquehtu, kah nishnoh pasuk anwohhou ut wunnutcheganit, ut ukkehchiyeuunneat.
E.8.4 Thus saith the LORD of hosts; There shall yet old men and old women dwell in the streets of Jerusalem, and every man with his staff in his hand for very age.

α.8.5 Kah keitototanae toumaog pish wunnumwabineau mukkchouksog kah nunksquaesog pumpuog ut maikontu.
E.8.5 And the streets of the city shall be full of boys and girls playing in the streets thereof.

α.8.6 Yeu wussin Jehovah ayeuteaunit, ne monachanukquok ut wuskesuk8out ashqushoncheg yeug missinninnuog ut yeush kesukodtash, sun ne woh monchanumukquodtinn8 ut nuskesukqut wussin Jehovah ayeuhteaunit?
E.8.6 Thus saith the LORD of hosts; If it be marvellous in the eyes of the remnant of this people in these days, should it also be marvellous in mine eyes? saith the LORD of hosts.

α.8.7 Yeu wussin Jehovah ayeuhteaunit, kusseh n8wadchan nummissinninnumog [w]utch wutch[$]pwoyaeu, kah wutch wutcheksuiyeu.
E.8.7 Thus saith the LORD of hosts; Behold, I will save my people from the east country, and from the west country;

α.8.8 Kah nag nuppas8oog, kah nag pish ayeuog ut nashaue Jerusalem, kah nag pish nummissinninnumog, kah nen pish um-Manitt8m8uh, ut wunnamuhkuteyeuuk kah ut sampwesuonganit.
E.8.8 And I will bring them, and they shall dwell in the midst of Jerusalem: and they shall be my people, and I will be their God, in truth and in righteousness.

α.8.9 Yeu wussin Jehovah ayeuhteaunit, kenutcheganoash menuhkaj, kenaau n8tamogig yeush ut kesukodtash, yeush kutt8wongash, ut wutt8n8wout quoshodtumwaenuog, neg apitcheg ne kesukok, ne quenohtag wek Jehovah ayeuhteaunit, wanohtomuk, onk woh Temple ayimun.
E.8.9 Thus saith the LORD of hosts; Let your hands be strong, ye that hear in these days these words by the mouth of the prophets, which were in the day that the foundation of the house of the LORD of hosts was laid, that the temple might be built.

α.8.10 Newutche asquam yeush anán8g kesukodtash, matta onkquatauóon wosketomp, asuh onkquott[au]oun puppinashim, kah matta wunohteá8p noh sohhog, asuh noh petutteadt, newutche onkapunnaonk: newutche nutayeu[h]konittue ponamau nish$noh wosketomp weetatteamungoh.
E.8.10 For before these days there was no hire for man, nor any hire for beast; neither was there any peace to him that went out or came in because of the affliction: for I set all men every one against his neighbour.

α.8.11 Qut yeuyeu matta netatu[p]pe unnehheounáuh ashqushonche yeuh missinninnúh, neane noadt wussin Jehovah ayeuhteaunit.
E.8.11 But now I will not be unto the residue of this people as in the former days, saith the LORD of hosts.

α.8.12 Newutche wuskannem pish wunniyeum8; weenomwussippog pish meechummú8, kah ohke pish ummissegitteauoh, kah kesuk pish wunneechippagukauoh[;] kah ashqushoncheh yeug missinninnuog nutohtauwaheoog wame yeush.
E.8.12 For the seed shall be prosperous; the vine shall give her fruit, and the ground shall give her increase, and the heavens shall give their dew; and I will cause the remnant of this people to possess all these things.

α.8.13 Kah pish nnih, neane mattánumitteaóg ut kenugke penuwohteaut woi wek Judah kah wek Israel, ne kittinne wadchanuneau kah pish kenaau wunnánittuonk: wabesehteók, qut kenutcheganóash menuhkaj.
E.8.13 And it shall come to pass, that as ye were a curse among the heathen, O house of Judah, and house of Israel; so will I save you, and ye shall be a blessing: fear not, but let your hands be strong.

α.8.14 Newutche yeu wussin Jehovah ayeuhteaunit, neane kod sasamatahwhunógkup, k8sh8óog m8m8sqhehettit, wussin Jehovah ayeuhteaunit kah matta nutáuskoianatam8p.
E.8.14 For thus saith the LORD of hosts; As I thought to punish you, when your fathers provoked me to wrath, saith the LORD of hosts, and I repented not:

α.8.15 Nene wonk nukkod wunnenéheon Jerusalem yeush ut kesukodtash, kah wekit Judah; wabesehteok.
E.8.15 So again have I thought in these days to do well unto Jerusalem and to the house of Judah: fear ye not.

α.8.16 Yeush pish aséogish unnók nishnoh pasuk weetatteamungoh wanamuhkuteyeuuk: ussek wunnamuhkutéyeue kah wunnohteae wussittumóonk ut k8squontamut.
E.8.16 These are the things that ye shall do; Speak ye every man the truth to his neighbour; execute the judgment of truth and peace in your gates:

α.8.17 Kah ahque howan kenaau missontaj machuk ut kuttahh8wout ayeuhkone weetatteamungoh, kah womantam8hteok pann8wáe chadchekeyeuaonk, newutche wame yeush sekeneamonish wussin Jehovah,
E.8.17 And let none of you imagine evil in your hearts against his neighbour; and love no false oath: for all these are things that I hate, saith the LORD.

α.8.18 Kah wuttinn8waonk Jehovah ayeuhteaunit nuppeyaonuk n8wau,
E.8.18 And the word of the LORD of hosts came unto me, saying,

α.8.19 Yeu wussin Jehovah ayeuhteaunit, mat meetsue kesuk yauouut nepauz, kah mat meetsue kesuk napanna adta[h]s8it nepauz, kah mat meetsue kesuk nesausuk adtahs8it nepaus, kah mat meetsue kesuk piogqussit nepauz, nish pish wekontam8ongann8ash, kah musko[ù]antam8onganu8ash, kah weekontamwe mishadtupp8ongash, ut wekit Judah, newutche womontam8k wunnamuhkutéyeuuk kah wunohteaonk.
E.8.19 Thus saith the LORD of hosts; The fast of the fourth month, and the fast of the fifth, and the fast of the seventh, and the fast of the tenth, shall be to the house of Judah joy and gladness, and cheerful feasts; therefore love the truth and peace.

α.8.20 Yeu wussin Jehovah ayeuhteaunit, pish nnih, missinninnuog pish peyaog, kah wadohkitcheg monaeu keitotanéhtu.
E.8.20 Thus saith the LORD of hosts; It shall yet come to pass, that there shall come people, and the inhabitants of many cities:

α.8.21 Kah wadohkitcheg p[á]suk otanat, pish auog onkatoganit, n8waog, kenupshae monchetuh peantamunat ut anaquabit Jehovah, kah natinneahwhonat Jehovah ayeuhteaunit nen wonk nummonchem.
E.8.21 And the inhabitants of one city shall go to another, saying, Let us go speedily to pray before the LORD, and to seek the LORD of hosts: I will go also.

α.8.22 Nux, monaog missinninnuog, kah menuhke wutohtimoneash pish peyaog natinneawhonat Jehovah ayeuhteaunit, ut Jerusalem, kah peantemunat anaquabit Jehovah.
E.8.22 Yea, many people and strong nations shall come to seek the LORD of hosts in Jerusalem, and to pray before the LORD.

α.8.23 Yeu wussin Jehovah ayeuhteaunit, yeush kesukodtash pish nnih, piogqussuog wosketompaog wutch wame wutohtimoinne unnont8waongash, pish sogkinnumauwaog, nux pish sogkinnumauwaog wussissippohogk8 Jewsuunitcheh, n8waog, k8weecháunumw8, newutch nunn8tamumun, God k8weetómukou.
E.8.23 Thus saith the LORD of hosts; In those days it shall come to pass, that ten men shall take hold out of all languages of the nations, even shall take hold of the skirt of him that is a Jew, saying, We will go with you: for we have heard that God is with you.

α.9.1 WEanunnue wuttinn8waonk Je[h]ovah ut ohkeit Hadrach, kah Damaskus, na pish wuttit anwôsinun: wuskesukquash wosketomp onatuh wame Israelle chipan8ongash, nogquapehettit Jehovahut
E.9.1 The burden of the word of the LORD in the land of Hadrach, and Damascus shall be the rest thereof: when the eyes of man, as of all the tribes of Israel, shall be toward the LORD.

α.9.2 Kah Hamath wonk na pish 8sissippoiyeumun: Tyrus kah Zidon, tôhkonogque ummishe waantamun.
E.9.2 And Hamath also shall border thereby; Tyrus, and Zidon, though it be very wise.

α.9.3 Kah Tyrus ayimop menuhkuhkon8s, kah ogque nánomúngquotto silver puppissiyeuut, kah wanegik gold onatuh pisseogq ut maikontu.
E.9.3 And Tyrus did build herself a strong hold, and heaped up silver as the dust, and fine gold as the mire of the streets.

α.9.4 Kusseh, Lord pish wussohwhôkònuh, kah noh pish wuttogkomuh ummenuhkesuonk ut ketahhannit, kah noh pish mahchikkussik n8teau
E.9.4 Behold, the LORD will cast her out, and he will smite her power in the sea; and she shall be devoured with fire.

α.9.5 Ashkelon pish wunnaumun, kah wabesu, Gaza wonk pish wunnaumun, kah pish m8cheke neuantam, kah Ekron, newutche ukkenompadtam8onk pish akodchu: kah ketass8t pish nupp8 wutch Gaza, kah Ashkelon matta pish wutohkein.
E.9.5 Ashkelon shall see it, and fear; Gaza also shall see it, and be very sorrowful, and Ekron; for her expectation shall be ashamed; and the king shall perish from Gaza, and Ashkelon shall not be inhabited.

α.9.6 Kah nanweetu pish ayeu Ashdod, kah pish nuttummetahham uppehtuánum8ongan8 Philistiansog.
E.9.6 And a bastard shall dwell in Ashdod, and I will cut off the pride of the Philistines.

α.9.7 Kah pish nutamaunum 8sqheonk wutch wutt8nut, kah unkquanumukquok wutch nashaue weepitit, qut noh ashqshont, noh wutcheiyeu num-KManitt8munonut, kah noh pish onatuh nanauwunnuaénin ut Judah, kah Ekron onatuh J[é]busit.
E.9.7 And I will take away his blood out of his mouth, and his abominations from between his teeth: but he that remaineth, even he, shall be for our God, and he shall be as a governor in Judah, and Ekron as a Jebusite.

α.9.8 Kah n8weenuhkomun nek, newutche kenauwameonk, newutche noh paumushadt, kah newutche noh quashkeit: kah matta sunukkutchah8waénin pish wonk uppannupuhkauoh: newutche yeuyeu nunnaumun ut nuskesukqut.
E.9.8 And I will encamp about mine house because of the army, because of him that passeth by, and because of him that returneth: and no oppressor shall pass through them any more: for now have I seen with mine eyes.

α.9.9 Mishe wekontash, woi wuttaunoh Zion; mishont8ash woi wuttaunoh Jerusalem: kusseh, kukkeitass8tamom kuppeyaónuk, noh sampweussu, kah ohto wadchánuaonk, hohp8, kah nayeumuk assoh, kah assemes, assese wushkoshim.
E.9.9 Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Zion; shout, O daughter of Jerusalem: behold, thy King cometh unto thee: he is just, and having salvation; lowly, and riding upon an ass, and upon a colt the foal of an ass.

α.9.10 Kah nuttummetahhum chariot wutch Ephraimut, kah horses wutch Jerusalemut, kah ayeuwuttue ahtomp pish tummetahwhou, kah noh wunohteae ken8nau penuwoht[é]oh, kah pish wunnanawunnu[sh]oonk wutch ketahhanit onk yaen ketahhanit, kah wutch sepuut wehqshik muttaok.
E.9.10 And I will cut off the chariot from Ephraim, and the horse from Jerusalem, and the battle bow shall be cut off: and he shall speak peace unto the heathen: and his dominion shall be from sea even to sea, and from the river even to the ends of the earth.

α.9.11 Papaume k[e]n wonk, nashpe k8n8wae musqueheonk, nussohwhéah kobshagkinumonteauneg wutch pass[ò]htheganit ne mo napen8g.
E.9.11 As for thee also, by the blood of thy covenant I have sent forth thy prisoners out of the pit wherein is no water.

α.9.12 Quinnuppegk en menuhke ummanskut, kenaau anno[ô]sue kobsh[à]gkinitcheg, pajeh kesukod ut n8wahteauwahuwam, kuppapask[u] onkquatoush.
E.9.12 Turn you to the strong hold, ye prisoners of hope: even to day do I declare that I will render double unto thee;

α.9.13 Nauwanumóomp Judah, nomwameechumehteaan weeche Ephraim, kah ayeuhkonittue omohkinumauunon kenaumonunk, woi Zion, kenaumoneunk, woi Greece, kah tatuppehenon wuttogkodteganit menuhkesuenin.
E.9.13 When I have bent Judah for me, filled the bow with Ephraim, and raised up thy sons, O Zion, against thy sons, O Greece, and made thee as the sword of a mighty man.

α.9.14 Kah Jehovah pish naâmut waábe nagoh, kah ukkôunkquod pish ogque sohham8m8 kutshamunat: kah Lord Jehovah pish puhpequam, kah pish weechauau sowaniyeue pemsquohhoh.
E.9.14 And the LORD shall be seen over them, and his arrow shall go forth as the lightning: and the LORD God shall blow the trumpet, and shall go with whirlwinds of the south.

α.9.15 Jehovah ayeuhteaunit nah pish wunnanauwéheuh, kah nag pish mahchipp8og, kah sohkôsuog nashpe s8wompagunahhamwe qussukquanash, kah nag wuttattamwog, kah ogque wogkouéog nashpe wine, kah nag pish ogque numwameechummuog wuttattamwaitchuut, kah onatuh altare náiyeuut.
E.9.15 The LORD of hosts shall defend them; and they shall devour, and subdue with sling stones; and they shall drink, and make a noise as through wine; and they shall be filled like bowls, and as the corners of the altar.

α.9.16 Kah Jehovah um-Manitt8m8uh pish nah 8wadchanóuh ne kesukok, onatuh flocke ummissinninnumoh: newutche nag pish tatuppeyeu8og chetuhquabinnee qussukquanit, tahshinumuk, onatuh muttaag ut wutohtuóut.
E.9.16 And the LORD their God shall save them in that day as the flock of his people: for they shall be as the stones of a crown, lifted up as an ensign upon his land.

α.9.17 Newutche ut$toh$en missi 8neet8onk, kah uttohen missi 8neetuonk? weatchiminneash pish weekontamwáteaog wuskenúh kah wusku wine, nunksquaog.
E.9.17 For how great is his goodness, and how great is his beauty! corn shall make the young men cheerful, and new wine the maids.

α.10.1 WEhquetumok Jehovah sokanon nahohtôeu ahquompiyeue sokanon, neit pish Jehovah ayim wôsipohtáeu mahtokqs, kah wussokanónukauoh, moskehtuash ohteuhkonit nishnoh pasuk8.
E.10.1 Ask ye of the LORD rain in the time of the latter rain; so the LORD shall make bright clouds, and give them showers of rain, to every one grass in the field.

α.10.2 Newutche nunnúkontunkanog tahn8cheyeu88k n8waog, kah pauwauog naumwog pann8wáonk, kah unn8waog pann8wae unnukquom8onguh: nag tahn8che taphuwáog, newaj ogque monchehettit flockut, wuttaméhpunáog newutche matta nanaushepsaenúun8.
E.10.2 For the idols have spoken vanity, and the diviners have seen a lie, and have told false dreams; they comfort in vain: therefore they went their way as a flock, they were troubled, because there was no shepherd.

α.10.3 Nummusquanittam8onk ayeuhkonittue nashqunnaehtauau nanaushepsaénuh, kah nussasamatahwhomp goatsog: newutche Jehovah ayeuhteaunit natauwáhto ufflockum, wek Judah, kah nah wutogqheuh wunne horsesut ayeuwuttinneat.
E.10.3 Mine anger was kindled against the shepherds, and I punished the goats: for the LORD of hosts hath visited his flock the house of Judah, and hath made them as his goodly horse in the battle.

α.10.4 Wuhhogkat wutch sohham8 adt nashik, wutch wuhhogkat kenunkwheg, wutch wuhhogkat mattompagwe ahtomp, wutch wuhhogkat nishnoh sunukkutchohh8enin moeh.
E.10.4 Out of him came forth the corner, out of him the nail, out of him the battle bow, out of him every oppressor together.

α.10.5 Kah pish tatuppeyeu8og menuhkésuenúut, neg tahtaskuhkauoncheg ummatwomuh ut pis[h]ogquahe mayit ut ayeuwuttinneat, kah nag pish ayeuhteáog newutche Jehovah weetomuh, kah na8mukqutcheg horsesog pish chepshaog.
E.10.5 And they shall be as mighty men, which tread down their enemies in the mire of the streets in the battle: and they shall fight, because the LORD is with them, and the riders on horses shall be confounded.

α.10.6 Kah nummenuhkéh wek Judah, kah n8wadch[á]num wek Joseph, kah nag wonk nuppas8oog wut[a]yeuongan8óut, newutche nag nummonánumóog: kah nag pish tatuppeyeu8og mat pagkenóut, newutche neen Jehovah um-Manitt8m8uh, kah nag pish n8tau8og.
E.10.6 And I will strengthen the house of Judah, and I will save the house of Joseph, and I will bring them again to place them; for I have mercy upon them: and they shall be as though I had not cast them off: for I am the LORD their God, and will hear them.

α.10.7 Kah nag wut-Ephraimeog pish tatuppeyeu8og menuhk[e]suenúut, kah wuttahhou pish ogque wekontam8m nashpe wine, nux wunneechan8oh pish wunnaumunin, kah pish weekontamwog, wuttahhou pish wekontam ut Jehovah.
E.10.7 And they of Ephraim shall be like a mighty man, and their heart shall rejoice as through wine: yea, their children shall see it, and be glad; their heart shall rejoice in the LORD.

α.10.8 Pish nukqu[e]quekqsumóog, kah nummukkinóog, newutche nag nummanóuwhopanneg: kah nag pish muttaanwog, neane muttaeghetteup.
E.10.8 I will hiss for them, and gather them; for I have redeemed them: and they shall increase as they have increased.

α.10.9 Kah nag nutohtekonunk ut kenugke missinninnúut, kah nag pish nummequanumukquog, ut nôadte wutohtimóneat, kah nag pish weeche pomantam8maog wunneechan8oh, kah wonk qushkeog.
E.10.9 And I will sow them among the people: and they shall remember me in far countries; and they shall live with their children, and turn again.

α.10.10 Kah nag wonk nuppás8oog wutch ohkeit Egypt, kah nag nummukkinóog wutch Assyria, kah nag pish nuppas8oog Gilead[é] ohkeit, kah ut Lebanon, kah matta pish tapappéog.
E.10.10 I will bring them again also out of the land of Egypt, and gather them out of Assyria; and I will bring them into the land of Gilead and Lebanon; and place shall not be found for them.

α.10.11 Kah pish pannupwushau kehtahhannit nashpe unkquanumóonk, kah pish togkomau tukk8oh ut keitahhanit, kah wame m8noagish ut sepuut pish nunnassum: kah uppehtuánumóonk Assyria pish n8kenumun, & Wgypte kehtass8tamwe anwohhou pish amaém8.
E.10.11 And he shall pass through the sea with affliction, and shall smite the waves in the sea, and all the deeps of the river shall dry up: and the pride of Assyria shall be brought down, and the sceptre of Egypt shall depart away.

α.10.12 Kah pish nummenuhkeheóog ut Jehovahut, kah nag pish papaumshaog ut 8wesuonganit, wussin Jehovah.
E.10.12 And I will strengthen them in the LORD; and they shall walk up and down in his name, saith the LORD.

α.11.1 WOhshittanish, woi Lebanon, onk woh n8tau mahchikkuswau, kus-Cedarumoh.
E.11.1 Open thy doors, O Lebanon, that the fire may devour thy cedars.

α.11.2 OOnsh firúhtug, newutche Cedar penush[á]u: newutche wame masugkenukeg matcheheáog: 8n8k kenaau Bashane n8timisseog newutche touohkomukque vintage n8kem8.
E.11.2 Howl, fir tree; for the cedar is fallen; because the mighty are spoiled: howl, O ye oaks of Bashan; for the forest of the vintage is come down.

α.11.3 Wut8n8e wadtauatonkqussuongan8 nanausheps[u]enuog: newutche wussohsum8ongan8 matchehetauun: nehnehteaeu wusku qunnonoue wadtauatonkqussuonk, newutch uppehtuanumóonk Jordan matchehteauun.
E.11.3 There is a voice of the howling of the shepherds; for their glory is spoiled: a voice of the roaring of young lions; for the pride of Jordan is spoiled.

α.11.4 Yeu wussin Jehovah num-Manitt8m, ass[à]m8k nehtòe flock.
E.11.4 Thus saith the LORD my God; Feed the flock of the slaughter;

α.11.5 Neg wadtihéitcheg wunushóuh, kah matta ogquanumo[8]og wuhhogkauh matchesémuk: kah neg nah magukeg, n8waog, wunánumunach Jehovah newutche n8weenauweet, kah nehenwonche nanausheps[u]énum8uh matta ukkitteamonteanumóuh.
E.11.5 Whose possessors slay them, and hold themselves not guilty: and they that sell them say, Blessed be the LORD; for I am rich: and their own shepherds pity them not.

α.11.6 Newutche matta wonk nukkitteamonteamunoh wadohkitcheg ohkeit, wussin Jehovah: qut kusseh, nuppon wosketompaog nishnoh pasuk en wunnutcheganit weetatteamungoh, kah en wunnutcheganit ukkehtass8tamómoh, kah nag pish togkodtamwog ohke, kah matta nuppohquohwhunóog wutch wunnutchegan8óut.
E.11.6 For I will no more pity the inhabitants of the land, saith the LORD: but, lo, I will deliver the men every one into his neighbour's hand, and into the hand of his king: and they shall smite the land, and out of their hand I will not deliver them.

α.11.7 Kah nussohkomon nehtóe flock, kenaau, woi kuttamunge wutche flockut: kah nunneemuñumomp neenash anw[o]hhouunash, pasuk nuttéhettam Wunnétuonk, kah onkatog nuttéhettam Kenepsuongash, kah nussohkom8top flock.
E.11.7 And I will feed the flock of slaughter, even you, O poor of the flock. And I took unto me two staves; the one I called Beauty, and the other I called Bands; and I fed the flock.

α.11.8 Nishuog wonk nanaushepsaenúog nuttummétah ut pasuk nepâuzsaut, kah nukketeahogkou nah wutunkquanumuh, & nag ukketeahogkôunóuh nutunkquanumukquoh.
E.11.8 Three shepherds also I cut off in one month; and my soul lothed them, and their soul also abhorred me.

α.11.9 Neit nussip, matta kutassamunómw8: ne napóm8uk nupp8m8utch, kah ne woh tâmátahhamuk tummehthamunach, kah askqshoncheg meechhettich nishnoh pasuk 8weyaus8.
E.11.9 Then said I, I will not feed you: that that dieth, let it die; and that that is to be cut off, let it be cut off; and let the rest eat every one the flesh of another.

α.11.10 Neit nunneemunnumup nutanwohhou (Wunneetuonk) kah nupposhtáhhamunáh, onk woh nuppohquenum n8n8waonk ne ayimauogkup wame missinninnúog.
E.11.10 And I took my staff, even Beauty, and cut it asunder, that I might break my covenant which I had made with all the people.

α.11.11 Kah pokqshau ut ne kesukok: neit kuttamunge ut flockut, neg pahtsuósitcheg, nag wahteauog ne wuttinn8waonk J[e]hovah.
E.11.11 And it was broken in that day: and so the poor of the flock that waited upon me knew that it was the word of the LORD.

α.11.12 Neit nag nuttinópanneg, tapeneamóg, àninnumiek ne ann8hum: sekenamog, ahqueteau8k: neit nag qutompagh8t8óog nuttinn8humóonk nishwinchaginái silver.
E.11.12 And I said unto them, If ye think good, give me my price; and if not, forbear. So they weighed for my price thirty pieces of silver.

α.11.13 Kah Jehovah nuttinuk, unnehteash ohkuhquehteáenuut, mishôadtue unn8humóonk, ne$an ann8hamihettit, kah neemunumup nishwinchaginneái silver, kah nuttinuhkauon ohkuhquehteaen ut wekit Jehovah.
E.11.13 And the LORD said unto me, Cast it unto the potter: a goodly price that I was prised at of them. And I took the thirty pieces of silver, and cast them to the potter in the house of the LORD.

α.11.14 Neit nuppaskittahhamup onkatog nutanwohhou (Kenepsuongash) onk woh nuppohquenumun weemattittuonk ut nashaue Judah kah Israel.
E.11.14 Then I cut asunder mine other staff, even Bands, that I might break the brotherhood between Judah and Israel.

α.11.15 Kah Jehovah nuttinuk, nemunush wutauwohteaongash ass8tue nanaushepsaénin.
E.11.15 And the LORD said unto me, Take unto thee yet the instruments of a foolish shepherd.

α.11.16 Newutche kusseh, n8waabin nanauwshepsaénin ut ohkeit, noh matta pish natauwáheunk neh támuttáwhutcheh, kah matta pish natinneahwhoou peissisinitch[è]h kah matta pish neetskehteo8 ne pohquag, & matta assamôou neh chequnikkómpauinitcheh: qut noh pish meech weese weyaus, kah sohquekom wonkqunnésog.
E.11.16 For, lo, I will raise up a shepherd in the land, which shall not visit those that be cut off, neither shall seek the young one, nor heal that that is broken, nor feed that that standeth still: but he shall eat the flesh of the fat, and tear their claws in pieces.

α.11.17 Missi wutonkapunáon nunnukontunka[u]e nanaushepsaen noh nôkonont flokoh: togkodteg pish ohteau wuhpittenit kah ut wuttinohkoune wuskesukqut: wuhpit pish papaquanne nunohteau, kah wuttinohkôunne wuskesuk pish papaquanne pohkeni.
E.11.17 Woe to the idol shepherd that leaveth the flock! the sword shall be upon his arm, and upon his right eye: his arm shall be clean dried up, and his right eye shall be utterly darkened.

α.12.1 WEanunne wuttinn8waonk Jehovah, wutche Israel, wussin Jehovah noh sepagkinuk kesukquash, kah noh wanahtunk quenohtag ohke, kah kenauwéhteunk wunnashauonk wosketomp ut wuttinnómiyeumut.
E.12.1 The burden of the word of the LORD for Israel, saith the LORD, which stretcheth forth the heavens, and layeth the foundation of the earth, and formeth the spirit of man within him.

α.12.2 Kusseh nutayim Jerusalem nunnukshae wuttattamwaitch8hkau en wame missinninnúut waéene, nag appehettit weenuhkôadtinneat, ayeuhkonittue naneeswe Judah kah Jerusalem.
E.12.2 Behold, I will make Jerusalem a cup of trembling unto all the people round about, when they shall be in the siege both against Judah and against Jerusalem.

α.12.3 Kah ne kesukok nutayim Jerusalem tohkequane qussuk wutch wame missiñinn[ù]og, wame neg nayeutogig pish sohquswôog, tôhkônogque wame missinninnúog ut ohkeit ayeuhkonie miaéhtamwehettit.
E.12.3 And in that day will I make Jerusalem a burdensome stone for all people: all that burden themselves with it shall be cut in pieces, though all the people of the earth be gathered together against it.

α.12.4 Ne kesukok, wussin Jéhovah, pish nuttogkom nishnoh horses n[a]shpe chepshaonk, kah neh nay8moncheh nashpe kogkeáonk, kah pish  n8woshwunnumau nuskesukquash wek Judah, kah nuttogkom nishnoh wut[-]horsesumoh missinnin nashpe pogkenumóonk.
E.12.4 In that day, saith the LORD, I will smite every horse with astonishment, and his rider with madness: and I will open mine eyes upon the house of Judah, and will smite every horse of the people with blindness.

α.12.5 Kah Judae nanánuácheg pish n8waog ut wuttahh8wóut, wadohkitcheg Jerusalem, neg pish n8menuhkesuonganinneunk, ut Jehovah ayeuhteaunit um$Manitt8m8uh.
E.12.5 And the governors of Judah shall say in their heart, The inhabitants of Jerusalem shall be my strength in the LORD of hosts their God.

α.12.6 Ne kesukok nutogquehéoog Judae nanánuácheg, n8tae ke[s]hkinau ut k[é]nugke wuttuhqunut, kah ogqueneunkquodt n8tae torchut ut sheafut; kah nag pish pagwanáog wame missinninnúh waeenu, ut enninnuhkôinniyeu, kah menadcheinniyeu: kah Jerusalem pish wonk wutohkein, ut nehenwonche wutayeuonganit, ut Jerusalem.
E.12.6 In that day will I make the governors of Judah like an hearth of fire among the wood, and like a torch of fire in a sheaf; and they shall devour all the people round about, on the right hand and on the left: and Jerusalem shall be inhabited again in her own place, even in Jerusalem.

α.12.7 Jehovah wonk pish negonne wadchanum Judae wetuomash, onk wussohsumóonk wek David, & wussohsum8ongan8 neg wadohkitcheg Jerusalem, matta woh misheheáog wuhhogkauh ayeuuhkone Judah.
E.12.7 The LORD also shall save the tents of Judah first, that the glory of the house of David and the glory of the inhabitants of Jerusalem do not magnify themselves against Judah.

α.12.8 Ne kesukok Jehovah pish wadchanau wadohkinitcheh Jerusalem, kah noh n8chumwesit ut kenugke nagoh ne kesukok, pish tatuppeyeu8 Davidut, kah wek David pish tatuppeyeu8 Godut: onatuh wut[-]angelumoh God, ut nag anaquabhettit.
E.12.8 In that day shall the LORD defend the inhabitants of Jerusalem; and he that is feeble among them at that day shall be as David; and the house of David shall be as God, as the angel of the LORD before them.

α.12.9 Kah pish n$nih ne kesukok, nukkodpágwa[n] wame wutohtimóneash ne ayeuuhkontogeg Jerusalem.
E.12.9 And it shall come to pass in that day, that I will seek to destroy all the nations that come against Jerusalem.

α.12.10 Kah nussokenumau wek David kah wadohkitcheg Jerusalem kitteamonteanitteáe, kah peantamoe nashauanit, kah nag pish nummoninneunkquog kônukk[é]htauwahette[ú]p[a]h; kah nag pish ummauemóuh, onatuh howan mauemo[u]t wunnukquttegheonoh, kah pish 8weesogkitteahonuh onatuh howan weesogkitteahónont mohtommegheoncheh.
E.12.10 And I will pour upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and of supplications: and they shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for him, as one mourneth for his only son, and shall be in bitterness for him, as one that is in bitterness for his firstborn.

α.12.11 Ne kesukok na pish mishe mauonganù8 ut Jerusalem, onatuh mauem8onk ut Hadadrimmon ut Megiddonne 8nouhkóiyeuut.
E.12.11 In that day shall there be a great mourning in Jerusalem, as the mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valley of Megiddon.

α.12.12 Kah ohke pish mau8m8, nishnoh teashiyeu8onk chippeu, tâhshiyeuongane wek David chippeu, kah ummittamwuss8oh chippeu, teashiyeuongane wek Nathan chippeu, kah ummittamwuss8uh chippeu.
E.12.12 And the land shall mourn, every family apart; the family of the house of David apart, and their wives apart; the family of the house of Nathan apart, and their wives apart;

α.12.13 Teashiyeue wek Levi chippeu, kah ummittamwuss8oh chippeu: teashiyeue wek Shimei chippeu, kah ummittamwuss8oh chippeu.
E.12.13 The family of the house of Levi apart, and their wives apart; the family of Shimei apart, and their wives apart;

α.12.14 Wame ashqshungish teashiyeu8ongàsh chippeu, kah ummittamwuss8oh chippeu.
E.12.14 All the families that remain, every family apart, and their wives apart.

α.13.1 NE kesukok tohkekom pish woshwunnumauun wek DAvid, kah wadohkitcheg Jerusalem, wutche matcheseonk, kah wutche nishkeneunkquok.
E.13.1 In that day there shall be a fountain opened to the house of David and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem for sin and for uncleanness.

α.13.2 Kah pish n$nih ne kesukok wussin Jehovah ayeuhteaunit, nuttummetahham 8wesuongan8ash nunnúkontunkanog wutch ohkeit: kah nag matta pish wonk mehquanumóog: kah wonk quoshodtumwaénuog, kah nishkeneungwe nashauongan8 nussohhamwahéoog wutch ohkeit.
E.13.2 And it shall come to pass in that day, saith the LORD of hosts, that I will cut off the names of the idols out of the land, and they shall no more be remembered: and also I will cause the prophets and the unclean spirit to pass out of the land.

α.13.3 Kah pish n$nih, howan ashpummee quoshodtuk, 8shoh kah ohkasog neh neechanukqutcheh, nag pish wuttinóuh, matta pish kuppomantam8: newutche kussim pann8w[à]ongash ut 8wesuonganit Jehovah: kah 8shoh, kah ohkasoh neh neechanukqutcheh, pish ukkonnukéhtahwhóuh quoshodtuk.
E.13.3 And it shall come to pass, that when any shall yet prophesy, then his father and his mother that begat him shall say unto him, Thou shalt not live; for thou speakest lies in the name of the LORD: and his father and his mother that begat him shall thrust him through when he prophesieth.

α.13.4 Kah pish n$nih ne kesukok, quoshodtumwaenùog pish akodchuog nishnoh pasuk ummonomansuonk, mahche quoshodtuk: kah nag matta pish hogk8og kushke hogk8onk, pann8wónat.
E.13.4 And it shall come to pass in that day, that the prophets shall be ashamed every one of his vision, when he hath prophesied; neither shall they wear a rough garment to deceive:

α.13.5 Qut noh pish n8wau, matta nen quoshodtumwaen, nen ohketeaénin; newutche wosketomp nukkuhk8tomuk nanauéheoónat neetasuog wutch n8skenúuneat.
E.13.5 But he shall say, I am no prophet, I am an husbandman; for man taught me to keep cattle from my youth.

α.13.6 Kah pasuk pish wuttinnuh, teagwassinish yeush n8chumwehtahwhuttuongash ut kenutcheganit? neit pish namp8ham: nish nashpe nunn8chumwetahwhit ut week8óut neetompaog.
E.13.6 And one shall say unto him, What are these wounds in thine hands? Then he shall answer, Those with which I was wounded in the house of my friends.

α.13.7 T8hkish, woi togkodteg, ayeuhkonittue nunnanaushepsaéneum, kah ayeuhkonittue wosk[e]tomp noh weechayeumukqueh, wussin Jehovah ayeuhteaunit, togkom8k nanausheps[a]enin, kah shepsog pish séaéog: kah nukquinnuppinnum nunnutcheg ut papeississitcheg.
E.13.7 Awake, O sword, against my shepherd, and against the man that is my fellow, saith the LORD of hosts: smite the shepherd, and the sheep shall be scattered: and I will turn mine hand upon the little ones.

α.13.8 Kah pish n$nih wame ohkeit, wussin Jehovah, neese chippai na$ut pish tummussumun, kah nupp8m8: qut nashwunnu8g na$ut pish séqunnumun.
E.13.8 And it shall come to pass, that in all the land, saith the LORD, two parts therein shall be cut off and die; but the third shall be left therein.

α.13.9 Kah nashwe chippag nuppannuppewuttauun n8taut, kah nutogqu[é] pahkippaswó[o]g silver pahkippassumuk: kah nag nut[o]gque qutchehhéoog gold quajteomuk: nag pish wehquetumwog n8wesuonk, kah nag pish nunn8tauóog: pish nussim neg nummissinninnûmog: kah nag pish n8waog Jehovah num-Manitt8m.
E.13.9 And I will bring the third part through the fire, and will refine them as silver is refined, and will try them as gold is tried: they shall call on my name, and I will hear them: I will say, It is my people: and they shall say, The LORD is my God.

α.14.1 KUsseh, ukkesukodt8m Jehovah peyom8, kah sequttahham8onk pish chachaubenumun ut kenashomut.
E.14.1 Behold, the day of the LORD cometh, and thy spoil shall be divided in the midst of thee.

α.14.2 Newutche nummukkinnum wame wutohtimóinneash ayeuhkontamunat Jerusalem, kah keitotan pish sohkomun, kah weetuomash pish mukkinnumwóntamunash, kah mittamwussissog pish chekeheóog, kah pohshe keitotan pish missi[n]óe sohham8m8 kah sekqshoncheg missinninnuog matta pish tummehtahwhóog wutch keitotanat.
E.14.2 For I will gather all nations against Jerusalem to battle; and the city shall be taken, and the houses rifled, and the women ravished; and half of the city shall go forth into captivity, and the residue of the people shall not be cut off from the city.

α.14.3 Neit Jehovah pish sohham, kah pish ayeuhkontam yeush wutohtimóneash, onatuh ayeuéhteadt ut ayeuwuttue kesukodtut.
E.14.3 Then shall the LORD go forth, and fight against those nations, as when he fought in the day of battle.

α.14.4 Kah ne kesukok wussetash pish neepo8m8ash olivese wadchuut, ne anaquogtag Jerusalem wutchepwoiyeu, kah olivese wadchu pish pohsheau, en nogque wutchepwoiyeu, kah en|nogque wutcheksuiyeu, kah na pish mishe 8n[ô]uhkói, kah pohshe wadchu pish ontohteau en nanummiyeu, kah pohshe en sowaniyeu.
E.14.4 And his feet shall stand in that day upon the mount of Olives, which is before Jerusalem on the east, and the mount of Olives shall cleave in the midst thereof toward the east and toward the west, and there shall be a very great valley; and half of the mountain shall remove toward the north, and half of it toward the south.

α.14.5 Kah kutushph8w[ó]m8 wadchue 8nôuhkóiyeuut: newutche wadchu 8nôuhkói pish weekqshin Azal; nux, pish kutogque wusseemumw8 waseemweog wutch quequanut ut ukkesukodtumut Uzziah Judae ketass8t, [k]ah Jehovah num[-]Manitt8m pish peyau, kah wame waneetupanatogig weeche ken
E.14.5 And ye shall flee to the valley of the mountains; for the valley of the mountains shall reach unto Azal: yea, ye shall flee, like as ye fled from before the earthquake in the days of Uzziah king of Judah: and the LORD my God shall come, and all the saints with thee.

α.14.6 Kah pish n$nih kesukok, wequai matta pish pohkan8 asuh pohkenaán8.
E.14.6 And it shall come to pass in that day, that the light shall not be clear, nor dark:

α.14.7 Qut ne pish pasuk kesuk, ne wahteunk Jehovah, matta kesukod asuh nuhkon; qut pish n$nih, wanonk88k pish wequái.
E.14.7 But it shall be one day which shall be known to the LORD, not day, nor night: but it shall come to pass, that at evening time it shall be light.

α.14.8 Kah pish n$nih ne kesukok, pomantamwáe nippe pish sohham8m8 Jerusalem: pohshe en nogque anaquohtag kehtahhannit, kah pohshe en nogque wuttáeiyeu keitahhannit, nepunae kah poponae pish n$nih.
E.14.8 And it shall be in that day, that living waters shall go out from Jerusalem; half of them toward the former sea, and half of them toward the hinder sea: in summer and in winter shall it be.

α.14.9 Kah Jehovah pish keitass8tam88 ut wame ohkeit: ne kesukok pish pasuk Jehovah, kah 8wesuonk pasukquinnú8.
E.14.9 And the LORD shall be king over all the earth: in that day shall there be one LORD, and his name one.

α.14.10 Wame ohke pish mukoshquttóou wutch Geba weeque Rimmon, sowaniyeu wutch Jerusalem: kah pish tohshinausu, kah ayin ut wutáyeuonganit: wutch Benjamin 8squontamut, wehque ayeuonganit negonohtag squont, wehque [nashik] ushquont, kah wutch ukquinnikommukqut Han[a]niel, pajeh winepress8mut ketass8t.
E.14.10 All the land shall be turned as a plain from Geba to Rimmon south of Jerusalem: and it shall be lifted up, and inhabited in her place, from Benjamin's gate unto the place of the first gate, unto the corner gate, and from the tower of Hananeel unto the king's winepresses.

α.14.11 Kah wosketompaog pish wuttaiinneau, kah matta pish wonk papaquanne pagwanittuonganinn8: qut Jerusalem pish wunniyeue ayin.
E.14.11 And men shall dwell in it, and there shall be no more utter destruction; but Jerusalem shall be safely inhabited.

α.14.12 Kah yeu pish enninneaonk ne pish Jehovah togkomont wame missinninnuh ne ayeuuhkontamunitcheh Jerusalem: 8weyaus8 pish mohchim8, ash neepauwehtauwehettit wusseet8oash, kah wuskesuk88as[h] pish mohchim8ash ut wad[t]onogok, kah weenanu8 pish mohchim8 ut wut8n8out
E.14.12 And this shall be the plague wherewith the LORD will smite all the people that have fought against Jerusalem; Their flesh shall consume away while they stand upon their feet, and their eyes shall consume away in their holes, and their tongue shall consume away in their mouth.

α.14.13 Kah pish nnih ne kesukok, mishe wogkoueonk wutch Jehovahut, pish ut kenugkushogquneau, kah nag nish$noh pasuk pish tohqunnau weetatteamungoh wunnutcheg: kah wunnutcheg pish ayeuuhkontam wunnutcheg weetatteamungoh.
E.14.13 And it shall come to pass in that day, that a great tumult from the LORD shall be among them; and they shall lay hold every one on the hand of his neighbour, and his hand shall rise up against the hand of his neighbour.

α.14.14 Kah Judah pish wonk ayeuhteau ut Jerusalem, & 8weenauwetuongan8 wame penuwohteaog waeenu pish moenumun, Gold kah silver, kah hogk8ongash mataanuhkish.
E.14.14 And Judah also shall fight at Jerusalem; and the wealth of all the heathen round about shall be gathered together, gold, and silver, and apparel, in great abundance.

α.14.15 Kah ne pish wuttinninne[a]ongan8 horse, kah mule, kah Cammel kah asse, kah wame puppinaṣhimwog neg apitcheg yeu weetuomehtu, neane ne enninneaonk.
E.14.15 And so shall be the plague of the horse, of the mule, of the camel, and of the ass, and of all the beasts that shall be in these tents, as this plague.

α.14.16 Kah pish nnih, nish$noh pasuk noh sequttahwhut ut wame wutohtimoneat noh ayeuhkontogkup Jerusalem, pish kuhkuhqueu [a]s[ek]odtum8kish, wowussumonat ketass8t Lord ayeuhteaunit, kah Tabernakle miṣhadtupwuneat.
E.14.16 And it shall come to pass, that every one that is left of all the nations which came against Jerusalem shall even go up from year to year to worship the King, the LORD of hosts, and to keep the feast of tabernacles.

α.14.17 Kah pish nnih, howan ut wame muttaohkee wutteateaṣhiyeuonganit matta kuhkuhquek en Jerusalem wowussumonat ketass8t Jehovah ayeuhteaunit: nag matta pish sokanonameog.
E.14.17 And it shall be, that whoso will not come up of all the families of the earth unto Jerusalem to worship the King, the LORD of hosts, even upon them shall be no rain.

α.14.18 Kah Egypte teateaṣhiyeuo[n]k matta kuhkuhquehetteg, kah matta peyahetteg; matta sokanonamegig na pish ut enninneaonganu8; ne naṣhpe Jehovah togkomont penuwoh, noh matta kohkuhqueg Tabernakle mishadtupwunneat.
E.14.18 And if the family of Egypt go not up, and come not, that have no rain; there shall be the plague, wherewith the LORD will smite the heathen that come not up to keep the feast of tabernacles.

α.14.19 Ne pish sasamatahwhaonk Egypt, kah sasamatahwhongan8 wame wutohtimoinneunk neg matta kohkukqueageg en Tabernakle miṣhadtupp8onganit.
E.14.19 This shall be the punishment of Egypt, and the punishment of all nations that come not up to keep the feast of tabernacles.

α.14.20 Ne kesukok ut horsese k8k8kinogsut pish ohteau, wunneetupanatam8onk en Jehovah$ut: kah o[h]kuhquog ut wekit Jehovah pish yaneyeu8og bowlsash ut anaquohtag Altar.
E.14.20 In that day shall there be upon the bells of the horses, HOLINESS UNTO THE LORD; and the pots in the LORD's house shall be like the bowls before the altar.

α.14.21 Nux, nish$noh ahkuhk ut Jerusalem kah ut Judah, pish wunneetupanatamweyeu8 en Jehovah ayeuhteaunit: kah wame neg sephausitcheg pish peyaog, kah pish nah wunneemuno[u]h kah pish upp8sompinneauh kah ne kesukok matta pish wonk Cananitsinn8 ut weekit Jehovah ayeuhteaunit.
E.14.21 Yea, every pot in Jerusalem and in Judah shall be holiness unto the LORD of hosts: and all they that sacrifice shall come and take of them, and seethe therein: and in that day there shall be no more the Canaanite in the house of the LORD of hosts.