abasing (1)
	2 Corinthians 11.7 Have I committed an offence in abasing myself that ye might be exalted, because I have preached to you the gospel of God freely?
abhorring (1)
	Isaiah 66.24 And they shall go forth, and look upon the carcases of the men that have transgressed against me: for their worm shall not die, neither shall their fire be quenched; and they shall be an abhorring unto all flesh.
abjects (1)
	Psalms (prose) 35.15 But in mine adversity they rejoiced, and gathered themselves together: yea, the abjects gathered themselves together against me, and I knew it not; they did tear me, and ceased not:
aboard (1)
	Acts 21.2 And finding a ship sailing over unto Phenicia, we went aboard, and set forth.
abominably (1)
	1 Kings 21.26 And he did very abominably in following idols, according to all things as did the Amorites, whom the LORD cast out before the children of Israel.
abstinence (1)
	Acts 27.21 But after long abstinence Paul stood forth in the midst of them, and said, Sirs, ye should have hearkened unto me, and not have loosed from Crete, and to have gained this harm and loss.
abusers (1)
	1 Corinthians 6.9 Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God?  Be not deceived: neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with mankind,
acceptably (1)
	Hebrews 12.28 Wherefore we receiving a kingdom which cannot be moved, let us have grace, whereby we may serve God acceptably with reverence and godly fear:
acceptance (1)
	Isaiah 60.7 All the flocks of Kedar shall be gathered together unto thee, the rams of Nebaioth shall minister unto thee: they shall come up with acceptance on mine altar, and I will glorify the house of my glory.
accomplishment (1)
	Acts 21.26 Then Paul took the men, and the next day purifying himself with them entered into the temple, to signify the accomplishment of the days of purification, until that an offering should be offered for every one of them.
accordingly (1)
	Isaiah 59.18 According to their deeds, accordingly he will repay, fury to his adversaries, recompence to his enemies; to the islands he will repay recompence.
accounting (1)
	Hebrews 11.19 Accounting that God was able to raise him up, even from the dead; from whence also he received him in a figure.
accounts (1)
	Daniel 6.2 And over these three presidents; of whom Daniel was first: that the princes might give accounts unto them, and the king should have no damage.
accuser (1)
	Revelation 12.10 And I heard a loud voice saying in heaven, Now is come salvation, and strength, and the kingdom of our God, and the power of his Christ: for the accuser of our brethren is cast down, which accused them before our God day and night.
accustomed (1)
	Jeremiah 13.23 Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the leopard his spots? then may ye also do good, that are accustomed to do evil.
acknowledgement (1)
	Colossians 2.2  That their hearts might be comforted, being knit together in love, and unto all riches of the full assurance of understanding, to the acknowledgement of the mystery of God, and of the Father, and of Christ;
actions (1)
	1 Samuel 2.3 Talk no more so exceeding proudly; let not arrogancy come out of your mouth: for the LORD is a God of knowledge, and by him actions are weighed.
activity (1)
	Genesis 47.6 The land of Egypt is before thee; in the best of the land make thy father and brethren to dwell; in the land of Goshen let them dwell: and if thou knowest any men of activity among them, then make them rulers over my cattle.
addicted (1)
	1 Corinthians 16.15 I beseech you, brethren, (ye know the house of Stephanas, that it is the firstfruits of Achaia, and that they have addicted themselves to the ministry of the saints,)
admired (1)
	2 Thessalonians 1.10 When he shall come to be glorified in his saints, and to be admired in all them that believe (because our testimony among you was believed) in that day.
ado (1)
	Mark 5.39 And when he was come in, he saith unto them, Why make ye this ado, and weep? the damsel is not dead, but sleepeth.
adventured (1)
	Judges 9.17 (For my father fought for you, and adventured his life far, and delivered you out of the hand of Midian:
advisement (1)
	1 Chronicles 12.19 And there fell some of Manasseh to David, when he came with the Philistines against Saul to battle: but they helped them not: for the lords of the Philistines upon advisement sent him away, saying, He will fall to his master Saul to the jeopardy of our heads.
advocate (1)
	1 John 2.1 My little children, these things write I unto you, that ye sin not. And if any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous:
aenon (1)
	John 3.23 And John also was baptizing in Aenon near to Salim, because there was much water there: and they came, and were baptized.
affecteth (1)
	Lamentations 3.51 Mine eye affecteth mine heart because of all the daughters of my city.
affectionately (1)
	1 Thessalonians 2.8 So being affectionately desirous of you, we were willing to have imparted unto you, not the gospel of God only, but also our own souls, because ye were dear unto us.
affectioned (1)
	Romans 12.10 Be kindly affectioned one to another with brotherly love; in honour preferring one another;
afflictest (1)
	1 Kings 8.35 When heaven is shut up, and there is no rain, because they have sinned against thee; if they pray toward this place, and confess thy name, and turn from their sin, when thou afflictest them:
affording (1)
	Psalms (prose) 144.13 That our garners may be full, affording all manner of store: that our sheep may bring forth thousands and ten thousands in our streets:
affright (1)
	2 Chronicles 32.18 Then they cried with a loud voice in the Jews' speech unto the people of Jerusalem that were on the wall, to affright them, and to trouble them; that they might take the city.
aforehand (1)
	Mark 14.8 She hath done what she could: she is come aforehand to anoint my body to the burying.
afresh (1)
	Hebrews 6.6 If they shall fall away, to renew them again unto repentance; seeing they crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open shame.
afternoon (1)
	Judges 19.8 And he arose early in the morning on the fifth day to depart; and the damsel's father said, Comfort thine heart, I pray thee. And they tarried until afternoon, and they did eat both of them.
agates (1)
	Isaiah 54.12 And I will make thy windows of agates, and thy gates of carbuncles, and all thy borders of pleasant stones.
agee (1)
	2 Samuel 23.11 And after him was Shammah the son of Agee the Hararite. And the Philistines were gathered together into a troop, where was a piece of ground full of lentiles: and the people fled from the Philistines.
agone (1)
	1 Samuel 30.13 And David said unto him, To whom belongest thou? and whence art thou? And he said, I am a young man of Egypt, servant to an Amalekite; and my master left me, because three days agone I fell sick.
agony (1)
	Luke 22.44 And being in an agony he prayed more earnestly: and his sweat was as it were great drops of blood falling down to the ground.
aground (1)
	Acts 27.41 And falling into a place where two seas met, they ran the ship aground; and the forepart stuck fast, and remained unmoveable, but the hinder part was broken with the violence of the waves.
ague (1)
	Leviticus 26.16 I also will do this unto you; I will even appoint over you terror, consumption, and the burning ague, that shall consume the eyes, and cause sorrow of heart: and ye shall sow your seed in vain, for your enemies shall eat it.
agur (1)
	Proverbs 30.1 The words of Agur the son of Jakeh, even the prophecy: the man spake unto Ithiel, even unto Ithiel and Ucal,
aharah (1)
	1 Chronicles 8.1 Now Benjamin begat Bela his firstborn, Ashbel the second, and Aharah the third,
aharhel (1)
	1 Chronicles 4.8 And Coz begat Anub, and Zobebah, and the families of Aharhel the son of Harum.
ahasai (1)
	Nehemiah 11.13 And his brethren, chief of the fathers, two hundred forty and two: and Amashai the son of Azareel, the son of Ahasai, the son of Meshillemoth, the son of Immer,
ahasbai (1)
	2 Samuel 23.34 Eliphelet the son of Ahasbai, the son of the Maachathite, Eliam the son of Ahithophel the Gilonite,
ahban (1)
	1 Chronicles 2.29 And the name of the wife of Abishur was Abihail, and she bare him Ahban, and Molid.
aher (1)
	1 Chronicles 7.12 Shuppim also, and Huppim, the children of Ir, and Hushim, the sons of Aher.
ahian (1)
	1 Chronicles 7.19 And the sons of Shemidah were, Ahian, and Shechem, and Likhi, and Aniam.
ahimelechs (1)
	1 Samuel 30.7 And David said to Abiathar the priest, Ahimelech's son, I pray thee, bring me hither the ephod. And Abiathar brought thither the ephod to David.
ahimoth (1)
	1 Chronicles 6.25 And the sons of Elkanah; Amasai, and Ahimoth.
ahinadab (1)
	1 Kings 4.14 Ahinadab the son of Iddo had Mahanaim:
ahiram (1)
	Numbers 26.38 The sons of Benjamin after their families: of Bela, the family of the Belaites: of Ashbel, the family of the Ashbelites: of Ahiram, the family of the Ahiramites:
ahiramites (1)
	Numbers 26.38 The sons of Benjamin after their families: of Bela, the family of the Belaites: of Ashbel, the family of the Ashbelites: of Ahiram, the family of the Ahiramites:
ahishahar (1)
	1 Chronicles 7.10 The sons also of Jediael; Bilhan: and the sons of Bilhan; Jeush, and Benjamin, and Ehud, and Chenaanah, and Zethan, and Tharshish, and Ahishahar.
ahishar (1)
	1 Kings 4.6 And Ahishar was over the household: and Adoniram the son of Abda was over the tribute.
ahlab (1)
	Judges 1.31 Neither did Asher drive out the inhabitants of Accho, nor the inhabitants of Zidon, nor of Ahlab, nor of Achzib, nor of Helbah, nor of Aphik, nor of Rehob:
ahoah (1)
	1 Chronicles 8.4 And Abishua, and Naaman, and Ahoah,
ahumai (1)
	1 Chronicles 4.2 And Reaiah the son of Shobal begat Jahath; and Jahath begat Ahumai, and Lahad. These are the families of the Zorathites.
ahuzam (1)
	1 Chronicles 4.6 And Naarah bare him Ahuzam, and Hepher, and Temeni, and Haahashtari. These were the sons of Naarah.
ahuzzath (1)
	Genesis 26.26 Then Abimelech went to him from Gerar, and Ahuzzath one of his friends, and Phichol the chief captain of his army.
aiath (1)
	Isaiah 10.28 He is come to Aiath, he is passed to Migron; at Michmash he hath laid up his carriages:
aided (1)
	Judges 9.24 That the cruelty done to the threescore and ten sons of Jerubbaal might come, and their blood be laid upon Abimelech their brother, which slew them; and upon the men of Shechem, which aided him in the killing of his brethren.
aija (1)
	Nehemiah 11.31 The children also of Benjamin from Geba dwelt at Michmash, and Aija, and Bethel, and in their villages.
ailed (1)
	Psalms (prose) 114.5 What ailed thee, O thou sea, that thou fleddest? thou Jordan, that thou wast driven back?
ajah (1)
	Genesis 36.24 And these are the children of Zibeon; both Ajah, and Anah: this was that Anah that found the mules in the wilderness, as he fed the asses of Zibeon his father.
akan (1)
	Genesis 36.27 The children of Ezer are these; Bilhan, and Zaavan, and Akan.
alameth (1)
	1 Chronicles 7.8 And the sons of Becher; Zemira, and Joash, and Eliezer, and Elioenai, and Omri, and Jerimoth, and Abiah, and Anathoth, and Alameth. All these are the sons of Becher.
alammelech (1)
	Joshua 19.26 And Alammelech, and Amad, and Misheal; and reacheth to Carmel westward, and to Shihorlibnath;
alamoth (1)
	1 Chronicles 15.20 And Zechariah, and Aziel, and Shemiramoth, and Jehiel, and Unni, and Eliab, and Maaseiah, and Benaiah, with psalteries on Alamoth;
alexandrians (1)
	Acts 6.9 Then there arose certain of the synagogue, which is called the synagogue of the Libertines, and Cyrenians, and Alexandrians, and of them of Cilicia and of Asia, disputing with Stephen.
aliah (1)
	1 Chronicles 1.51 Hadad died also. And the dukes of Edom were; duke Timnah, duke Aliah, duke Jetheth,
alian (1)
	1 Chronicles 1.40 The sons of Shobal; Alian, and Manahath, and Ebal, Shephi, and Onam. And the sons of Zibeon; Aiah, and Anah.
alienate (1)
	Ezekiel 48.14 And they shall not sell of it, neither exchange, nor alienate the firstfruits of the land: for it is holy unto the LORD.
alleging (1)
	Acts 17.3 Opening and alleging, that Christ must needs have suffered, and risen again from the dead; and that this Jesus, whom I preach unto you, is Christ.
allegory (1)
	Galatians 4.24 Which things are an allegory: for these are the two covenants; the one from the mount Sinai, which gendereth to bondage, which is Agar.
allied (1)
	Nehemiah 13.4 And before this, Eliashib the priest, having the oversight of the chamber of the house of our God, was allied unto Tobiah:
allonbachuth (1)
	Genesis 35.8 But Deborah Rebekah's nurse died, and she was buried beneath Bethel under an oak: and the name of it was called Allonbachuth.
allowed (1)
	1 Thessalonians 2.4 But as we were allowed of God to be put in trust with the gospel, even so we speak; not as pleasing men, but God, which trieth our hearts.
alloweth (1)
	Romans 14.22 Hast thou faith? have it to thyself before God. Happy is he that condemneth not himself in that thing which he alloweth.
almon (1)
	Joshua 21.18 Anathoth with her suburbs, and Almon with her suburbs; four cities.
almsdeeds (1)
	Acts 9.36 Now there was at Joppa a certain disciple named Tabitha, which by interpretation is called Dorcas: this woman was full of good works and almsdeeds which she did.
aloof (1)
	Psalms (prose) 38.11 My lovers and my friends stand aloof from my sore; and my kinsmen stand afar off.
aloth (1)
	1 Kings 4.16 Baanah the son of Hushai was in Asher and in Aloth:
alvah (1)
	Genesis 36.40 And these are the names of the dukes that came of Esau, according to their families, after their places, by their names; duke Timnah, duke Alvah, duke Jetheth,
alvan (1)
	Genesis 36.23 And the children of Shobal were these; Alvan, and Manahath, and Ebal, Shepho, and Onam.
amad (1)
	Joshua 19.26 And Alammelech, and Amad, and Misheal; and reacheth to Carmel westward, and to Shihorlibnath;
amal (1)
	1 Chronicles 7.35 And the sons of his brother Helem; Zophah, and Imna, and Shelesh, and Amal.
amam (1)
	Joshua 15.26 Amam, and Shema, and Moladah,
amana (1)
	Song of Songs 4.8 Come with me from Lebanon, my spouse, with me from Lebanon: look from the top of Amana, from the top of Shenir and Hermon, from the lions' dens, from the mountains of the leopards.
amashai (1)
	Nehemiah 11.13 And his brethren, chief of the fathers, two hundred forty and two: and Amashai the son of Azareel, the son of Ahasai, the son of Meshillemoth, the son of Immer,
amasiah (1)
	2 Chronicles 17.16 And next him was Amasiah the son of Zichri, who willingly offered himself unto the LORD; and with him two hundred thousand mighty men of valour.
ambassage (1)
	Luke 14.32 Or else, while the other is yet a great way off, he sendeth an ambassage, and desireth conditions of peace.
ambushes (1)
	Jeremiah 51.12 Set up the standard upon the walls of Babylon, make the watch strong, set up the watchmen, prepare the ambushes: for the LORD hath both devised and done that which he spake against the inhabitants of Babylon.
ambushments (1)
	2 Chronicles 20.22 And when they began to sing and to praise, the LORD set ambushments against the children of Ammon, Moab, and mount Seir, which were come against Judah; and they were smitten.
amends (1)
	Leviticus 5.16 And he shall make amends for the harm that he hath done in the holy thing, and shall add the fifth part thereto, and give it unto the priest: and the priest shall make an atonement for him with the ram of the trespass offering, and it shall be forgiven him.
amerce (1)
	Deuteronomy 22.19 And they shall amerce him in an hundred shekels of silver, and give them unto the father of the damsel, because he hath brought up an evil name upon a virgin of Israel: and she shall be his wife; he may not put her away all his days.
ami (1)
	Ezra 2.57 The children of Shephatiah, the children of Hattil, the children of Pochereth of Zebaim, the children of Ami.
amiable (1)
	Psalms (prose) 84.1 How amiable are thy tabernacles, O LORD of hosts!
ammah (1)
	2 Samuel 2.24 Joab also and Abishai pursued after Abner: and the sun went down when they were come to the hill of Ammah, that lieth before Giah by the way of the wilderness of Gibeon.
ammi (1)
	Hosea 2.1 Say ye unto your brethren, Ammi; and to your sisters, Ruhamah.
amminadib (1)
	Song of Songs 6.12 Or ever I was aware, my soul made me like the chariots of Amminadib.
ammizabad (1)
	1 Chronicles 27.6 This is that Benaiah, who was mighty among the thirty, and above the thirty: and in his course was Ammizabad his son.
amounting (1)
	2 Chronicles 3.8 And he made the most holy house, the length whereof was according to the breadth of the house, twenty cubits, and the breadth thereof twenty cubits: and he overlaid it with fine gold, amounting to six hundred talents.
amphipolis (1)
	Acts 17.1 Now when they had passed through Amphipolis and Apollonia, they came to Thessalonica, where was a synagogue of the Jews:
amplias (1)
	Romans 16.8 Greet Amplias my beloved in the Lord.
amrams (1)
	Numbers 26.59 And the name of Amram's wife was Jochebed, the daughter of Levi, whom her mother bare to Levi in Egypt: and she bare unto Amram Aaron and Moses, and Miriam their sister.
anaharath (1)
	Joshua 19.19 And Haphraim, and Shihon, and Anaharath,
anammelech (1)
	2 Kings 17.31 And the Avites made Nibhaz and Tartak, and the Sepharvites burnt their children in fire to Adrammelech and Anammelech, the gods of Sepharvaim.
anan (1)
	Nehemiah 10.26 And Ahijah, Hanan, Anan,
anani (1)
	1 Chronicles 3.24 And the sons of Elioenai were, Hodaiah, and Eliashib, and Pelaiah, and Akkub, and Johanan, and Dalaiah, and Anani, seven.
anathema (1)
	1 Corinthians 16.22 If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema Maranatha.
ancestors (1)
	Leviticus 26.45 But I will for their sakes remember the covenant of their ancestors, whom I brought forth out of the land of Egypt in the sight of the heathen, that I might be their God: I am the LORD.
anchor (1)
	Hebrews 6.19 Which hope we have as an anchor of the soul, both sure and stedfast, and which entereth into that within the veil;
andronicus (1)
	Romans 16.7 Salute Andronicus and Junia, my kinsmen, and my fellow-prisoners, who are of note among the apostles, who also were in Christ before me.
anem (1)
	1 Chronicles 6.73 And Ramoth with her suburbs, and Anem with her suburbs:
anethothite (1)
	2 Samuel 23.27 Abiezer the Anethothite, Mebunnai the Hushathite,
anetothite (1)
	1 Chronicles 27.12 The ninth captain for the ninth month was Abiezer the Anetothite, of the Benjamites: and in his course were twenty and four thousand.
angered (1)
	Psalms (prose) 106.32 They angered him also at the waters of strife, so that it went ill with Moses for their sakes:
aniam (1)
	1 Chronicles 7.19 And the sons of Shemidah were, Ahian, and Shechem, and Likhi, and Aniam.
anim (1)
	Joshua 15.50 And Anab, and Eshtemoh, and Anim,
anise (1)
	Matthew 23.23 Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye pay tithe of mint and anise and cummin, and have omitted the weightier matters of the law, judgment, mercy, and faith: these ought ye to have done, and not to leave the other undone.
ankle (1)
	Acts 3.7 And he took him by the right hand, and lifted him up: and immediately his feet and ankle bones received strength.
ankles (1)
	Ezekiel 47.3 And when the man that had the line in his hand went forth eastward, he measured a thousand cubits, and he brought me through the waters; the waters were to the ankles.
anna (1)
	Luke 2.36 And there was one Anna, a prophetess, the daughter of Phanuel, of the tribe of Aser: she was of a great age, and had lived with an husband seven years from her virginity;
anointedst (1)
	Genesis 31.13 I am the God of Bethel, where thou anointedst the pillar, and where thou vowedst a vow unto me: now arise, get thee out from this land, and return unto the land of thy kindred.
anointest (1)
	Psalms (prose) 23.5 Thou preparest a table before me in the presence of mine enemies: thou anointest my head with oil; my cup runneth over.
answerable (1)
	Exodus 38.18 And the hanging for the gate of the court was needlework, of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen: and twenty cubits was the length, and the height in the breadth was five cubits, answerable to the hangings of the court.
ant (1)
	Proverbs 6.6 Go to the ant, thou sluggard; consider her ways, and be wise:
antichrists (1)
	1 John 2.18 Little children, it is the last time: and as ye have heard that antichrist shall come, even now are there many antichrists; whereby we know that it is the last time.
antipas (1)
	Revelation 2.13 I know thy works, and where thou dwellest, even where Satan's seat is: and thou holdest fast my name, and hast not denied my faith, even in those days wherein Antipas was my faithful martyr, who was slain among you, where Satan dwelleth.
antipatris (1)
	Acts 23.31 Then the soldiers, as it was commanded them, took Paul, and brought him by night to Antipatris.
antiquity (1)
	Isaiah 23.7 Is this your joyous city, whose antiquity is of ancient days? her own feet shall carry her afar off to sojourn.
antothijah (1)
	1 Chronicles 8.24 And Hananiah, and Elam, and Antothijah,
ants (1)
	Proverbs 30.25 The ants are a people not strong, yet they prepare their meat in the summer;
anub (1)
	1 Chronicles 4.8 And Coz begat Anub, and Zobebah, and the families of Aharhel the son of Harum.
anvil (1)
	Isaiah 41.7 So the carpenter encouraged the goldsmith, and he that smootheth with the hammer him that smote the anvil, saying, It is ready for the sodering: and he fastened it with nails, that it should not be moved.
apelles (1)
	Romans 16.10 Salute Apelles approved in Christ. Salute them which are of Aristobulus' household.
apharsathchites (1)
	Ezra 4.9 Then wrote Rehum the chancellor, and Shimshai the scribe, and the rest of their companions; the Dinaites, the Apharsathchites, the Tarpelites, the Apharsites, the Archevites, the Babylonians, the Susanchites, the Dehavites, and the Elamites,
apharsites (1)
	Ezra 4.9 Then wrote Rehum the chancellor, and Shimshai the scribe, and the rest of their companions; the Dinaites, the Apharsathchites, the Tarpelites, the Apharsites, the Archevites, the Babylonians, the Susanchites, the Dehavites, and the Elamites,
aphekah (1)
	Joshua 15.53 And Janum, and Bethtappuah, and Aphekah,
aphiah (1)
	1 Samuel 9.1 Now there was a man of Benjamin, whose name was Kish, the son of Abiel, the son of Zeror, the son of Bechorath, the son of Aphiah, a Benjamite, a mighty man of power.
aphik (1)
	Judges 1.31 Neither did Asher drive out the inhabitants of Accho, nor the inhabitants of Zidon, nor of Ahlab, nor of Achzib, nor of Helbah, nor of Aphik, nor of Rehob:
aphrah (1)
	Micah 1.10 Declare ye it not at Gath, weep ye not at all: in the house of Aphrah roll thyself in the dust.
aphses (1)
	1 Chronicles 24.15 The seventeenth to Hezir, the eighteenth to Aphses,
apollonia (1)
	Acts 17.1 Now when they had passed through Amphipolis and Apollonia, they came to Thessalonica, where was a synagogue of the Jews:
apollyon (1)
	Revelation 9.11 And they had a king over them, which is the angel of the bottomless pit, whose name in the Hebrew tongue is Abaddon, but in the Greek tongue hath his name Apollyon.
apparently (1)
	Numbers 12.8 With him will I speak mouth to mouth, even apparently, and not in dark speeches; and the similitude of the LORD shall he behold: wherefore then were ye not afraid to speak against my servant Moses?
appease (1)
	Genesis 32.20 And say ye moreover, Behold, thy servant Jacob is behind us. For he said, I will appease him with the present that goeth before me, and afterward I will see his face; peradventure he will accept of me.
appeaseth (1)
	Proverbs 15.18 A wrathful man stirreth up strife: but he that is slow to anger appeaseth strife.
apphia (1)
	Philemon 1.2 And to our beloved Apphia, and Archippus our fellowsoldier, and to the church in thy house:
appii (1)
	Acts 28.15 And from thence, when the brethren heard of us, they came to meet us as far as Appii forum, and The three taverns: whom when Paul saw, he thanked God, and took courage.
appointeth (1)
	Daniel 5.21 And he was driven from the sons of men; and his heart was made like the beasts, and his dwelling was with the wild asses: they fed him with grass like oxen, and his body was wet with the dew of heaven; till he knew that the most high God ruled in the kingdom of men, and that he appointeth over it whomsoever he will.
approacheth (1)
	Luke 12.33 Sell that ye have, and give alms; provide yourselves bags which wax not old, a treasure in the heavens that faileth not, where no thief approacheth, neither moth corrupteth.
approvest (1)
	Romans 2.18 And knowest his will, and approvest the things that are more excellent, being instructed out of the law;
approveth (1)
	Lamentations 3.36 To subvert a man in his cause, the LORD approveth not.
approving (1)
	2 Corinthians 6.4 But in all things approving ourselves as the ministers of God, in much patience, in afflictions, in necessities, in distresses,
ara (1)
	1 Chronicles 7.38 And the sons of Jether; Jephunneh, and Pispah, and Ara.
arab (1)
	Joshua 15.52 Arab, and Dumah, and Eshean,
aramitess (1)
	1 Chronicles 7.14 The sons of Manasseh; Ashriel, whom she bare: (but his concubine the Aramitess bare Machir the father of Gilead:
arbah (1)
	Genesis 35.27 And Jacob came unto Isaac his father unto Mamre, unto the city of Arbah, which is Hebron, where Abraham and Isaac sojourned.
arbite (1)
	2 Samuel 23.35 Hezrai the Carmelite, Paarai the Arbite,
archelaus (1)
	Matthew 2.22 But when he heard that Archelaus did reign in Judaea in the room of his father Herod, he was afraid to go thither: notwithstanding, being warned of God in a dream, he turned aside into the parts of Galilee:
archevites (1)
	Ezra 4.9 Then wrote Rehum the chancellor, and Shimshai the scribe, and the rest of their companions; the Dinaites, the Apharsathchites, the Tarpelites, the Apharsites, the Archevites, the Babylonians, the Susanchites, the Dehavites, and the Elamites,
archi (1)
	Joshua 16.2 And goeth out from Bethel to Luz, and passeth along unto the borders of Archi to Ataroth,
ardites (1)
	Numbers 26.40 And the sons of Bela were Ard and Naaman: of Ard, the family of the Ardites: and of Naaman, the family of the Naamites.
ardon (1)
	1 Chronicles 2.18 And Caleb the son of Hezron begat children of Azubah his wife, and of Jerioth: her sons are these; Jesher, and Shobab, and Ardon.
arelites (1)
	Numbers 26.17 Of Arod, the family of the Arodites: of Areli, the family of the Arelites.
areopagite (1)
	Acts 17.34 Howbeit certain men clave unto him, and believed: among the which was Dionysius the Areopagite, and a woman named Damaris, and others with them.
areopagus (1)
	Acts 17.19 And they took him, and brought him unto Areopagus, saying, May we know what this new doctrine, whereof thou speakest, is?
aretas (1)
	2 Corinthians 11.32 In Damascus the governor under Aretas the king kept the city of the Damascenes with a garrison, desirous to apprehend me:
arguing (1)
	Job 6.25 How forcible are right words! but what doth your arguing reprove?
arguments (1)
	Job 23.4 I would order my cause before him, and fill my mouth with arguments.
aridai (1)
	Esther 9.9 And Parmashta, and Arisai, and Aridai, and Vajezatha,
aridatha (1)
	Esther 9.8 And Poratha, and Adalia, and Aridatha,
arieh (1)
	2 Kings 15.25 But Pekah the son of Remaliah, a captain of his, conspired against him, and smote him in Samaria, in the palace of the king's house, with Argob and Arieh, and with him fifty men of the Gileadites: and he killed him, and reigned in his room.
arisai (1)
	Esther 9.9 And Parmashta, and Arisai, and Aridai, and Vajezatha,
arising (1)
	Esther 7.7 And the king arising from the banquet of wine in his wrath went into the palace garden: and Haman stood up to make request for his life to Esther the queen; for he saw that there was evil determined against him by the king.
aristobulus (1)
	Romans 16.10 Salute Apelles approved in Christ. Salute them which are of Aristobulus' household.
armageddon (1)
	Revelation 16.16 And he gathered them together into a place called in the Hebrew tongue Armageddon.
armoni (1)
	2 Samuel 21.8 But the king took the two sons of Rizpah the daughter of Aiah, whom she bare unto Saul, Armoni and Mephibosheth; and the five sons of Michal the daughter of Saul, whom she brought up for Adriel the son of Barzillai the Meholathite:
arnan (1)
	1 Chronicles 3.21 And the sons of Hananiah; Pelatiah, and Jesaiah: the sons of Rephaiah, the sons of Arnan, the sons of Obadiah, the sons of Shechaniah.
arod (1)
	Numbers 26.17 Of Arod, the family of the Arodites: of Areli, the family of the Arelites.
arodi (1)
	Genesis 46.16 And the sons of Gad; Ziphion, and Haggi, Shuni, and Ezbon, Eri, and Arodi, and Areli.
arodites (1)
	Numbers 26.17 Of Arod, the family of the Arodites: of Areli, the family of the Arelites.
aroerite (1)
	1 Chronicles 11.44 Uzzia the Ashterathite, Shama and Jehiel the sons of Hothan the Aroerite,
artemas (1)
	Titus 3.12 When I shall send Artemas unto thee, or Tychicus, be diligent to come unto me to Nicopolis: for I have determined there to winter.
artillery (1)
	1 Samuel 20.40 And Jonathan gave his artillery unto his lad, and said unto him, Go, carry them to the city.
arts (1)
	Acts 19.19 Many of them also which used curious arts brought their books together, and burned them before all men: and they counted the price of them, and found it fifty thousand pieces of silver.
aruboth (1)
	1 Kings 4.10 The son of Hesed, in Aruboth; to him pertained Sochoh, and all the land of Hepher:
arumah (1)
	Judges 9.41 And Abimelech dwelt at Arumah: and Zebul thrust out Gaal and his brethren, that they should not dwell in Shechem.
arza (1)
	1 Kings 16.9 And his servant Zimri, captain of half his chariots, conspired against him, as he was in Tirzah, drinking himself drunk in the house of Arza steward of his house in Tirzah.
asaphs (1)
	Isaiah 36.3 Then came forth unto him Eliakim, Hilkiah's son, which was over the house, and Shebna the scribe, and Joah, Asaph's son, the recorder.
asareel (1)
	1 Chronicles 4.16 And the sons of Jehaleleel; Ziph, and Ziphah, Tiria, and Asareel.
asarelah (1)
	1 Chronicles 25.2 Of the sons of Asaph; Zaccur, and Joseph, and Nethaniah, and Asarelah, the sons of Asaph under the hands of Asaph, which prophesied according to the order of the king.
asas (1)
	1 Kings 15.14 But the high places were not removed: nevertheless Asa's heart was perfect with the LORD all his days.
ash (1)
	Isaiah 44.14 He heweth him down cedars, and taketh the cypress and the oak, which he strengtheneth for himself among the trees of the forest: he planteth an ash, and the rain doth nourish it.
ashbea (1)
	1 Chronicles 4.21 The sons of Shelah the son of Judah were, Er the father of Lecah, and Laadah the father of Mareshah, and the families of the house of them that wrought fine linen, of the house of Ashbea,
ashbelites (1)
	Numbers 26.38 The sons of Benjamin after their families: of Bela, the family of the Belaites: of Ashbel, the family of the Ashbelites: of Ahiram, the family of the Ahiramites:
ashdodites (1)
	Nehemiah 4.7 But it came to pass, that when Sanballat, and Tobiah, and the Arabians, and the Ammonites, and the Ashdodites, heard that the walls of Jerusalem were made up, and that the breaches began to be stopped, then they were very wroth,
ashdothites (1)
	Joshua 13.3 From Sihor, which is before Egypt, even unto the borders of Ekron northward, which is counted to the Canaanite: five lords of the Philistines; the Gazathites, and the Ashdothites, the Eshkalonites, the Gittites, and the Ekronites; also the Avites:
asherites (1)
	Judges 1.32 But the Asherites dwelt among the Canaanites, the inhabitants of the land: for they did not drive them out.
ashima (1)
	2 Kings 17.30 And the men of Babylon made Succothbenoth, and the men of Cuth made Nergal, and the men of Hamath made Ashima,
ashkenaz (1)
	Genesis 10.3 And the sons of Gomer; Ashkenaz, and Riphath, and Togarmah.
ashpenaz (1)
	Daniel 1.3 And the king spake unto Ashpenaz the master of his eunuchs, that he should bring certain of the children of Israel, and of the king's seed, and of the princes;
ashriel (1)
	1 Chronicles 7.14 The sons of Manasseh; Ashriel, whom she bare: (but his concubine the Aramitess bare Machir the father of Gilead:
ashterathite (1)
	1 Chronicles 11.44 Uzzia the Ashterathite, Shama and Jehiel the sons of Hothan the Aroerite,
ashteroth (1)
	Genesis 14.5 And in the fourteenth year came Chedorlaomer, and the kings that were with him, and smote the Rephaims in Ashteroth Karnaim, and the Zuzims in Ham, and the Emins in Shaveh Kiriathaim,
ashvath (1)
	1 Chronicles 7.33 And the sons of Japhlet; Pasach, and Bimhal, and Ashvath. These are the children of Japhlet.
asiel (1)
	1 Chronicles 4.35 And Joel, and Jehu the son of Josibiah, the son of Seraiah, the son of Asiel,
asnah (1)
	Ezra 2.50 The children of Asnah, the children of Mehunim, the children of Nephusim,
asnapper (1)
	Ezra 4.10 And the rest of the nations whom the great and noble Asnapper brought over, and set in the cities of Samaria, and the rest that are on this side the river, and at such a time.
asp (1)
	Isaiah 11.8 And the sucking child shall play on the hole of the asp, and the weaned child shall put his hand on the cockatrice' den.
aspatha (1)
	Esther 9.7 And Parshandatha, and Dalphon, and Aspatha,
asrielites (1)
	Numbers 26.31 And of Asriel, the family of the Asrielites: and of Shechem, the family of the Shechemites:
assaulted (1)
	Acts 17.5 But the Jews which believed not, moved with envy, took unto them certain lewd fellows of the baser sort, and gathered a company, and set all the city on an uproar, and assaulted the house of Jason, and sought to bring them out to the people.
assay (1)
	Job 4.2 If we assay to commune with thee, wilt thou be grieved? but who can withhold himself from speaking?
assaying (1)
	Hebrews 11.29 By faith they passed through the Red sea as by dry land: which the Egyptians assaying to do were drowned.
assent (1)
	2 Chronicles 18.12 And the messenger that went to call Micaiah spake to him, saying, Behold, the words of the prophets declare good to the king with one assent; let thy word therefore, I pray thee, be like one of their's, and speak thou good.
assented (1)
	Acts 24.9 And the Jews also assented, saying that these things were so.
asshurim (1)
	Genesis 25.3 And Jokshan begat Sheba, and Dedan. And the sons of Dedan were Asshurim, and Letushim, and Leummim.
assist (1)
	Romans 16.2 That ye receive her in the Lord, as becometh saints, and that ye assist her in whatsoever business she hath need of you: for she hath been a succourer of many, and of myself also.
associate (1)
	Isaiah 8.9 Associate yourselves, O ye people, and ye shall be broken in pieces; and give ear, all ye of far countries: gird yourselves, and ye shall be broken in pieces; gird yourselves, and ye shall be broken in pieces.
assure (1)
	1 John 3.19 And hereby we know that we are of the truth, and shall assure our hearts before him.
asswage (1)
	Job 16.5 But I would strengthen you with my mouth, and the moving of my lips should asswage your grief.
astaroth (1)
	Deuteronomy 1.4 After he had slain Sihon the king of the Amorites, which dwelt in Heshbon, and Og the king of Bashan, which dwelt at Astaroth in Edrei:
astrologer (1)
	Daniel 2.10 The Chaldeans answered before the king, and said, There is not a man upon the earth that can shew the king's matter: therefore there is no king, lord, nor ruler, that asked such things at any magician, or astrologer, or Chaldean.
asyncritus (1)
	Romans 16.14 Salute Asyncritus, Phlegon, Hermas, Patrobas, Hermes, and the brethren which are with them.
atarah (1)
	1 Chronicles 2.26 Jerahmeel had also another wife, whose name was Atarah; she was the mother of Onam.
atarothadar (1)
	Joshua 18.13 And the border went over from thence toward Luz, to the side of Luz, which is Bethel, southward; and the border descended to Atarothadar, near the hill that lieth on the south side of the nether Bethhoron.
atarothaddar (1)
	Joshua 16.5 And the border of the children of Ephraim according to their families was thus: even the border of their inheritance on the east side was Atarothaddar, unto Bethhoron the upper;
athach (1)
	1 Samuel 30.30 And to them which were in Hormah, and to them which were in Chorashan, and to them which were in Athach,
athaiah (1)
	Nehemiah 11.4 And at Jerusalem dwelt certain of the children of Judah, and of the children of Benjamin. Of the children of Judah; Athaiah the son of Uzziah, the son of Zechariah, the son of Amariah, the son of Shephatiah, the son of Mahalaleel, of the children of Perez;
athenians (1)
	Acts 17.21 (For all the Athenians and strangers which were there spent their time in nothing else, but either to tell, or to hear some new thing.)
athlai (1)
	Ezra 10.28 Of the sons also of Bebai; Jehohanan, Hananiah, Zabbai, and Athlai.
atonements (1)
	Exodus 30.10 And Aaron shall make an atonement upon the horns of it once in a year with the blood of the sin offering of atonements: once in the year shall he make atonement upon it throughout your generations: it is most holy unto the LORD.
atroth (1)
	Numbers 32.35 And Atroth, Shophan, and Jaazer, and Jogbehah,
attalia (1)
	Acts 14.25 And when they had preached the word in Perga, they went down into Attalia:
attending (1)
	Romans 13.6 For for this cause pay ye tribute also: for they are God's ministers, attending continually upon this very thing.
attentively (1)
	Job 37.2 Hear attentively the noise of his voice, and the sound that goeth out of his mouth.
attired (1)
	Leviticus 16.4 He shall put on the holy linen coat, and he shall have the linen breeches upon his flesh, and shall be girded with a linen girdle, and with the linen mitre shall he be attired: these are holy garments; therefore shall he wash his flesh in water, and so put them on.
augment (1)
	Numbers 32.14 And, behold, ye are risen up in your fathers' stead, an increase of sinful men, to augment yet the fierce anger of the LORD toward Israel.
aunt (1)
	Leviticus 18.14 Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy father's brother, thou shalt not approach to his wife: she is thine aunt.
authorities (1)
	1 Peter 3.22 Who is gone into heaven, and is on the right hand of God; angels and authorities and powers being made subject unto him.
ava (1)
	2 Kings 17.24 And the king of Assyria brought men from Babylon, and from Cuthah, and from Ava, and from Hamath, and from Sepharvaim, and placed them in the cities of Samaria instead of the children of Israel: and they possessed Samaria, and dwelt in the cities thereof.
averse (1)
	Micah 2.8 Even of late my people is risen up as an enemy: ye pull off the robe with the garment from them that pass by securely as men averse from war.
avim (1)
	Joshua 18.23 And Avim, and Pharah, and Ophrah,
avims (1)
	Deuteronomy 2.23 And the Avims which dwelt in Hazerim, even unto Azzah, the Caphtorims, which came forth out of Caphtor, destroyed them, and dwelt in their stead.)
avoided (1)
	1 Samuel 18.11 And Saul cast the javelin; for he said, I will smite David even to the wall with it. And David avoided out of his presence twice.
await (1)
	Acts 9.24 But their laying await was known of Saul. And they watched the gates day and night to kill him.
awaking (1)
	Acts 16.27 And the keeper of the prison awaking out of his sleep, and seeing the prison doors open, he drew out his sword, and would have killed himself, supposing that the prisoners had been fled.
azal (1)
	Zechariah 14.5 And ye shall flee to the valley of the mountains; for the valley of the mountains shall reach unto Azal: yea, ye shall flee, like as ye fled from before the earthquake in the days of Uzziah king of Judah: and the LORD my God shall come, and all the saints with thee.
azaniah (1)
	Nehemiah 10.9 And the Levites: both Jeshua the son of Azaniah, Binnui of the sons of Henadad, Kadmiel;
azarael (1)
	Nehemiah 12.36 And his brethren, Shemaiah, and Azarael, Milalai, Gilalai, Maai, Nethaneel, and Judah, Hanani, with the musical instruments of David the man of God, and Ezra the scribe before them.
azaz (1)
	1 Chronicles 5.8 And Bela the son of Azaz, the son of Shema, the son of Joel, who dwelt in Aroer, even unto Nebo and Baalmeon:
azbuk (1)
	Nehemiah 3.16 After him repaired Nehemiah the son of Azbuk, the ruler of the half part of Bethzur, unto the place over against the sepulchres of David, and to the pool that was made, and unto the house of the mighty.
aziel (1)
	1 Chronicles 15.20 And Zechariah, and Aziel, and Shemiramoth, and Jehiel, and Unni, and Eliab, and Maaseiah, and Benaiah, with psalteries on Alamoth;
aziza (1)
	Ezra 10.27 And of the sons of Zattu; Elioenai, Eliashib, Mattaniah, and Jeremoth, and Zabad, and Aziza.
aznothtabor (1)
	Joshua 19.34 And then the coast turneth westward to Aznothtabor, and goeth out from thence to Hukkok, and reacheth to Zebulun on the south side, and reacheth to Asher on the west side, and to Judah upon Jordan toward the sunrising.
azotus (1)
	Acts 8.40 But Philip was found at Azotus: and passing through he preached in all the cities, till he came to Caesarea.
azzan (1)
	Numbers 34.26 And the prince of the tribe of the children of Issachar, Paltiel the son of Azzan.
azzur (1)
	Nehemiah 10.17 Ater, Hizkijah, Azzur,
baalathbeer (1)
	Joshua 19.8 And all the villages that were round about these cities to Baalathbeer, Ramath of the south. This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Simeon according to their families.
baale (1)
	2 Samuel 6.2 And David arose, and went with all the people that were with him from Baale of Judah, to bring up from thence the ark of God, whose name is called by the name of the LORD of hosts that dwelleth between the cherubims.
baalhamon (1)
	Song of Songs 8.11 Solomon had a vineyard at Baalhamon; he let out the vineyard unto keepers; every one for the fruit thereof was to bring a thousand pieces of silver.
baalhazor (1)
	2 Samuel 13.23 And it came to pass after two full years, that Absalom had sheepshearers in Baalhazor, which is beside Ephraim: and Absalom invited all the king's sons.
baali (1)
	Hosea 2.16 And it shall be at that day, saith the LORD, that thou shalt call me Ishi; and shalt call me no more Baali.
baalis (1)
	Jeremiah 40.14 And said unto him, Dost thou certainly know that Baalis the king of the Ammonites hath sent Ishmael the son of Nethaniah to slay thee? But Gedaliah the son of Ahikam believed them not.
baals (1)
	1 Kings 18.22 Then said Elijah unto the people, I, even I only, remain a prophet of the LORD; but Baal's prophets are four hundred and fifty men.
baalshalisha (1)
	2 Kings 4.42 And there came a man from Baalshalisha, and brought the man of God bread of the firstfruits, twenty loaves of barley, and full ears of corn in the husk thereof. And he said, Give unto the people, that they may eat.
baaltamar (1)
	Judges 20.33 And all the men of Israel rose up out of their place, and put themselves in array at Baaltamar: and the liers in wait of Israel came forth out of their places, even out of the meadows of Gibeah.
baara (1)
	1 Chronicles 8.8 And Shaharaim begat children in the country of Moab, after he had sent them away; Hushim and Baara were his wives.
baaseiah (1)
	1 Chronicles 6.40 The son of Michael, the son of Baaseiah, the son of Malchiah,
babbling (1)
	Proverbs 23.29 Who hath woe? who hath sorrow? who hath contentions? who hath babbling? who hath wounds without cause? who hath redness of eyes?
babylonish (1)
	Joshua 7.21 When I saw among the spoils a goodly Babylonish garment, and two hundred shekels of silver, and a wedge of gold of fifty shekels weight, then I coveted them, and took them; and, behold, they are hid in the earth in the midst of my tent, and the silver under it.
baca (1)
	Psalms (prose) 84.6 Who passing through the valley of Baca make it a well; the rain also filleth the pools.
bachrites (1)
	Numbers 26.35 These are the sons of Ephraim after their families: of Shuthelah, the family of the Shuthalhites: of Becher, the family of the Bachrites: of Tahan, the family of the Tahanites.
backbiters (1)
	Romans 1.30 Backbiters, haters of God, despiteful, proud, boasters, inventors of evil things, disobedient to parents,
backbiteth (1)
	Psalms (prose) 15.3 He that backbiteth not with his tongue, nor doeth evil to his neighbour, nor taketh up a reproach against his neighbour.
backbiting (1)
	Proverbs 25.23 The north wind driveth away rain: so doth an angry countenance a backbiting tongue.
backbitings (1)
	2 Corinthians 12.20 For I fear, lest, when I come, I shall not find you such as I would, and that I shall be found unto you such as ye would not: lest there be debates, envyings, wraths, strifes, backbitings, whisperings, swellings, tumults:
backbone (1)
	Leviticus 3.9 And he shall offer of the sacrifice of the peace offering an offering made by fire unto the LORD; the fat thereof, and the whole rump, it shall he take off hard by the backbone; and the fat that covereth the inwards, and all the fat that is upon the inwards,
backslider (1)
	Proverbs 14.14 The backslider in heart shall be filled with his own ways: and a good man shall be satisfied from himself.
badest (1)
	Genesis 27.19 And Jacob said unto his father, I am Esau thy first born; I have done according as thou badest me: arise, I pray thee, sit and eat of my venison, that thy soul may bless me.
badness (1)
	Genesis 41.19 And, behold, seven other kine came up after them, poor and very ill favoured and leanfleshed, such as I never saw in all the land of Egypt for badness:
baharumite (1)
	1 Chronicles 11.33 Azmaveth the Baharumite, Eliahba the Shaalbonite,
bajith (1)
	Isaiah 15.2 He is gone up to Bajith, and to Dibon, the high places, to weep: Moab shall howl over Nebo, and over Medeba: on all their heads shall be baldness, and every beard cut off.
bakbakkar (1)
	1 Chronicles 9.15 And Bakbakkar, Heresh, and Galal, and Mattaniah the son of Micah, the son of Zichri, the son of Asaph;
bakemeats (1)
	Genesis 40.17 And in the uppermost basket there was of all manner of bakemeats for Pharaoh; and the birds did eat them out of the basket upon my head.
baketh (1)
	Isaiah 44.15 Then shall it be for a man to burn: for he will take thereof, and warm himself; yea, he kindleth it, and baketh bread; yea, he maketh a god, and worshippeth it; he maketh it a graven image, and falleth down thereto.
balac (1)
	Revelation 2.14 But I have a few things against thee, because thou hast there them that hold the doctrine of Balaam, who taught Balac to cast a stumblingblock before the children of Israel, to eat things sacrificed unto idols, and to commit fornication.
balah (1)
	Joshua 19.3 And Hazarshual, and Balah, and Azem,
balaks (1)
	Numbers 24.10 And Balak's anger was kindled against Balaam, and he smote his hands together: and Balak said unto Balaam, I called thee to curse mine enemies, and, behold, thou hast altogether blessed them these three times.
balancings (1)
	Job 37.16 Dost thou know the balancings of the clouds, the wondrous works of him which is perfect in knowledge?
ball (1)
	Isaiah 22.18 He will surely violently turn and toss thee like a ball into a large country: there shalt thou die, and there the chariots of thy glory shall be the shame of thy lord's house.
bamah (1)
	Ezekiel 20.29 Then I said unto them, What is the high place whereunto ye go? And the name whereof is called Bamah unto this day.
bamothbaal (1)
	Joshua 13.17 Heshbon, and all her cities that are in the plain; Dibon, and Bamothbaal, and Bethbaalmeon,
banded (1)
	Acts 23.12 And when it was day, certain of the Jews banded together, and bound themselves under a curse, saying that they would neither eat nor drink till they had killed Paul.
banqueting (1)
	Song of Songs 2.4 He brought me to the banqueting house, and his banner over me was love.
banquetings (1)
	1 Peter 4.3 For the time past of our life may suffice us to have wrought the will of the Gentiles, when we walked in lasciviousness, lusts, excess of wine, revellings, banquetings, and abominable idolatries:
baptisms (1)
	Hebrews 6.2 Of the doctrine of baptisms, and of laying on of hands, and of resurrection of the dead, and of eternal judgment.
baptists (1)
	Matthew 14.8 And she, being before instructed of her mother, said, Give me here John Baptist's head in a charger.
baptizest (1)
	John 1.25 And they asked him, and said unto him, Why baptizest thou then, if thou be not that Christ, nor Elias, neither that prophet?
barachias (1)
	Matthew 23.35 That upon you may come all the righteous blood shed upon the earth, from the blood of righteous Abel unto the blood of Zacharias son of Barachias, whom ye slew between the temple and the altar.
barbarous (1)
	Acts 28.2 And the barbarous people shewed us no little kindness: for they kindled a fire, and received us every one, because of the present rain, and because of the cold.
barbed (1)
	Job 41.7 Canst thou fill his skin with barbed irons? or his head with fish spears?
barbers (1)
	Ezekiel 5.1 And thou, son of man, take thee a sharp knife, take thee a barber's razor, and cause it to pass upon thine head and upon thy beard: then take thee balances to weigh, and divide the hair.
barhumite (1)
	2 Samuel 23.31 Abialbon the Arbathite, Azmaveth the Barhumite,
bariah (1)
	1 Chronicles 3.22 And the sons of Shechaniah; Shemaiah: and the sons of Shemaiah; Hattush, and Igeal, and Bariah, and Neariah, and Shaphat, six.
barjesus (1)
	Acts 13.6 And when they had gone through the isle unto Paphos, they found a certain sorcerer, a false prophet, a Jew, whose name was Barjesus:
barjona (1)
	Matthew 16.17 And Jesus answered and said unto him, Blessed art thou, Simon Barjona: for flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven.
bark (1)
	Isaiah 56.10 His watchmen are blind: they are all ignorant, they are all dumb dogs, they cannot bark; sleeping, lying down, loving to slumber.
barked (1)
	Joel 1.7 He hath laid my vine waste, and barked my fig tree: he hath made it clean bare, and cast it away; the branches thereof are made white.
barnfloor (1)
	2 Kings 6.27 And he said, If the LORD do not help thee, whence shall I help thee?  out of the barnfloor, or out of the winepress?
barrels (1)
	1 Kings 18.33 And he put the wood in order, and cut the bullock in pieces, and laid him on the wood, and said, Fill four barrels with water, and pour it on the burnt sacrifice, and on the wood.
barrenness (1)
	Psalms (prose) 107.34 A fruitful land into barrenness, for the wickedness of them that dwell therein.
bartimaeus (1)
	Mark 10.46 And they came to Jericho: and as he went out of Jericho with his disciples and a great number of people, blind Bartimaeus, the son of Timaeus, sat by the highway side begging.
baser (1)
	Acts 17.5 But the Jews which believed not, moved with envy, took unto them certain lewd fellows of the baser sort, and gathered a company, and set all the city on an uproar, and assaulted the house of Jason, and sought to bring them out to the people.
bashanhavothjair (1)
	Deuteronomy 3.14 Jair the son of Manasseh took all the country of Argob unto the coasts of Geshuri and Maachathi; and called them after his own name, Bashanhavothjair, unto this day.
basmath (1)
	1 Kings 4.15 Ahimaaz was in Naphtali; he also took Basmath the daughter of Solomon to wife:
bastards (1)
	Hebrews 12.8 But if ye be without chastisement, whereof all are partakers, then are ye bastards, and not sons.
bathed (1)
	Isaiah 34.5 For my sword shall be bathed in heaven: behold, it shall come down upon Idumea, and upon the people of my curse, to judgment.
bathrabbim (1)
	Song of Songs 7.4 Thy neck is as a tower of ivory; thine eyes like the fishpools in Heshbon, by the gate of Bathrabbim: thy nose is as the tower of Lebanon which looketh toward Damascus.
bathshua (1)
	1 Chronicles 3.5 And these were born unto him in Jerusalem; Shimea, and Shobab, and Nathan, and Solomon, four, of Bathshua the daughter of Ammiel:
bats (1)
	Isaiah 2.20 In that day a man shall cast his idols of silver, and his idols of gold, which they made each one for himself to worship, to the moles and to the bats;
battered (1)
	2 Samuel 20.15 And they came and besieged him in Abel of Bethmaachah, and they cast up a bank against the city, and it stood in the trench: and all the people that were with Joab battered the wall, to throw it down.
battlement (1)
	Deuteronomy 22.8 When thou buildest a new house, then thou shalt make a battlement for thy roof, that thou bring not blood upon thine house, if any man fall from thence.
battlements (1)
	Jeremiah 5.10 Go ye up upon her walls, and destroy; but make not a full end: take away her battlements; for they are not the LORD's.
bavai (1)
	Nehemiah 3.18 After him repaired their brethren, Bavai the son of Henadad, the ruler of the half part of Keilah.
bazlith (1)
	Nehemiah 7.54 The children of Bazlith, the children of Mehida, the children of Harsha,
bazluth (1)
	Ezra 2.52 The children of Bazluth, the children of Mehida, the children of Harsha,
beacon (1)
	Isaiah 30.17 One thousand shall flee at the rebuke of one; at the rebuke of five shall ye flee: till ye be left as a beacon upon the top of a mountain, and as an ensign on an hill.
bealiah (1)
	1 Chronicles 12.5 Eluzai, and Jerimoth, and Bealiah, and Shemariah, and Shephatiah the Haruphite,
bealoth (1)
	Joshua 15.24 Ziph, and Telem, and Bealoth,
beateth (1)
	1 Corinthians 9.26 I therefore so run, not as uncertainly; so fight I, not as one that beateth the air:
beauties (1)
	Psalms (prose) 110.3 Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power, in the beauties of holiness from the womb of the morning: thou hast the dew of thy youth.
bechorath (1)
	1 Samuel 9.1 Now there was a man of Benjamin, whose name was Kish, the son of Abiel, the son of Zeror, the son of Bechorath, the son of Aphiah, a Benjamite, a mighty man of power.
bedeiah (1)
	Ezra 10.35 Benaiah, Bedeiah, Chelluh,
bee (1)
	Isaiah 7.18 And it shall come to pass in that day, that the LORD shall hiss for the fly that is in the uttermost part of the rivers of Egypt, and for the bee that is in the land of Assyria.
beeliada (1)
	1 Chronicles 14.7 And Elishama, and Beeliada, and Eliphalet.
beera (1)
	1 Chronicles 7.37 Bezer, and Hod, and Shamma, and Shilshah, and Ithran, and Beera.
beerah (1)
	1 Chronicles 5.6 Beerah his son, whom Tilgathpilneser king of Assyria carried away captive: he was prince of the Reubenites.
beerelim (1)
	Isaiah 15.8 For the cry is gone round about the borders of Moab; the howling thereof unto Eglaim, and the howling thereof unto Beerelim.
beerlahairoi (1)
	Genesis 16.14 Wherefore the well was called Beerlahairoi; behold, it is between Kadesh and Bered.
beerothites (1)
	2 Samuel 4.3 And the Beerothites fled to Gittaim, and were sojourners there until this day.)
beeshterah (1)
	Joshua 21.27 And unto the children of Gershon, of the families of the Levites, out of the other half tribe of Manasseh they gave Golan in Bashan with her suburbs, to be a city of refuge for the slayer; and Beeshterah with her suburbs; two cities.
beetle (1)
	Leviticus 11.22 Even these of them ye may eat; the locust after his kind, and the bald locust after his kind, and the beetle after his kind, and the grasshopper after his kind.
beggarly (1)
	Galatians 4.9 But now, after that ye have known God, or rather are known of God, how turn ye again to the weak and beggarly elements, whereunto ye desire again to be in bondage?
beginnest (1)
	Deuteronomy 16.9 Seven weeks shalt thou number unto thee: begin to number the seven weeks from such time as thou beginnest to put the sickle to the corn.
beguiling (1)
	2 Peter 2.14 Having eyes full of adultery, and that cannot cease from sin; beguiling unstable souls: an heart they have exercised with covetous practices; cursed children:
behaveth (1)
	1 Corinthians 7.36 But if any man think that he behaveth himself uncomely toward his virgin, if she pass the flower of her age, and need so require, let him do what he will, he sinneth not: let them marry.
behemoth (1)
	Job 40.15 Behold now behemoth, which I made with thee; he eateth grass as an ox.
bekah (1)
	Exodus 38.26 A bekah for every man, that is, half a shekel, after the shekel of the sanctuary, for every one that went to be numbered, from twenty years old and upward, for six hundred thousand and three thousand and five hundred and fifty men.
belah (1)
	Genesis 46.21 And the sons of Benjamin were Belah, and Becher, and Ashbel, Gera, and Naaman, Ehi, and Rosh, Muppim, and Huppim, and Ard.
belaites (1)
	Numbers 26.38 The sons of Benjamin after their families: of Bela, the family of the Belaites: of Ashbel, the family of the Ashbelites: of Ahiram, the family of the Ahiramites:
belch (1)
	Psalms (prose) 59.7 Behold, they belch out with their mouth: swords are in their lips: for who, say they, doth hear?
belied (1)
	Jeremiah 5.12 They have belied the LORD, and said, It is not he; neither shall evil come upon us; neither shall we see sword nor famine:
belief (1)
	2 Thessalonians 2.13 But we are bound to give thanks alway to God for you, brethren beloved of the Lord, because God hath from the beginning chosen you to salvation through sanctification of the Spirit and belief of the truth:
bellies (1)
	Titus 1.12 One of themselves, even a prophet of their own, said, The Cretians are alway liars, evil beasts, slow bellies.
bellow (1)
	Jeremiah 50.11 Because ye were glad, because ye rejoiced, O ye destroyers of mine heritage, because ye are grown fat as the heifer at grass, and bellow as bulls;
bellows (1)
	Jeremiah 6.29 The bellows are burned, the lead is consumed of the fire; the founder melteth in vain: for the wicked are not plucked away.
belongest (1)
	1 Samuel 30.13 And David said unto him, To whom belongest thou? and whence art thou? And he said, I am a young man of Egypt, servant to an Amalekite; and my master left me, because three days agone I fell sick.
bemoaned (1)
	Job 42.11 Then came there unto him all his brethren, and all his sisters, and all they that had been of his acquaintance before, and did eat bread with him in his house: and they bemoaned him, and comforted him over all the evil that the LORD had brought upon him: every man also gave him a piece of money, and every one an earring of gold.
bemoaning (1)
	Jeremiah 31.18 I have surely heard Ephraim bemoaning himself thus; Thou hast chastised me, and I was chastised, as a bullock unaccustomed to the yoke: turn thou me, and I shall be turned; for thou art the LORD my God.
ben (1)
	1 Chronicles 15.18 And with them their brethren of the second degree, Zechariah, Ben, and Jaaziel, and Shemiramoth, and Jehiel, and Unni, Eliab, and Benaiah, and Maaseiah, and Mattithiah, and Elipheleh, and Mikneiah, and Obededom, and Jeiel, the porters.
benammi (1)
	Genesis 19.38 And the younger, she also bare a son, and called his name Benammi: the same is the father of the children of Ammon unto this day.
benches (1)
	Ezekiel 27.6 Of the oaks of Bashan have they made thine oars; the company of the Ashurites have made thy benches of ivory, brought out of the isles of Chittim.
bending (1)
	Isaiah 60.14 The sons also of them that afflicted thee shall come bending unto thee; and all they that despised thee shall bow themselves down at the soles of thy feet; and they shall call thee; The city of the LORD, The Zion of the Holy One of Israel.
beneberak (1)
	Joshua 19.45 And Jehud, and Beneberak, and Gathrimmon,
benefactors (1)
	Luke 22.25 And he said unto them, The kings of the Gentiles exercise lordship over them; and they that exercise authority upon them are called benefactors.
benevolence (1)
	1 Corinthians 7.3 Let the husband render unto the wife due benevolence: and likewise also the wife unto the husband.
benhail (1)
	2 Chronicles 17.7 Also in the third year of his reign he sent to his princes, even to Benhail, and to Obadiah, and to Zechariah, and to Nethaneel, and to Michaiah, to teach in the cities of Judah.
benhanan (1)
	1 Chronicles 4.20 And the sons of Shimon were, Amnon, and Rinnah, Benhanan, and Tilon. And the sons of Ishi were, Zoheth, and Benzoheth.
beninu (1)
	Nehemiah 10.13 Hodijah, Bani, Beninu.
benoni (1)
	Genesis 35.18 And it came to pass, as her soul was in departing, (for she died) that she called his name Benoni: but his father called him Benjamin.
benzoheth (1)
	1 Chronicles 4.20 And the sons of Shimon were, Amnon, and Rinnah, Benhanan, and Tilon. And the sons of Ishi were, Zoheth, and Benzoheth.
beon (1)
	Numbers 32.3 Ataroth, and Dibon, and Jazer, and Nimrah, and Heshbon, and Elealeh, and Shebam, and Nebo, and Beon,
bera (1)
	Genesis 14.2 That these made war with Bera king of Sodom, and with Birsha king of Gomorrah, Shinab king of Admah, and Shemeber king of Zeboiim, and the king of Bela, which is Zoar.
berachiah (1)
	1 Chronicles 6.39 And his brother Asaph, who stood on his right hand, even Asaph the son of Berachiah, the son of Shimea,
beraiah (1)
	1 Chronicles 8.21 And Adaiah, and Beraiah, and Shimrath, the sons of Shimhi;
bereaveth (1)
	Lamentations 1.20 Behold, O LORD; for I am in distress: my bowels are troubled; mine heart is turned within me; for I have grievously rebelled: abroad the sword bereaveth, at home there is as death.
beri (1)
	1 Chronicles 7.36 The sons of Zophah; Suah, and Harnepher, and Shual, and Beri, and Imrah,
beriites (1)
	Numbers 26.44 Of the children of Asher after their families: of Jimna, the family of the Jimnites: of Jesui, the family of the Jesuites: of Beriah, the family of the Beriites.
berites (1)
	2 Samuel 20.14 And he went through all the tribes of Israel unto Abel, and to Bethmaachah, and all the Berites: and they were gathered together, and went also after him.
berith (1)
	Judges 9.46 And when all the men of the tower of Shechem heard that, they entered into an hold of the house of the god Berith.
berodachbaladan (1)
	2 Kings 20.12 At that time Berodachbaladan, the son of Baladan, king of Babylon, sent letters and a present unto Hezekiah: for he had heard that Hezekiah had been sick.
berothah (1)
	Ezekiel 47.16 Hamath, Berothah, Sibraim, which is between the border of Damascus and the border of Hamath; Hazarhatticon, which is by the coast of Hauran.
berothai (1)
	2 Samuel 8.8 And from Betah, and from Berothai, cities of Hadadezer, king David took exceeding much brass.
berothite (1)
	1 Chronicles 11.39 Zelek the Ammonite, Naharai the Berothite, the armourbearer of Joab the son of Zeruiah,
besodeiah (1)
	Nehemiah 3.6 Moreover the old gate repaired Jehoiada the son of Paseah, and Meshullam the son of Besodeiah; they laid the beams thereof, and set up the doors thereof, and the locks thereof, and the bars thereof.
besom (1)
	Isaiah 14.23 I will also make it a possession for the bittern, and pools of water: and I will sweep it with the besom of destruction, saith the LORD of hosts.
bestead (1)
	Isaiah 8.21 And they shall pass through it, hardly bestead and hungry: and it shall come to pass, that when they shall be hungry, they shall fret themselves, and curse their king and their God, and look upward.
bestir (1)
	2 Samuel 5.24 And let it be, when thou hearest the sound of a going in the tops of the mulberry trees, that then thou shalt bestir thyself: for then shall the LORD go out before thee, to smite the host of the Philistines.
betah (1)
	2 Samuel 8.8 And from Betah, and from Berothai, cities of Hadadezer, king David took exceeding much brass.
beten (1)
	Joshua 19.25 And their border was Helkath, and Hali, and Beten, and Achshaph,
bethabara (1)
	John 1.28 These things were done in Bethabara beyond Jordan, where John was baptizing.
bethanoth (1)
	Joshua 15.59 And Maarath, and Bethanoth, and Eltekon; six cities with their villages:
betharam (1)
	Joshua 13.27 And in the valley, Betharam, and Bethnimrah, and Succoth, and Zaphon, the rest of the kingdom of Sihon king of Heshbon, Jordan and his border, even unto the edge of the sea of Chinnereth on the other side Jordan eastward.
betharbel (1)
	Hosea 10.14 Therefore shall a tumult arise among thy people, and all thy fortresses shall be spoiled, as Shalman spoiled Betharbel in the day of battle: the mother was dashed in pieces upon her children.
bethazmaveth (1)
	Nehemiah 7.28 The men of Bethazmaveth, forty and two.
bethbaalmeon (1)
	Joshua 13.17 Heshbon, and all her cities that are in the plain; Dibon, and Bamothbaal, and Bethbaalmeon,
bethbirei (1)
	1 Chronicles 4.31 And at Bethmarcaboth, and Hazarsusim, and at Bethbirei, and at Shaaraim. These were their cities unto the reign of David.
bethcar (1)
	1 Samuel 7.11 And the men of Israel went out of Mizpeh, and pursued the Philistines, and smote them, until they came under Bethcar.
bethdiblathaim (1)
	Jeremiah 48.22 And upon Dibon, and upon Nebo, and upon Bethdiblathaim,
bethelite (1)
	1 Kings 16.34 In his days did Hiel the Bethelite build Jericho: he laid the foundation thereof in Abiram his firstborn, and set up the gates thereof in his youngest son Segub, according to the word of the LORD, which he spake by Joshua the son of Nun.
bethemek (1)
	Joshua 19.27 And turneth toward the sunrising to Bethdagon, and reacheth to Zebulun, and to the valley of Jiphthahel toward the north side of Bethemek, and Neiel, and goeth out to Cabul on the left hand,
bether (1)
	Song of Songs 2.17 Until the day break, and the shadows flee away, turn, my beloved, and be thou like a roe or a young hart upon the mountains of Bether.
bethesda (1)
	John 5.2 Now there is at Jerusalem by the sheep market a pool, which is called in the Hebrew tongue Bethesda, having five porches.
bethezel (1)
	Micah 1.11 Pass ye away, thou inhabitant of Saphir, having thy shame naked: the inhabitant of Zaanan came not forth in the mourning of Bethezel; he shall receive of you his standing.
bethgader (1)
	1 Chronicles 2.51 Salma the father of Bethlehem, Hareph the father of Bethgader.
bethgamul (1)
	Jeremiah 48.23 And upon Kiriathaim, and upon Bethgamul, and upon Bethmeon,
bethharan (1)
	Numbers 32.36 And Bethnimrah, and Bethharan, fenced cities: and folds for sheep.
bethhogla (1)
	Joshua 15.6 And the border went up to Bethhogla, and passed along by the north of Betharabah; and the border went up to the stone of Bohan the son of Reuben:
bethjesimoth (1)
	Numbers 33.49 And they pitched by Jordan, from Bethjesimoth even unto Abelshittim in the plains of Moab.
bethlebaoth (1)
	Joshua 19.6 And Bethlebaoth, and Sharuhen; thirteen cities and their villages:
bethmeon (1)
	Jeremiah 48.23 And upon Kiriathaim, and upon Bethgamul, and upon Bethmeon,
bethpalet (1)
	Joshua 15.27 And Hazargaddah, and Heshmon, and Bethpalet,
bethpazzez (1)
	Joshua 19.21 And Remeth, and Engannim, and Enhaddah, and Bethpazzez;
bethphelet (1)
	Nehemiah 11.26 And at Jeshua, and at Moladah, and at Bethphelet,
bethrapha (1)
	1 Chronicles 4.12 And Eshton begat Bethrapha, and Paseah, and Tehinnah the father of Irnahash. These are the men of Rechah.
bethshittah (1)
	Judges 7.22 And the three hundred blew the trumpets, and the LORD set every man's sword against his fellow, even throughout all the host: and the host fled to Bethshittah in Zererath, and to the border of Abelmeholah, unto Tabbath.
bethtappuah (1)
	Joshua 15.53 And Janum, and Bethtappuah, and Aphekah,
bethul (1)
	Joshua 19.4 And Eltolad, and Bethul, and Hormah,
betonim (1)
	Joshua 13.26 And from Heshbon unto Ramathmizpeh, and Betonim; and from Mahanaim unto the border of Debir;
betrayers (1)
	Acts 7.52 Which of the prophets have not your fathers persecuted? and they have slain them which shewed before of the coming of the Just One; of whom ye have been now the betrayers and murderers:
betrayest (1)
	Luke 22.48 But Jesus said unto him, Judas, betrayest thou the Son of man with a kiss?
bettered (1)
	Mark 5.26 And had suffered many things of many physicians, and had spent all that she had, and was nothing bettered, but rather grew worse,
beulah (1)
	Isaiah 62.4 Thou shalt no more be termed Forsaken; neither shall thy land any more be termed Desolate: but thou shalt be called Hephzibah, and thy land Beulah: for the LORD delighteth in thee, and thy land shall be married.
bewaileth (1)
	Jeremiah 4.31 For I have heard a voice as of a woman in travail, and the anguish as of her that bringeth forth her first child, the voice of the daughter of Zion, that bewaileth herself, that spreadeth her hands, saying, Woe is me now! for my soul is wearied because of murderers.
bewray (1)
	Isaiah 16.3 Take counsel, execute judgment; make thy shadow as the night in the midst of the noonday; hide the outcasts; bewray not him that wandereth.
biddeth (1)
	2 John 1.11 For he that biddeth him God speed is partaker of his evil deeds.
bidding (1)
	1 Samuel 22.14 Then Ahimelech answered the king, and said, And who is so faithful among all thy servants as David, which is the king's son in law, and goeth at thy bidding, and is honourable in thine house?
bidkar (1)
	2 Kings 9.25 Then said Jehu to Bidkar his captain, Take up, and cast him in the portion of the field of Naboth the Jezreelite: for remember how that, when I and thou rode together after Ahab his father, the LORD laid this burden upon him;
bigtha (1)
	Esther 1.10 On the seventh day, when the heart of the king was merry with wine, he commanded Mehuman, Biztha, Harbona, Bigtha, and Abagtha, Zethar, and Carcas, the seven chamberlains that served in the presence of Ahasuerus the king,
bigthan (1)
	Esther 2.21 In those days, while Mordecai sat in the king's gate, two of the king's chamberlains, Bigthan and Teresh, of those which kept the door, were wroth, and sought to lay hands on the king Ahasuerus.
bigthana (1)
	Esther 6.2 And it was found written, that Mordecai had told of Bigthana and Teresh, two of the king's chamberlains, the keepers of the door, who sought to lay hand on the king Ahasuerus.
bileam (1)
	1 Chronicles 6.70 And out of the half tribe of Manasseh; Aner with her suburbs, and Bileam with her suburbs, for the family of the remnant of the sons of Kohath.
bilgai (1)
	Nehemiah 10.8 Maaziah, Bilgai, Shemaiah: these were the priests.
bimhal (1)
	1 Chronicles 7.33 And the sons of Japhlet; Pasach, and Bimhal, and Ashvath. These are the children of Japhlet.
birsha (1)
	Genesis 14.2 That these made war with Bera king of Sodom, and with Birsha king of Gomorrah, Shinab king of Admah, and Shemeber king of Zeboiim, and the king of Bela, which is Zoar.
birzavith (1)
	1 Chronicles 7.31 And the sons of Beriah; Heber, and Malchiel, who is the father of Birzavith.
bishlam (1)
	Ezra 4.7 And in the days of Artaxerxes wrote Bishlam, Mithredath, Tabeel, and the rest of their companions, unto Artaxerxes king of Persia; and the writing of the letter was written in the Syrian tongue, and interpreted in the Syrian tongue.
bishoprick (1)
	Acts 1.20 For it is written in the book of Psalms, Let his habitation be desolate, and let no man dwell therein: and his bishoprick let another take.
bishops (1)
	Philippians 1.1 Paul and Timotheus, the servants of Jesus Christ, to all the saints in Christ Jesus which are at Philippi, with the bishops and deacons:
bithiah (1)
	1 Chronicles 4.18 And his wife Jehudijah bare Jered the father of Gedor, and Heber the father of Socho, and Jekuthiel the father of Zanoah. And these are the sons of Bithiah the daughter of Pharaoh, which Mered took.
bithron (1)
	2 Samuel 2.29 And Abner and his men walked all that night through the plain, and passed over Jordan, and went through all Bithron, and they came to Mahanaim.
bits (1)
	James 3.3 Behold, we put bits in the horses' mouths, that they may obey us; and we turn about their whole body.
bizjothjah (1)
	Joshua 15.28 And Hazarshual, and Beersheba, and Bizjothjah,
biztha (1)
	Esther 1.10 On the seventh day, when the heart of the king was merry with wine, he commanded Mehuman, Biztha, Harbona, Bigtha, and Abagtha, Zethar, and Carcas, the seven chamberlains that served in the presence of Ahasuerus the king,
blacker (1)
	Lamentations 4.8 Their visage is blacker than a coal; they are not known in the streets: their skin cleaveth to their bones; it is withered, it is become like a stick.
blackish (1)
	Job 6.16 Which are blackish by reason of the ice, and wherein the snow is hid:
blasphemer (1)
	1 Timothy 1.13 Who was before a blasphemer, and a persecutor, and injurious: but I obtained mercy, because I did it ignorantly in unbelief.
blasphemest (1)
	John 10.36 Say ye of him, whom the Father hath sanctified, and sent into the world, Thou blasphemest; because I said, I am the Son of God?
blaspheming (1)
	Acts 13.45 But when the Jews saw the multitudes, they were filled with envy, and spake against those things which were spoken by Paul, contradicting and blaspheming.
blasphemously (1)
	Luke 22.65 And many other things blasphemously spake they against him.
blastus (1)
	Acts 12.20 And Herod was highly displeased with them of Tyre and Sidon: but they came with one accord to him, and, having made Blastus the king's chamberlain their friend, desired peace; because their country was nourished by the king's country.
blaze (1)
	Mark 1.45 But he went out, and began to publish it much, and to blaze abroad the matter, insomuch that Jesus could no more openly enter into the city, but was without in desert places: and they came to him from every quarter.
bleating (1)
	1 Samuel 15.14 And Samuel said, What meaneth then this bleating of the sheep in mine ears, and the lowing of the oxen which I hear?
bleatings (1)
	Judges 5.16 Why abodest thou among the sheepfolds, to hear the bleatings of the flocks? For the divisions of Reuben there were great searchings of heart.
blindeth (1)
	Exodus 23.8 And thou shalt take no gift: for the gift blindeth the wise, and perverteth the words of the righteous.
blindfolded (1)
	Luke 22.64 And when they had blindfolded him, they struck him on the face, and asked him, saying, Prophesy, who is it that smote thee?
blocks (1)
	Zephaniah 1.3 I will consume man and beast; I will consume the fowls of the heaven, and the fishes of the sea, and the stumbling blocks with the wicked: and I will cut off man from off the land, saith the LORD.
bloodguiltiness (1)
	Psalms (prose) 51.14 Deliver me from bloodguiltiness, O God, thou God of my salvation: and my tongue shall sing aloud of thy righteousness.
bloodthirsty (1)
	Proverbs 29.10 The bloodthirsty hate the upright: but the just seek his soul.
bloomed (1)
	Numbers 17.8 And it came to pass, that on the morrow Moses went into the tabernacle of witness; and, behold, the rod of Aaron for the house of Levi was budded, and brought forth buds, and bloomed blossoms, and yielded almonds.
blossomed (1)
	Ezekiel 7.10 Behold the day, behold, it is come: the morning is gone forth; the rod hath blossomed, pride hath budded.
blotteth (1)
	Isaiah 43.25 I, even I, am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for mine own sake, and will not remember thy sins.
blotting (1)
	Colossians 2.14  Blotting out the handwriting of ordinances that was against us, which was contrary to us, and took it out of the way, nailing it to his cross;
blueness (1)
	Proverbs 20.30 The blueness of a wound cleanseth away evil: so do stripes the inward parts of the belly.
blunt (1)
	Ecclesiastes 10.10 If the iron be blunt, and he do not whet the edge, then must he put to more strength: but wisdom is profitable to direct.
boanerges (1)
	Mark 3.17 And James the son of Zebedee, and John the brother of James; and he surnamed them Boanerges, which is, The sons of thunder:
boar (1)
	Psalms (prose) 80.13 The boar out of the wood doth waste it, and the wild beast of the field doth devour it.
boastest (1)
	Psalms (prose) 52.1 Why boastest thou thyself in mischief, O mighty man? the goodness of God endureth continually.
boastings (1)
	James 4.16 But now ye rejoice in your boastings: all such rejoicing is evil.
boats (1)
	John 6.23 (Howbeit there came other boats from Tiberias nigh unto the place where they did eat bread, after that the Lord had given thanks:)
bodys (1)
	Colossians 1.24  Who now rejoice in my sufferings for you, and fill up that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh for his body's sake, which is the church:
boiling (1)
	Ezekiel 46.23 And there was a row of building round about in them, round about them four, and it was made with boiling places under the rows round about.
boisterous (1)
	Matthew 14.30 But when he saw the wind boisterous, he was afraid; and beginning to sink, he cried, saying, Lord, save me.
bolled (1)
	Exodus 9.31 And the flax and the barley was smitten: for the barley was in the ear, and the flax was bolled.
bolt (1)
	2 Samuel 13.17 Then he called his servant that ministered unto him, and said, Put now this woman out from me, and bolt the door after her.
bolted (1)
	2 Samuel 13.18 And she had a garment of divers colours upon her: for with such robes were the king's daughters that were virgins apparelled. Then his servant brought her out, and bolted the door after her.
bondservant (1)
	Leviticus 25.39 And if thy brother that dwelleth by thee be waxen poor, and be sold unto thee; thou shalt not compel him to serve as a bondservant:
bondservice (1)
	1 Kings 9.21 Their children that were left after them in the land, whom the children of Israel also were not able utterly to destroy, upon those did Solomon levy a tribute of bondservice unto this day.
booties (1)
	Habakkuk 2.7 Shall they not rise up suddenly that shall bite thee, and awake that shall vex thee, and thou shalt be for booties unto them?
bored (1)
	2 Kings 12.9 But Jehoiada the priest took a chest, and bored a hole in the lid of it, and set it beside the altar, on the right side as one cometh into the house of the LORD: and the priests that kept the door put therein all the money that was brought into the house of the LORD.
borroweth (1)
	Psalms (prose) 37.21 The wicked borroweth, and payeth not again: but the righteous sheweth mercy, and giveth.
boscath (1)
	2 Kings 22.1 Josiah was eight years old when he began to reign, and he reigned thirty and one years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Jedidah, the daughter of Adaiah of Boscath.
bosor (1)
	2 Peter 2.15 Which have forsaken the right way, and are gone astray, following the way of Balaam the son of Bosor, who loved the wages of unrighteousness;
bosses (1)
	Job 15.26 He runneth upon him, even on his neck, upon the thick bosses of his bucklers:
bottoms (1)
	Jonah 2.6 I went down to the bottoms of the mountains; the earth with her bars was about me for ever: yet hast thou brought up my life from corruption, O LORD my God.
bountifulness (1)
	2 Corinthians 9.11 Being enriched in every thing to all bountifulness, which causeth through us thanksgiving to God.
bowmen (1)
	Jeremiah 4.29 The whole city shall flee for the noise of the horsemen and bowmen; they shall go into thickets, and climb up upon the rocks: every city shall be forsaken, and not a man dwell therein.
boy (1)
	Joel 3.3 And they have cast lots for my people; and have given a boy for an harlot, and sold a girl for wine, that they might drink.
bozez (1)
	1 Samuel 14.4 And between the passages, by which Jonathan sought to go over unto the Philistines' garrison, there was a sharp rock on the one side, and a sharp rock on the other side: and the name of the one was Bozez, and the name of the other Seneh.
bozkath (1)
	Joshua 15.39 Lachish, and Bozkath, and Eglon,
bracelet (1)
	2 Samuel 1.10 So I stood upon him, and slew him, because I was sure that he could not live after that he was fallen: and I took the crown that was upon his head, and the bracelet that was on his arm, and have brought them hither unto my lord.
brambles (1)
	Isaiah 34.13 And thorns shall come up in her palaces, nettles and brambles in the fortresses thereof: and it shall be an habitation of dragons, and a court for owls.
brand (1)
	Zechariah 3.2 And the LORD said unto Satan, The LORD rebuke thee, O Satan; even the LORD that hath chosen Jerusalem rebuke thee: is not this a brand plucked out of the fire?
brandish (1)
	Ezekiel 32.10 Yea, I will make many people amazed at thee, and their kings shall be horribly afraid for thee, when I shall brandish my sword before them; and they shall tremble at every moment, every man for his own life, in the day of thy fall.
brands (1)
	Judges 15.5 And when he had set the brands on fire, he let them go into the standing corn of the Philistines, and burnt up both the shocks, and also the standing corn, with the vineyards and olives.
bravery (1)
	Isaiah 3.18 In that day the Lord will take away the bravery of their tinkling ornaments about their feet, and their cauls, and their round tires like the moon,
brawler (1)
	1 Timothy 3.3 Not given to wine, no striker, not greedy of filthy lucre; but patient, not a brawler, not covetous;
brawlers (1)
	Titus 3.2 To speak evil of no man, to be no brawlers, but gentle, shewing all meekness unto all men.
brayed (1)
	Job 30.7 Among the bushes they brayed; under the nettles they were gathered together.
breakest (1)
	Psalms (prose) 48.7 Thou breakest the ships of Tarshish with an east wind.
breakings (1)
	Job 41.25 When he raiseth up himself, the mighty are afraid: by reason of breakings they purify themselves.
breatheth (1)
	Deuteronomy 20.16 But of the cities of these people, which the LORD thy God doth give thee for an inheritance, thou shalt save alive nothing that breatheth:
bred (1)
	Exodus 16.20 Notwithstanding they hearkened not unto Moses; but some of them left of it until the morning, and it bred worms, and stank: and Moses was wroth with them.
breeding (1)
	Zephaniah 2.9 Therefore as I live, saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel, Surely Moab shall be as Sodom, and the children of Ammon as Gomorrah, even the breeding of nettles, and saltpits, and a perpetual desolation: the residue of my people shall spoil them, and the remnant of my people shall possess them.
brethrens (1)
	Deuteronomy 20.8 And the officers shall speak further unto the people, and they shall say, What man is there that is fearful and fainthearted? let him go and return unto his house, lest his brethren's heart faint as well as his heart.
bribery (1)
	Job 15.34 For the congregation of hypocrites shall be desolate, and fire shall consume the tabernacles of bribery.
bridegrooms (1)
	John 3.29 He that hath the bride is the bridegroom: but the friend of the bridegroom, which standeth and heareth him, rejoiceth greatly because of the bridegroom's voice: this my joy therefore is fulfilled.
bridles (1)
	Revelation 14.20 And the winepress was trodden without the city, and blood came out of the winepress, even unto the horse bridles, by the space of a thousand and six hundred furlongs.
bridleth (1)
	James 1.26 If any man among you seem to be religious, and bridleth not his tongue, but deceiveth his own heart, this man's religion is vain.
brigandine (1)
	Jeremiah 51.3 Against him that bendeth let the archer bend his bow, and against him that lifteth himself up in his brigandine: and spare ye not her young men; destroy ye utterly all her host.
brigandines (1)
	Jeremiah 46.4 Harness the horses; and get up, ye horsemen, and stand forth with your helmets; furbish the spears, and put on the brigandines.
bringers (1)
	2 Kings 10.5 And he that was over the house, and he that was over the city, the elders also, and the bringers up of the children, sent to Jehu, saying, We are thy servants, and will do all that thou shalt bid us; we will not make any king: do thou that which is good in thine eyes.
broader (1)
	Job 11.9 The measure thereof is longer than the earth, and broader than the sea.
broided (1)
	1 Timothy 2.9 In like manner also, that women adorn themselves in modest apparel, with shamefacedness and sobriety; not with broided hair, or gold, or pearls, or costly array;
broiled (1)
	Luke 24.42 And they gave him a piece of a broiled fish, and of an honeycomb.
brokenfooted (1)
	Leviticus 21.19 Or a man that is brokenfooted, or brokenhanded,
brokenhanded (1)
	Leviticus 21.19 Or a man that is brokenfooted, or brokenhanded,
brood (1)
	Luke 13.34 O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which killest the prophets, and stonest them that are sent unto thee; how often would I have gathered thy children together, as a hen doth gather her brood under her wings, and ye would not!
bruises (1)
	Isaiah 1.6 From the sole of the foot even unto the head there is no soundness in it; but wounds, and bruises, and putrifying sores: they have not been closed, neither bound up, neither mollified with ointment.
bucket (1)
	Isaiah 40.15 Behold, the nations are as a drop of a bucket, and are counted as the small dust of the balance: behold, he taketh up the isles as a very little thing.
buckets (1)
	Numbers 24.7 He shall pour the water out of his buckets, and his seed shall be in many waters, and his king shall be higher than Agag, and his kingdom shall be exalted.
buds (1)
	Numbers 17.8 And it came to pass, that on the morrow Moses went into the tabernacle of witness; and, behold, the rod of Aaron for the house of Levi was budded, and brought forth buds, and bloomed blossoms, and yielded almonds.
buildedst (1)
	Deuteronomy 6.10 And it shall be, when the LORD thy God shall have brought thee into the land which he sware unto thy fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, to give thee great and goodly cities, which thou buildedst not,
builder (1)
	Hebrews 11.10 For he looked for a city which hath foundations, whose builder and maker is God.
bul (1)
	1 Kings 6.38 And in the eleventh year, in the month Bul, which is the eighth month, was the house finished throughout all the parts thereof, and according to all the fashion of it. So was he seven years in building it.
bulrush (1)
	Isaiah 58.5 Is it such a fast that I have chosen? a day for a man to afflict his soul? is it to bow down his head as a bulrush, and to spread sackcloth and ashes under him? wilt thou call this a fast, and an acceptable day to the LORD?
bunah (1)
	1 Chronicles 2.25 And the sons of Jerahmeel the firstborn of Hezron were, Ram the firstborn, and Bunah, and Oren, and Ozem, and Ahijah.
bunch (1)
	Exodus 12.22 And ye shall take a bunch of hyssop, and dip it in the blood that is in the bason, and strike the lintel and the two side posts with the blood that is in the bason; and none of you shall go out at the door of his house until the morning.
buriers (1)
	Ezekiel 39.15 And the passengers that pass through the land, when any seeth a man's bone, then shall he set up a sign by it, till the buriers have buried it in the valley of Hamongog.
burnished (1)
	Ezekiel 1.7 And their feet were straight feet; and the sole of their feet was like the sole of a calf's foot: and they sparkled like the colour of burnished brass.
bursting (1)
	Isaiah 30.14 And he shall break it as the breaking of the potters' vessel that is broken in pieces; he shall not spare: so that there shall not be found in the bursting of it a sherd to take fire from the hearth, or to take water withal out of the pit.
bushy (1)
	Song of Songs 5.11 His head is as the most fine gold, his locks are bushy, and black as a raven.
busied (1)
	2 Chronicles 35.14 And afterward they made ready for themselves, and for the priests: because the priests the sons of Aaron were busied in offering of burnt offerings and the fat until night; therefore the Levites prepared for themselves, and for the priests the sons of Aaron.
busy (1)
	1 Kings 20.40 And as thy servant was busy here and there, he was gone. And the king of Israel said unto him, So shall thy judgment be; thyself hast decided it.
busybody (1)
	1 Peter 4.15 But let none of you suffer as a murderer, or as a thief, or as an evildoer, or as a busybody in other men's matters.
butlers (1)
	Genesis 40.2 And Pharaoh was wroth against two of his officers, against the chief of the butlers, and against the chief of the bakers.
butlership (1)
	Genesis 40.21 And he restored the chief butler unto his butlership again; and he gave the cup into Pharaoh's hand:
buzi (1)
	Ezekiel 1.3 The word of the LORD came expressly unto Ezekiel the priest, the son of Buzi, in the land of the Chaldeans by the river Chebar; and the hand of the LORD was there upon him.
byways (1)
	Judges 5.6 In the days of Shamgar the son of Anath, in the days of Jael, the highways were unoccupied, and the travellers walked through byways.
cab (1)
	2 Kings 6.25 And there was a great famine in Samaria: and, behold, they besieged it, until an ass's head was sold for fourscore pieces of silver, and the fourth part of a cab of dove's dung for five pieces of silver.
cabbon (1)
	Joshua 15.40 And Cabbon, and Lahmam, and Kithlish,
cabins (1)
	Jeremiah 37.16 When Jeremiah was entered into the dungeon, and into the cabins, and Jeremiah had remained there many days;
calcol (1)
	1 Chronicles 2.6 And the sons of Zerah; Zimri, and Ethan, and Heman, and Calcol, and Dara: five of them in all.
calebephratah (1)
	1 Chronicles 2.24 And after that Hezron was dead in Calebephratah, then Abiah Hezron's wife bare him Ashur the father of Tekoa.
calfs (1)
	Ezekiel 1.7 And their feet were straight feet; and the sole of their feet was like the sole of a calf's foot: and they sparkled like the colour of burnished brass.
calno (1)
	Isaiah 10.9 Is not Calno as Carchemish? is not Hamath as Arpad? is not Samaria as Damascus?
calvary (1)
	Luke 23.33 And when they were come to the place, which is called Calvary, there they crucified him, and the malefactors, one on the right hand, and the other on the left.
calved (1)
	Jeremiah 14.5 Yea, the hind also calved in the field, and forsook it, because there was no grass.
calveth (1)
	Job 21.10 Their bull gendereth, and faileth not; their cow calveth, and casteth not her calf.
camon (1)
	Judges 10.5 And Jair died, and was buried in Camon.
camped (1)
	Exodus 19.2 For they were departed from Rephidim, and were come to the desert of Sinai, and had pitched in the wilderness; and there Israel camped before the mount.
canaanitess (1)
	1 Chronicles 2.3 The sons of Judah; Er, and Onan, and Shelah: which three were born unto him of the daughter of Shua the Canaanitess. And Er, the firstborn of Judah, was evil in the sight of the LORD; and he slew him.
candace (1)
	Acts 8.27 And he arose and went: and, behold, a man of Ethiopia, an eunuch of great authority under Candace queen of the Ethiopians, who had the charge of all her treasure, and had come to Jerusalem for to worship,
candles (1)
	Zephaniah 1.12 And it shall come to pass at that time, that I will search Jerusalem with candles, and punish the men that are settled on their lees: that say in their heart, The LORD will not do good, neither will he do evil.
canker (1)
	2 Timothy 2.17 And their word will eat as doth a canker: of whom is Hymenaeus and Philetus;
cankered (1)
	James 5.3 Your gold and silver is cankered; and the rust of them shall be a witness against you, and shall eat your flesh as it were fire. Ye have heaped treasure together for the last days.
canneh (1)
	Ezekiel 27.23 Haran, and Canneh, and Eden, the merchants of Sheba, Asshur, and Chilmad, were thy merchants.
caphthorim (1)
	1 Chronicles 1.12 And Pathrusim, and Casluhim, (of whom came the Philistines,) and Caphthorim.
caphtorim (1)
	Genesis 10.14 And Pathrusim, and Casluhim, (out of whom came Philistim,) and Caphtorim.
caphtorims (1)
	Deuteronomy 2.23 And the Avims which dwelt in Hazerim, even unto Azzah, the Caphtorims, which came forth out of Caphtor, destroyed them, and dwelt in their stead.)
carbuncles (1)
	Isaiah 54.12 And I will make thy windows of agates, and thy gates of carbuncles, and all thy borders of pleasant stones.
carcas (1)
	Esther 1.10 On the seventh day, when the heart of the king was merry with wine, he commanded Mehuman, Biztha, Harbona, Bigtha, and Abagtha, Zethar, and Carcas, the seven chamberlains that served in the presence of Ahasuerus the king,
careah (1)
	2 Kings 25.23 And when all the captains of the armies, they and their men, heard that the king of Babylon had made Gedaliah governor, there came to Gedaliah to Mizpah, even Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, and Johanan the son of Careah, and Seraiah the son of Tanhumeth the Netophathite, and Jaazaniah the son of a Maachathite, they and their men.
caring (1)
	1 Samuel 9.5 And when they were come to the land of Zuph, Saul said to his servant that was with him, Come, and let us return; lest my father leave caring for the asses, and take thought for us.
carmites (1)
	Numbers 26.6 Of Hezron, the family of the Hezronites: of Carmi, the family of the Carmites.
carpus (1)
	2 Timothy 4.13 The cloke that I left at Troas with Carpus, when thou comest, bring with thee, and the books, but especially the parchments.
carriest (1)
	Psalms (prose) 90.5 Thou carriest them away as with a flood; they are as a sleep: in the morning they are like grass which groweth up.
carshena (1)
	Esther 1.14 And the next unto him was Carshena, Shethar, Admatha, Tarshish, Meres, Marsena, and Memucan, the seven princes of Persia and Media, which saw the king's face, and which sat the first in the kingdom;)
carvings (1)
	1 Kings 6.32 The two doors also were of olive tree; and he carved upon them carvings of cherubims and palm trees and open flowers, and overlaid them with gold, and spread gold upon the cherubims, and upon the palm trees.
casement (1)
	Proverbs 7.6 For at the window of my house I looked through my casement,
cases (1)
	1 Corinthians 7.15 But if the unbelieving depart, let him depart. A brother or a sister is not under bondage in such cases: but God hath called us to peace.
castaway (1)
	1 Corinthians 9.27 But I keep under my body, and bring it into subjection: lest that by any means, when I have preached to others, I myself should be a castaway.
castedst (1)
	Psalms (prose) 73.18 Surely thou didst set them in slippery places: thou castedst them down into destruction.
castor (1)
	Acts 28.11 And after three months we departed in a ship of Alexandria, which had wintered in the isle, whose sign was Castor and Pollux.
cauls (1)
	Isaiah 3.18 In that day the Lord will take away the bravery of their tinkling ornaments about their feet, and their cauls, and their round tires like the moon,
cedron (1)
	John 18.1 When Jesus had spoken these words, he went forth with his disciples over the brook Cedron, where was a garden, into the which he entered, and his disciples.
ceiling (1)
	1 Kings 6.15 And he built the walls of the house within with boards of cedar, both the floor of the house, and the walls of the ceiling: and he covered them on the inside with wood, and covered the floor of the house with planks of fir.
ceremonies (1)
	Numbers 9.3 In the fourteenth day of this month, at even, ye shall keep it in his appointed season: according to all the rites of it, and according to all the ceremonies thereof, shall ye keep it.
chafed (1)
	2 Samuel 17.8 For, said Hushai, thou knowest thy father and his men, that they be mighty men, and they be chafed in their minds, as a bear robbed of her whelps in the field: and thy father is a man of war, and will not lodge with the people.
chalcedony (1)
	Revelation 21.19 And the foundations of the wall of the city were garnished with all manner of precious stones. The first foundation was jasper; the second, sapphire; the third, a chalcedony; the fourth, an emerald;
chalcol (1)
	1 Kings 4.31 For he was wiser than all men; than Ethan the Ezrahite, and Heman, and Chalcol, and Darda, the sons of Mahol: and his fame was in all nations round about.
chaldaeans (1)
	Acts 7.4 Then came he out of the land of the Chaldaeans, and dwelt in Charran: and from thence, when his father was dead, he removed him into this land, wherein ye now dwell.
chalkstones (1)
	Isaiah 27.9 By this therefore shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged; and this is all the fruit to take away his sin; when he maketh all the stones of the altar as chalkstones that are beaten in sunder, the groves and images shall not stand up.
challengeth (1)
	Exodus 22.9 For all manner of trespass, whether it be for ox, for ass, for sheep, for raiment, or for any manner of lost thing which another challengeth to be his, the cause of both parties shall come before the judges; and whom the judges shall condemn, he shall pay double unto his neighbour.
chambering (1)
	Romans 13.13 Let us walk honestly, as in the day; not in rioting and drunkenness, not in chambering and wantonness, not in strife and envying.
chameleon (1)
	Leviticus 11.30 And the ferret, and the chameleon, and the lizard, and the snail, and the mole.
chamois (1)
	Deuteronomy 14.5 The hart, and the roebuck, and the fallow deer, and the wild goat, and the pygarg, and the wild ox, and the chamois.
champaign (1)
	Deuteronomy 11.30 Are they not on the other side Jordan, by the way where the sun goeth down, in the land of the Canaanites, which dwell in the champaign over against Gilgal, beside the plains of Moreh?
chanceth (1)
	Deuteronomy 23.10 If there be among you any man, that is not clean by reason of uncleanness that chanceth him by night, then shall he go abroad out of the camp, he shall not come within the camp:
changeable (1)
	Isaiah 3.22 The changeable suits of apparel, and the mantles, and the wimples, and the crisping pins,
changest (1)
	Job 14.20 Thou prevailest for ever against him, and he passeth: thou changest his countenance, and sendest him away.
changing (1)
	Ruth 4.7 Now this was the manner in former time in Israel concerning redeeming and concerning changing, for to confirm all things; a man plucked off his shoe, and gave it to his neighbour: and this was a testimony in Israel.
channel (1)
	Isaiah 27.12 And it shall come to pass in that day, that the LORD shall beat off from the channel of the river unto the stream of Egypt, and ye shall be gathered one by one, O ye children of Israel.
chant (1)
	Amos 6.5 That chant to the sound of the viol, and invent to themselves instruments of musick, like David;
chapel (1)
	Amos 7.13 But prophesy not again any more at Bethel: for it is the king's chapel, and it is the king's court.
chapmen (1)
	2 Chronicles 9.14 Beside that which chapmen and merchants brought. And all the kings of Arabia and governors of the country brought gold and silver to Solomon.
chapt (1)
	Jeremiah 14.4 Because the ground is chapt, for there was no rain in the earth, the plowmen were ashamed, they covered their heads.
charashim (1)
	1 Chronicles 4.14 And Meonothai begat Ophrah: and Seraiah begat Joab, the father of the valley of Charashim; for they were craftsmen.
charchemish (1)
	2 Chronicles 35.20 After all this, when Josiah had prepared the temple, Necho king of Egypt came up to fight against Charchemish by Euphrates: and Josiah went out against him.
chargedst (1)
	Exodus 19.23 And Moses said unto the LORD, The people cannot come up to mount Sinai: for thou chargedst us, saying, Set bounds about the mount, and sanctify it.
chargest (1)
	2 Samuel 3.8 Then was Abner very wroth for the words of Ishbosheth, and said, Am I a dog's head, which against Judah do shew kindness this day unto the house of Saul thy father, to his brethren, and to his friends, and have not delivered thee into the hand of David, that thou chargest me to day with a fault concerning this woman?
charitably (1)
	Romans 14.15 But if thy brother be grieved with thy meat, now walkest thou not charitably. Destroy not him with thy meat, for whom Christ died.
charmed (1)
	Jeremiah 8.17 For, behold, I will send serpents, cockatrices, among you, which will not be charmed, and they shall bite you, saith the LORD.
charmer (1)
	Deuteronomy 18.11 Or a charmer, or a consulter with familiar spirits, or a wizard, or a necromancer.
charming (1)
	Psalms (prose) 58.5 Which will not hearken to the voice of charmers, charming never so wisely.
chaseth (1)
	Proverbs 19.26 He that wasteth his father, and chaseth away his mother, is a son that causeth shame, and bringeth reproach.
chasing (1)
	1 Samuel 17.53 And the children of Israel returned from chasing after the Philistines, and they spoiled their tents.
chastenest (1)
	Psalms (prose) 94.12 Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest, O LORD, and teachest him out of thy law;
chastiseth (1)
	Psalms (prose) 94.10 He that chastiseth the heathen, shall not he correct? he that teacheth man knowledge, shall not he know?
chatter (1)
	Isaiah 38.14 Like a crane or a swallow, so did I chatter: I did mourn as a dove: mine eyes fail with looking upward: O LORD, I am oppressed; undertake for me.
check (1)
	Job 20.3 I have heard the check of my reproach, and the spirit of my understanding causeth me to answer.
checker (1)
	1 Kings 7.17 And nets of checker work, and wreaths of chain work, for the chapiters which were upon the top of the pillars; seven for the one chapiter, and seven for the other chapiter.
cheereth (1)
	Judges 9.13 And the vine said unto them, Should I leave my wine, which cheereth God and man, and go to be promoted over the trees?
cheerfully (1)
	Acts 24.10 Then Paul, after that the governor had beckoned unto him to speak, answered, Forasmuch as I know that thou hast been of many years a judge unto this nation, I do the more cheerfully answer for myself:
cheerfulness (1)
	Romans 12.8 Or he that exhorteth, on exhortation: he that giveth, let him do it with simplicity; he that ruleth, with diligence; he that sheweth mercy, with cheerfulness.
cheeses (1)
	1 Samuel 17.18 And carry these ten cheeses unto the captain of their thousand, and look how thy brethren fare, and take their pledge.
chelal (1)
	Ezra 10.30 And of the sons of Pahathmoab; Adna, and Chelal, Benaiah, Maaseiah, Mattaniah, Bezaleel, and Binnui, and Manasseh.
chelluh (1)
	Ezra 10.35 Benaiah, Bedeiah, Chelluh,
chelubai (1)
	1 Chronicles 2.9 The sons also of Hezron, that were born unto him; Jerahmeel, and Ram, and Chelubai.
chemarims (1)
	Zephaniah 1.4 I will also stretch out mine hand upon Judah, and upon all the inhabitants of Jerusalem; and I will cut off the remnant of Baal from this place, and the name of the Chemarims with the priests;
chenani (1)
	Nehemiah 9.4 Then stood up upon the stairs, of the Levites, Jeshua, and Bani, Kadmiel, Shebaniah, Bunni, Sherebiah, Bani, and Chenani, and cried with a loud voice unto the LORD their God.
chepharhaammonai (1)
	Joshua 18.24 And Chepharhaammonai, and Ophni, and Gaba; twelve cities with their villages:
cherethims (1)
	Ezekiel 25.16 Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I will stretch out mine hand upon the Philistines, and I will cut off the Cherethims, and destroy the remnant of the sea coast.
cherish (1)
	1 Kings 1.2 Wherefore his servants said unto him, Let there be sought for my lord the king a young virgin: and let her stand before the king, and let her cherish him, and let her lie in thy bosom, that my lord the king may get heat.
cherished (1)
	1 Kings 1.4 And the damsel was very fair, and cherished the king, and ministered to him: but the king knew her not.
chesalon (1)
	Joshua 15.10 And the border compassed from Baalah westward unto mount Seir, and passed along unto the side of mount Jearim, which is Chesalon, on the north side, and went down to Bethshemesh, and passed on to Timnah:
chesed (1)
	Genesis 22.22 And Chesed, and Hazo, and Pildash, and Jidlaph, and Bethuel.
chesil (1)
	Joshua 15.30 And Eltolad, and Chesil, and Hormah,
chests (1)
	Ezekiel 27.24 These were thy merchants in all sorts of things, in blue clothes, and broidered work, and in chests of rich apparel, bound with cords, and made of cedar, among thy merchandise.
chesulloth (1)
	Joshua 19.18 And their border was toward Jezreel, and Chesulloth, and Shunem,
chewed (1)
	Numbers 11.33 And while the flesh was yet between their teeth, ere it was chewed, the wrath of the LORD was kindled against the people, and the LORD smote the people with a very great plague.
chezib (1)
	Genesis 38.5 And she yet again conceived, and bare a son; and called his name Shelah: and he was at Chezib, when she bare him.
chickens (1)
	Matthew 23.37 O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the prophets, and stonest them which are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy children together, even as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, and ye would not!
chiding (1)
	Exodus 17.7 And he called the name of the place Massah, and Meribah, because of the chiding of the children of Israel, and because they tempted the LORD, saying, Is the LORD among us, or not?
chidon (1)
	1 Chronicles 13.9 And when they came unto the threshingfloor of Chidon, Uzza put forth his hand to hold the ark; for the oxen stumbled.
childbearing (1)
	1 Timothy 2.15 Notwithstanding she shall be saved in childbearing, if they continue in faith and charity and holiness with sobriety.
childish (1)
	1 Corinthians 13.11 When I was a child, I spake as a child, I understood as a child, I thought as a child: but when I became a man, I put away childish things.
chileab (1)
	2 Samuel 3.3 And his second, Chileab, of Abigail the wife of Nabal the Carmelite; and the third, Absalom the son of Maacah the daughter of Talmai king of Geshur;
chilions (1)
	Ruth 4.9 And Boaz said unto the elders, and unto all the people, Ye are witnesses this day, that I have bought all that was Elimelech's, and all that was Chilion's and Mahlon's, of the hand of Naomi.
chilmad (1)
	Ezekiel 27.23 Haran, and Canneh, and Eden, the merchants of Sheba, Asshur, and Chilmad, were thy merchants.
chimney (1)
	Hosea 13.3 Therefore they shall be as the morning cloud and as the early dew that passeth away, as the chaff that is driven with the whirlwind out of the floor, and as the smoke out of the chimney.
chios (1)
	Acts 20.15 And we sailed thence, and came the next day over against Chios; and the next day we arrived at Samos, and tarried at Trogyllium; and the next day we came to Miletus.
chislon (1)
	Numbers 34.21 Of the tribe of Benjamin, Elidad the son of Chislon.
chislothtabor (1)
	Joshua 19.12 And turned from Sarid eastward toward the sunrising unto the border of Chislothtabor, and then goeth out to Daberath, and goeth up to Japhia,
chiun (1)
	Amos 5.26 But ye have borne the tabernacle of your Moloch and Chiun your images, the star of your god, which ye made to yourselves.
chloe (1)
	1 Corinthians 1.11 For it hath been declared unto me of you, my brethren, by them which are of the house of Chloe, that there are contentions among you.
choosing (1)
	Hebrews 11.25 Choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season;
chop (1)
	Micah 3.3 Who also eat the flesh of my people, and flay their skin from off them; and they break their bones, and chop them in pieces, as for the pot, and as flesh within the caldron.
chorashan (1)
	1 Samuel 30.30 And to them which were in Hormah, and to them which were in Chorashan, and to them which were in Athach,
chozeba (1)
	1 Chronicles 4.22 And Jokim, and the men of Chozeba, and Joash, and Saraph, who had the dominion in Moab, and Jashubilehem. And these are ancient things.
christians (1)
	Acts 11.26 And when he had found him, he brought him unto Antioch. And it came to pass, that a whole year they assembled themselves with the church, and taught much people. And the disciples were called Christians first in Antioch.
chrysolyte (1)
	Revelation 21.20 The fifth, sardonyx; the sixth, sardius; the seventh, chrysolyte; the eighth, beryl; the ninth, a topaz; the tenth, a chrysoprasus; the eleventh, a jacinth; the twelfth, an amethyst.
chrysoprasus (1)
	Revelation 21.20 The fifth, sardonyx; the sixth, sardius; the seventh, chrysolyte; the eighth, beryl; the ninth, a topaz; the tenth, a chrysoprasus; the eleventh, a jacinth; the twelfth, an amethyst.
chub (1)
	Ezekiel 30.5 Ethiopia, and Libya, and Lydia, and all the mingled people, and Chub, and the men of the land that is in league, shall fall with them by the sword.
chun (1)
	1 Chronicles 18.8 Likewise from Tibhath, and from Chun, cities of Hadarezer, brought David very much brass, wherewith Solomon made the brasen sea, and the pillars, and the vessels of brass.
churlish (1)
	1 Samuel 25.3 Now the name of the man was Nabal; and the name of his wife Abigail: and she was a woman of good understanding, and of a beautiful countenance: but the man was churlish and evil in his doings; and he was of the house of Caleb.
churning (1)
	Proverbs 30.33 Surely the churning of milk bringeth forth butter, and the wringing of the nose bringeth forth blood: so the forcing of wrath bringeth forth strife.
chuza (1)
	Luke 8.3 And Joanna the wife of Chuza Herod's steward, and Susanna, and many others, which ministered unto him of their substance.
cinneroth (1)
	1 Kings 15.20 So Benhadad hearkened unto king Asa, and sent the captains of the hosts which he had against the cities of Israel, and smote Ijon, and Dan, and Abelbethmaachah, and all Cinneroth, with all the land of Naphtali.
circle (1)
	Isaiah 40.22 It is he that sitteth upon the circle of the earth, and the inhabitants thereof are as grasshoppers; that stretcheth out the heavens as a curtain, and spreadeth them out as a tent to dwell in:
circuits (1)
	Ecclesiastes 1.6 The wind goeth toward the south, and turneth about unto the north; it whirleth about continually, and the wind returneth again according to his circuits.
circumspect (1)
	Exodus 23.13 And in all things that I have said unto you be circumspect: and make no mention of the name of other gods, neither let it be heard out of thy mouth.
circumspectly (1)
	Ephesians 5.15 See then that ye walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise,
cis (1)
	Acts 13.21 And afterward they desired a king: and God gave unto them Saul the son of Cis, a man of the tribe of Benjamin, by the space of forty years.
citizens (1)
	Luke 19.14 But his citizens hated him, and sent a message after him, saying, We will not have this man to reign over us.
clamorous (1)
	Proverbs 9.13 A foolish woman is clamorous: she is simple, and knoweth nothing.
clamour (1)
	Ephesians 4.31 Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamour, and evil speaking, be put away from you, with all malice:
clappeth (1)
	Job 34.37 For he addeth rebellion unto his sin, he clappeth his hands among us, and multiplieth his words against God.
clauda (1)
	Acts 27.16 And running under a certain island which is called Clauda, we had much work to come by the boat:
claudia (1)
	2 Timothy 4.21 Do thy diligence to come before winter. Eubulus greeteth thee, and Pudens, and Linus, and Claudia, and all the brethren.
clearer (1)
	Job 11.17 And thine age shall be clearer than the noonday: thou shalt shine forth, thou shalt be as the morning.
clearness (1)
	Exodus 24.10 And they saw the God of Israel: and there was under his feet as it were a paved work of a sapphire stone, and as it were the body of heaven in his clearness.
clemency (1)
	Acts 24.4 Notwithstanding, that I be not further tedious unto thee, I pray thee that thou wouldest hear us of thy clemency a few words.
clement (1)
	Philippians 4.3 And I intreat thee also, true yokefellow, help those women which laboured with me in the gospel, with Clement also, and with other my fellowlabourers, whose names are in the book of life.
cleopas (1)
	Luke 24.18 And the one of them, whose name was Cleopas, answering said unto him, Art thou only a stranger in Jerusalem, and hast not known the things which are come to pass there in these days?
cleophas (1)
	John 19.25 Now there stood by the cross of Jesus his mother, and his mother's sister, Mary the wife of Cleophas, and Mary Magdalene.
cliff (1)
	2 Chronicles 20.16 To morrow go ye down against them: behold, they come up by the cliff of Ziz; and ye shall find them at the end of the brook, before the wilderness of Jeruel.
cliffs (1)
	Job 30.6 To dwell in the cliffs of the valleys, in caves of the earth, and in the rocks.
clift (1)
	Exodus 33.22 And it shall come to pass, while my glory passeth by, that I will put thee in a clift of the rock, and will cover thee with my hand while I pass by:
clifts (1)
	Isaiah 57.5 Enflaming yourselves with idols under every green tree, slaying the children in the valleys under the clifts of the rocks?
climbeth (1)
	John 10.1 Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that entereth not by the door into the sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, the same is a thief and a robber.
clipped (1)
	Jeremiah 48.37 For every head shall be bald, and every beard clipped: upon all the hands shall be cuttings, and upon the loins sackcloth.
closer (1)
	Proverbs 18.24 A man that hath friends must shew himself friendly: and there is a friend that sticketh closer than a brother.
closest (1)
	Jeremiah 22.15 Shalt thou reign, because thou closest thyself in cedar? did not thy father eat and drink, and do judgment and justice, and then it was well with him?
closets (1)
	Luke 12.3 Therefore whatsoever ye have spoken in darkness shall be heard in the light; and that which ye have spoken in the ear in closets shall be proclaimed upon the housetops.
clothest (1)
	Jeremiah 4.30 And when thou art spoiled, what wilt thou do? Though thou clothest thyself with crimson, though thou deckest thee with ornaments of gold, though thou rentest thy face with painting, in vain shalt thou make thyself fair; thy lovers will despise thee, they will seek thy life.
clouted (1)
	Joshua 9.5 And old shoes and clouted upon their feet, and old garments upon them; and all the bread of their provision was dry and mouldy.
cnidus (1)
	Acts 27.7 And when we had sailed slowly many days, and scarce were come over against Cnidus, the wind not suffering us, we sailed under Crete, over against Salmone;
cockatrices (1)
	Jeremiah 8.17 For, behold, I will send serpents, cockatrices, among you, which will not be charmed, and they shall bite you, saith the LORD.
cockcrowing (1)
	Mark 13.35 Watch ye therefore: for ye know not when the master of the house cometh, at even, or at midnight, or at the cockcrowing, or in the morning:
cockle (1)
	Job 31.40 Let thistles grow instead of wheat, and cockle instead of barley. The words of Job are ended.
coffin (1)
	Genesis 50.26 So Joseph died, being an hundred and ten years old: and they embalmed him, and he was put in a coffin in Egypt.
cogitations (1)
	Daniel 7.28 Hitherto is the end of the matter. As for me Daniel, my cogitations much troubled me, and my countenance changed in me: but I kept the matter in my heart.
collar (1)
	Job 30.18 By the great force of my disease is my garment changed: it bindeth me about as the collar of my coat.
collars (1)
	Judges 8.26 And the weight of the golden earrings that he requested was a thousand and seven hundred shekels of gold; beside ornaments, and collars, and purple raiment that was on the kings of Midian, and beside the chains that were about their camels' necks.
collops (1)
	Job 15.27 Because he covereth his face with his fatness, and maketh collops of fat on his flanks.
colony (1)
	Acts 16.12 And from thence to Philippi, which is the chief city of that part of Macedonia, and a colony: and we were in that city abiding certain days.
colosse (1)
	Colossians 1.2  To the saints and faithful brethren in Christ which are at Colosse: Grace be unto you, and peace, from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
coloured (1)
	Revelation 17.3 So he carried me away in the spirit into the wilderness: and I saw a woman sit upon a scarlet coloured beast, full of names of blasphemy, having seven heads and ten horns.
comers (1)
	Hebrews 10.1 For the law having a shadow of good things to come, and not the very image of the things, can never with those sacrifices which they offered year by year continually make the comers thereunto perfect.
comfortedst (1)
	Isaiah 12.1 And in that day thou shalt say, O LORD, I will praise thee: though thou wast angry with me, thine anger is turned away, and thou comfortedst me.
comfortless (1)
	John 14.18 I will not leave you comfortless: I will come to you.
comings (1)
	Ezekiel 43.11 And if they be ashamed of all that they have done, shew them the form of the house, and the fashion thereof, and the goings out thereof, and the comings in thereof, and all the forms thereof, and all the ordinances thereof, and all the forms thereof, and all the laws thereof: and write it in their sight, that they may keep the whole form thereof, and all the ordinances thereof, and do them.
commander (1)
	Isaiah 55.4 Behold, I have given him for a witness to the people, a leader and commander to the people.
commending (1)
	2 Corinthians 4.2 But have renounced the hidden things of dishonesty, not walking in craftiness, nor handling the word of God deceitfully; but by manifestation of the truth commending ourselves to every man's conscience in the sight of God.
commission (1)
	Acts 26.12 Whereupon as I went to Damascus with authority and commission from the chief priests,
commissions (1)
	Ezra 8.36 And they delivered the king's commissions unto the king's lieutenants, and to the governors on this side the river: and they furthered the people, and the house of God.
committest (1)
	Hosea 5.3 I know Ephraim, and Israel is not hid from me: for now, O Ephraim, thou committest whoredom, and Israel is defiled.
commodious (1)
	Acts 27.12 And because the haven was not commodious to winter in, the more part advised to depart thence also, if by any means they might attain to Phenice, and there to winter; which is an haven of Crete, and lieth toward the south west and north west.
commonwealth (1)
	Ephesians 2.12 That at that time ye were without Christ, being aliens from the commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the covenants of promise, having no hope, and without God in the world:
commotion (1)
	Jeremiah 10.22 Behold, the noise of the bruit is come, and a great commotion out of the north country, to make the cities of Judah desolate, and a den of dragons.
commotions (1)
	Luke 21.9 But when ye shall hear of wars and commotions, be not terrified: for these things must first come to pass; but the end is not by and by.
compact (1)
	Psalms (prose) 122.3 Jerusalem is builded as a city that is compact together:
compacted (1)
	Ephesians 4.16 From whom the whole body fitly joined together and compacted by that which every joint supplieth, according to the effectual working in the measure of every part, maketh increase of the body unto the edifying of itself in love.
companied (1)
	Acts 1.21 Wherefore of these men which have companied with us all the time that the Lord Jesus went in and out among us,
comparable (1)
	Lamentations 4.2 The precious sons of Zion, comparable to fine gold, how are they esteemed as earthen pitchers, the work of the hands of the potter!
compassest (1)
	Psalms (prose) 139.3 Thou compassest my path and my lying down, and art acquainted with all my ways.
compellest (1)
	Galatians 2.14 But when I saw that they walked not uprightly according to the truth of the gospel, I said unto Peter before them all, If thou, being a Jew, livest after the manner of Gentiles, and not as do the Jews, why compellest thou the Gentiles to live as do the Jews?
complainers (1)
	Jude 1.16 These are murmurers, complainers, walking after their own lusts; and their mouth speaketh great swelling words, having men's persons in admiration because of advantage.
complaining (1)
	Psalms (prose) 144.14 That our oxen may be strong to labour; that there be no breaking in, nor going out; that there be no complaining in our streets.
compound (1)
	Exodus 30.25 And thou shalt make it an oil of holy ointment, an ointment compound after the art of the apothecary: it shall be an holy anointing oil.
compoundeth (1)
	Exodus 30.33 Whosoever compoundeth any like it, or whosoever putteth any of it upon a stranger, shall even be cut off from his people.
conaniah (1)
	2 Chronicles 35.9 Conaniah also, and Shemaiah and Nethaneel, his brethren, and Hashabiah and Jeiel and Jozabad, chief of the Levites, gave unto the Levites for passover offerings five thousand small cattle, and five hundred oxen.
conceiving (1)
	Isaiah 59.13 In transgressing and lying against the LORD, and departing away from our God, speaking oppression and revolt, conceiving and uttering from the heart words of falsehood.
concision (1)
	Philippians 3.2 Beware of dogs, beware of evil workers, beware of the concision.
conclude (1)
	Romans 3.28 Therefore we conclude that a man is justified by faith without the deeds of the law.
conclusion (1)
	Ecclesiastes 12.13 Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter: Fear God, and keep his commandments: for this is the whole duty of man.
concord (1)
	2 Corinthians 6.15 And what concord hath Christ with Belial? or what part hath he that believeth with an infidel?
condemnest (1)
	Romans 2.1 Therefore thou art inexcusable, O man, whosoever thou art that judgest: for wherein thou judgest another, thou condemnest thyself; for thou that judgest doest the same things.
condescend (1)
	Romans 12.16 Be of the same mind one toward another. Mind not high things, but condescend to men of low estate. Be not wise in your own conceits.
condition (1)
	1 Samuel 11.2 And Nahash the Ammonite answered them, On this condition will I make a covenant with you, that I may thrust out all your right eyes, and lay it for a reproach upon all Israel.
conditions (1)
	Luke 14.32 Or else, while the other is yet a great way off, he sendeth an ambassage, and desireth conditions of peace.
confection (1)
	Exodus 30.35 And thou shalt make it a perfume, a confection after the art of the apothecary, tempered together, pure and holy:
confectionaries (1)
	1 Samuel 8.13 And he will take your daughters to be confectionaries, and to be cooks, and to be bakers.
conference (1)
	Galatians 2.6 But of these who seemed to be somewhat, (whatsoever they were, it maketh no matter to me: God accepteth no man's person:) for they who seemed to be somewhat in conference added nothing to me:
confidences (1)
	Jeremiah 2.37 Yea, thou shalt go forth from him, and thine hands upon thine head: for the LORD hath rejected thy confidences, and thou shalt not prosper in them.
confidently (1)
	Luke 22.59 And about the space of one hour after another confidently affirmed, saying, Of a truth this fellow also was with him: for he is a Galilaean.
confiscation (1)
	Ezra 7.26 And whosoever will not do the law of thy God, and the law of the king, let judgment be executed speedily upon him, whether it be unto death, or to banishment, or to confiscation of goods, or to imprisonment.
conformable (1)
	Philippians 3.10 That I may know him, and the power of his resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings, being made conformable unto his death;
congealed (1)
	Exodus 15.8 And with the blast of thy nostrils the waters were gathered together, the floods stood upright as an heap, and the depths were congealed in the heart of the sea.
congratulate (1)
	1 Chronicles 18.10 He sent Hadoram his son to king David, to enquire of his welfare, and to congratulate him, because he had fought against Hadarezer, and smitten him; (for Hadarezer had war with Tou;) and with him all manner of vessels of gold and silver and brass.
conquer (1)
	Revelation 6.2 And I saw, and behold a white horse: and he that sat on him had a bow; and a crown was given unto him: and he went forth conquering, and to conquer.
conquering (1)
	Revelation 6.2 And I saw, and behold a white horse: and he that sat on him had a bow; and a crown was given unto him: and he went forth conquering, and to conquer.
conquerors (1)
	Romans 8.37 Nay, in all these things we are more than conquerors through him that loved us.
consciences (1)
	2 Corinthians 5.11 Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord, we persuade men; but we are made manifest unto God; and I trust also are made manifest in your consciences.
consentedst (1)
	Psalms (prose) 50.18 When thou sawest a thief, then thou consentedst with him, and hast been partaker with adulterers.
consist (1)
	Colossians 1.17  And he is before all things, and by him all things consist.
consisteth (1)
	Luke 12.15 And he said unto them, Take heed, and beware of covetousness: for a man's life consisteth not in the abundance of the things which he possesseth.
consorted (1)
	Acts 17.4 And some of them believed, and consorted with Paul and Silas; and of the devout Greeks a great multitude, and of the chief women not a few.
conspirators (1)
	2 Samuel 15.31 And one told David, saying, Ahithophel is among the conspirators with Absalom. And David said, O LORD, I pray thee, turn the counsel of Ahithophel into foolishness.
constant (1)
	1 Chronicles 28.7 Moreover I will establish his kingdom for ever, if he be constant to do my commandments and my judgments, as at this day.
constellations (1)
	Isaiah 13.10 For the stars of heaven and the constellations thereof shall not give their light: the sun shall be darkened in his going forth, and the moon shall not cause her light to shine.
constrain (1)
	Galatians 6.12 As many as desire to make a fair shew in the flesh, they constrain you to be circumcised; only lest they should suffer persecution for the cross of Christ.
constraint (1)
	1 Peter 5.2 Feed the flock of God which is among you, taking the oversight thereof, not by constraint, but willingly; not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind;
consult (1)
	Psalms (prose) 62.4 They only consult to cast him down from his excellency: they delight in lies: they bless with their mouth, but they curse inwardly. Selah.
consultation (1)
	Mark 15.1 And straightway in the morning the chief priests held a consultation with the elders and scribes and the whole council, and bound Jesus, and carried him away, and delivered him to Pilate.
consulter (1)
	Deuteronomy 18.11 Or a charmer, or a consulter with familiar spirits, or a wizard, or a necromancer.
consulteth (1)
	Luke 14.31 Or what king, going to make war against another king, sitteth not down first, and consulteth whether he be able with ten thousand to meet him that cometh against him with twenty thousand?
consummation (1)
	Daniel 9.27 And he shall confirm the covenant with many for one week: and in the midst of the week he shall cause the sacrifice and the oblation to cease, and for the overspreading of abominations he shall make it desolate, even until the consummation, and that determined shall be poured upon the desolate.
containeth (1)
	Ezekiel 23.32 Thus saith the Lord GOD; Thou shalt drink of thy sister's cup deep and large: thou shalt be laughed to scorn and had in derision; it containeth much.
containing (1)
	John 2.6 And there were set there six waterpots of stone, after the manner of the purifying of the Jews, containing two or three firkins apiece.
contemneth (1)
	Ezekiel 21.10 It is sharpened to make a sore slaughter; it is furbished that it may glitter: should we then make mirth? it contemneth the rod of my son, as every tree.
contemptuously (1)
	Psalms (prose) 31.18 Let the lying lips be put to silence; which speak grievous things proudly and contemptuously against the righteous.
contendest (1)
	Job 10.2 I will say unto God, Do not condemn me; shew me wherefore thou contendest with me.
contending (1)
	Jude 1.9 Yet Michael the archangel, when contending with the devil he disputed about the body of Moses, durst not bring against him a railing accusation, but said, The Lord rebuke thee.
contentment (1)
	1 Timothy 6.6 But godliness with contentment is great gain.
contradicting (1)
	Acts 13.45 But when the Jews saw the multitudes, they were filled with envy, and spake against those things which were spoken by Paul, contradicting and blaspheming.
contribution (1)
	Romans 15.26 For it hath pleased them of Macedonia and Achaia to make a certain contribution for the poor saints which are at Jerusalem.
controversies (1)
	2 Chronicles 19.8 Moreover in Jerusalem did Jehoshaphat set of the Levites, and of the priests, and of the chief of the fathers of Israel, for the judgment of the LORD, and for controversies, when they returned to Jerusalem.
conveniently (1)
	Mark 14.11 And when they heard it, they were glad, and promised to give him money. And he sought how he might conveniently betray him.
conversion (1)
	Acts 15.3 And being brought on their way by the church, they passed through Phenice and Samaria, declaring the conversion of the Gentiles: and they caused great joy unto all the brethren.
converteth (1)
	James 5.20 Let him know, that he which converteth the sinner from the error of his way shall save a soul from death, and shall hide a multitude of sins.
converting (1)
	Psalms (prose) 19.7 The law of the LORD is perfect, converting the soul: the testimony of the LORD is sure, making wise the simple.
converts (1)
	Isaiah 1.27 Zion shall be redeemed with judgment, and her converts with righteousness.
conveyed (1)
	John 5.13 And he that was healed wist not who it was: for Jesus had conveyed himself away, a multitude being in that place.
convicted (1)
	John 8.9 And they which heard it, being convicted by their own conscience, went out one by one, beginning at the eldest, even unto the last: and Jesus was left alone, and the woman standing in the midst.
convinceth (1)
	John 8.46 Which of you convinceth me of sin? And if I say the truth, why do ye not believe me?
cooks (1)
	1 Samuel 8.13 And he will take your daughters to be confectionaries, and to be cooks, and to be bakers.
coos (1)
	Acts 21.1 And it came to pass, that after we were gotten from them, and had launched, we came with a straight course unto Coos, and the day following unto Rhodes, and from thence unto Patara:
copied (1)
	Proverbs 25.1 These are also proverbs of Solomon, which the men of Hezekiah king of Judah copied out.
coping (1)
	1 Kings 7.9 All these were of costly stones, according to the measures of hewed stones, sawed with saws, within and without, even from the foundation unto the coping, and so on the outside toward the great court.
copper (1)
	Ezra 8.27 Also twenty basons of gold, of a thousand drams; and two vessels of fine copper, precious as gold.
coppersmith (1)
	2 Timothy 4.14 Alexander the coppersmith did me much evil: the Lord reward him according to his works:
cor (1)
	Ezekiel 45.14 Concerning the ordinance of oil, the bath of oil, ye shall offer the tenth part of a bath out of the cor, which is an homer of ten baths; for ten baths are an homer:
corban (1)
	Mark 7.11 But ye say, If a man shall say to his father or mother, It is Corban, that is to say, a gift, by whatsoever thou mightest be profited by me; he shall be free.
core (1)
	Jude 1.11 Woe unto them! for they have gone in the way of Cain, and ran greedily after the error of Balaam for reward, and perished in the gainsaying of Core.
cornfloor (1)
	Hosea 9.1 Rejoice not, O Israel, for joy, as other people: for thou hast gone a whoring from thy God, thou hast loved a reward upon every cornfloor.
corpse (1)
	Mark 6.29 And when his disciples heard of it, they came and took up his corpse, and laid it in a tomb.
corrupteth (1)
	Luke 12.33 Sell that ye have, and give alms; provide yourselves bags which wax not old, a treasure in the heavens that faileth not, where no thief approacheth, neither moth corrupteth.
corrupting (1)
	Daniel 11.17 He shall also set his face to enter with the strength of his whole kingdom, and upright ones with him; thus shall he do: and he shall give him the daughter of women, corrupting her: but she shall not stand on his side, neither be for him.
cosam (1)
	Luke 3.28 Which was the son of Melchi, which was the son of Addi, which was the son of Cosam, which was the son of Elmodam, which was the son of Er,
costliness (1)
	Revelation 18.19 And they cast dust on their heads, and cried, weeping and wailing, saying, Alas, alas that great city, wherein were made rich all that had ships in the sea by reason of her costliness! for in one hour is she made desolate.
cotes (1)
	2 Chronicles 32.28 Storehouses also for the increase of corn, and wine, and oil; and stalls for all manner of beasts, and cotes for flocks.
cottages (1)
	Zephaniah 2.6 And the sea coast shall be dwellings and cottages for shepherds, and folds for flocks.
coucheth (1)
	Deuteronomy 33.13 And of Joseph he said, Blessed of the LORD be his land, for the precious things of heaven, for the dew, and for the deep that coucheth beneath,
coulter (1)
	1 Samuel 13.20 But all the Israelites went down to the Philistines, to sharpen every man his share, and his coulter, and his axe, and his mattock.
coulters (1)
	1 Samuel 13.21 Yet they had a file for the mattocks, and for the coulters, and for the forks, and for the axes, and to sharpen the goads.
counsellorsleth (1)
	Psalms (prose) 119.24 Thy testimonies also are my delight and my counsellors.leth.
countervail (1)
	Esther 7.4 For we are sold, I and my people, to be destroyed, to be slain, and to perish. But if we had been sold for bondmen and bondwomen, I had held my tongue, although the enemy could not countervail the king's damage.
counting (1)
	Ecclesiastes 7.27 Behold, this have I found, saith the preacher, counting one by one, to find out the account:
couplings (1)
	2 Chronicles 34.11 Even to the artificers and builders gave they it, to buy hewn stone, and timber for couplings, and to floor the houses which the kings of Judah had destroyed.
courageously (1)
	2 Chronicles 19.11 And, behold, Amariah the chief priest is over you in all matters of the LORD; and Zebadiah the son of Ishmael, the ruler of the house of Judah, for all the king's matters: also the Levites shall be officers before you. Deal courageously, and the LORD shall be with the good.
courteous (1)
	1 Peter 3.8 Finally, be ye all of one mind, having compassion one of another, love as brethren, be pitiful, be courteous:
cousin (1)
	Luke 1.36 And, behold, thy cousin Elisabeth, she hath also conceived a son in her old age: and this is the sixth month with her, who was called barren.
cousins (1)
	Luke 1.58 And her neighbours and her cousins heard how the Lord had shewed great mercy upon her; and they rejoiced with her.
covenantbreakers (1)
	Romans 1.31 Without understanding, covenantbreakers, without natural affection, implacable, unmerciful:
cows (1)
	Ezekiel 4.15 Then he said unto me, Lo, I have given thee cow's dung for man's dung, and thou shalt prepare thy bread therewith.
coz (1)
	1 Chronicles 4.8 And Coz begat Anub, and Zobebah, and the families of Aharhel the son of Harum.
crackling (1)
	Ecclesiastes 7.6 For as the crackling of thorns under a pot, so is the laughter of the fool: this also is vanity.
cracknels (1)
	1 Kings 14.3 And take with thee ten loaves, and cracknels, and a cruse of honey, and go to him: he shall tell thee what shall become of the child.
crag (1)
	Job 39.28 She dwelleth and abideth on the rock, upon the crag of the rock, and the strong place.
crashing (1)
	Zephaniah 1.10 And it shall come to pass in that day, saith the LORD, that there shall be the noise of a cry from the fish gate, and an howling from the second, and a great crashing from the hills.
craved (1)
	Mark 15.43 Joseph of Arimathaea, an honourable counsellor, which also waited for the kingdom of God, came, and went in boldly unto Pilate, and craved the body of Jesus.
craveth (1)
	Proverbs 16.26 He that laboureth laboureth for himself; for his mouth craveth it of him.
createth (1)
	Amos 4.13 For, lo, he that formeth the mountains, and createth the wind, and declareth unto man what is his thought, that maketh the morning darkness, and treadeth upon the high places of the earth, The LORD, The God of hosts, is his name.
creditors (1)
	Isaiah 50.1 Thus saith the LORD, Where is the bill of your mother's divorcement, whom I have put away? or which of my creditors is it to whom I have sold you?  Behold, for your iniquities have ye sold yourselves, and for your transgressions is your mother put away.
creek (1)
	Acts 27.39 And when it was day, they knew not the land: but they discovered a certain creek with a shore, into the which they were minded, if it were possible, to thrust in the ship.
crept (1)
	Jude 1.4 For there are certain men crept in unawares, who were before of old ordained to this condemnation, ungodly men, turning the grace of our God into lasciviousness, and denying the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ.
crescens (1)
	2 Timothy 4.10 For Demas hath forsaken me, having loved this present world, and is departed unto Thessalonica; Crescens to Galatia, Titus unto Dalmatia.
cretes (1)
	Acts 2.11 Cretes and Arabians, we do hear them speak in our tongues the wonderful works of God.
cretians (1)
	Titus 1.12 One of themselves, even a prophet of their own, said, The Cretians are alway liars, evil beasts, slow bellies.
cries (1)
	James 5.4 Behold, the hire of the labourers who have reaped down your fields, which is of you kept back by fraud, crieth: and the cries of them which have reaped are entered into the ears of the Lord of sabaoth.
cripple (1)
	Acts 14.8 And there sat a certain man at Lystra, impotent in his feet, being a cripple from his mother's womb, who never had walked:
crisping (1)
	Isaiah 3.22 The changeable suits of apparel, and the mantles, and the wimples, and the crisping pins,
crookbackt (1)
	Leviticus 21.20 Or crookbackt, or a dwarf, or that hath a blemish in his eye, or be scurvy, or scabbed, or hath his stones broken;
cropped (1)
	Ezekiel 17.4 He cropped off the top of his young twigs, and carried it into a land of traffick; he set it in a city of merchants.
crossway (1)
	Obadiah 1.14 Neither shouldest thou have stood in the crossway, to cut off those of his that did escape; neither shouldest thou have delivered up those of his that did remain in the day of distress.
crouch (1)
	1 Samuel 2.36 And it shall come to pass, that every one that is left in thine house shall come and crouch to him for a piece of silver and a morsel of bread, and shall say, Put me, I pray thee, into one of the priests' offices, that I may eat a piece of bread.
croucheth (1)
	Psalms (prose) 10.10 He croucheth, and humbleth himself, that the poor may fall by his strong ones.
crownedst (1)
	Hebrews 2.7 Thou madest him a little lower than the angels; thou crownedst him with glory and honour, and didst set him over the works of thy hands:
crownest (1)
	Psalms (prose) 65.11 Thou crownest the year with thy goodness; and thy paths drop fatness.
crowneth (1)
	Psalms (prose) 103.4 Who redeemeth thy life from destruction; who crowneth thee with lovingkindness and tender mercies;
crowning (1)
	Isaiah 23.8 Who hath taken this counsel against Tyre, the crowning city, whose merchants are princes, whose traffickers are the honourable of the earth?
cruelly (1)
	Ezekiel 18.18 As for his father, because he cruelly oppressed, spoiled his brother by violence, and did that which is not good among his people, lo, even he shall die in his iniquity.
cumbered (1)
	Luke 10.40 But Martha was cumbered about much serving, and came to him, and said, Lord, dost thou not care that my sister hath left me to serve alone?  bid her therefore that she help me.
cumbereth (1)
	Luke 13.7 Then said he unto the dresser of his vineyard, Behold, these three years I come seeking fruit on this fig tree, and find none: cut it down; why cumbereth it the ground?
cumbrance (1)
	Deuteronomy 1.12 How can I myself alone bear your cumbrance, and your burden, and your strife?
cumi (1)
	Mark 5.41 And he took the damsel by the hand, and said unto her, Talitha cumi; which is, being interpreted, Damsel, I say unto thee, arise.
cunningly (1)
	2 Peter 1.16 For we have not followed cunningly devised fables, when we made known unto you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but were eyewitnesses of his majesty.
cupbearer (1)
	Nehemiah 1.11 O LORD, I beseech thee, let now thine ear be attentive to the prayer of thy servant, and to the prayer of thy servants, who desire to fear thy name: and prosper, I pray thee, thy servant this day, and grant him mercy in the sight of this man. For I was the king's cupbearer.
curdled (1)
	Job 10.10 Hast thou not poured me out as milk, and curdled me like cheese?
cures (1)
	Luke 13.32 And he said unto them, Go ye, and tell that fox, Behold, I cast out devils, and I do cures to day and to morrow, and the third day I shall be perfected.
curiously (1)
	Psalms (prose) 139.15 My substance was not hid from thee, when I was made in secret, and curiously wrought in the lowest parts of the earth.
current (1)
	Genesis 23.16 And Abraham hearkened unto Ephron; and Abraham weighed to Ephron the silver, which he had named in the audience of the sons of Heth, four hundred shekels of silver, current money with the merchant.
cursest (1)
	Numbers 22.6 Come now therefore, I pray thee, curse me this people; for they are too mighty for me: peradventure I shall prevail, that we may smite them, and that I may drive them out of the land: for I wot that he whom thou blessest is blessed, and he whom thou cursest is cursed.
cursings (1)
	Joshua 8.34 And afterward he read all the words of the law, the blessings and cursings, according to all that is written in the book of the law.
cushan (1)
	Habakkuk 3.7 I saw the tents of Cushan in affliction: and the curtains of the land of Midian did tremble.
cuth (1)
	2 Kings 17.30 And the men of Babylon made Succothbenoth, and the men of Cuth made Nergal, and the men of Hamath made Ashima,
cuthah (1)
	2 Kings 17.24 And the king of Assyria brought men from Babylon, and from Cuthah, and from Ava, and from Hamath, and from Sepharvaim, and placed them in the cities of Samaria instead of the children of Israel: and they possessed Samaria, and dwelt in the cities thereof.
cuttest (1)
	Deuteronomy 24.19 When thou cuttest down thine harvest in thy field, and hast forgot a sheaf in the field, thou shalt not go again to fetch it: it shall be for the stranger, for the fatherless, and for the widow: that the LORD thy God may bless thee in all the work of thine hands.
cymbal (1)
	1 Corinthians 13.1 Though I speak with the tongues of men and of angels, and have not charity, I am become as sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal.
cypress (1)
	Isaiah 44.14 He heweth him down cedars, and taketh the cypress and the oak, which he strengtheneth for himself among the trees of the forest: he planteth an ash, and the rain doth nourish it.
cyrenians (1)
	Acts 6.9 Then there arose certain of the synagogue, which is called the synagogue of the Libertines, and Cyrenians, and Alexandrians, and of them of Cilicia and of Asia, disputing with Stephen.
cyrenius (1)
	Luke 2.2 (And this taxing was first made when Cyrenius was governor of Syria.)
dabareh (1)
	Joshua 21.28 And out of the tribe of Issachar, Kishon with her suburbs, Dabareh with her suburbs,
dabbasheth (1)
	Joshua 19.11 And their border went up toward the sea, and Maralah, and reached to Dabbasheth, and reached to the river that is before Jokneam;
dagons (1)
	1 Samuel 5.5 Therefore neither the priests of Dagon, nor any that come into Dagon's house, tread on the threshold of Dagon in Ashdod unto this day.
dalaiah (1)
	1 Chronicles 3.24 And the sons of Elioenai were, Hodaiah, and Eliashib, and Pelaiah, and Akkub, and Johanan, and Dalaiah, and Anani, seven.
dalmanutha (1)
	Mark 8.10 And straightway he entered into a ship with his disciples, and came into the parts of Dalmanutha.
dalmatia (1)
	2 Timothy 4.10 For Demas hath forsaken me, having loved this present world, and is departed unto Thessalonica; Crescens to Galatia, Titus unto Dalmatia.
dalphon (1)
	Esther 9.7 And Parshandatha, and Dalphon, and Aspatha,
damaris (1)
	Acts 17.34 Howbeit certain men clave unto him, and believed: among the which was Dionysius the Areopagite, and a woman named Damaris, and others with them.
damascenes (1)
	2 Corinthians 11.32 In Damascus the governor under Aretas the king kept the city of the Damascenes with a garrison, desirous to apprehend me:
damnable (1)
	2 Peter 2.1 But there were false prophets also among the people, even as there shall be false teachers among you, who privily shall bring in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves swift destruction.
dandled (1)
	Isaiah 66.12 For thus saith the LORD, Behold, I will extend peace to her like a river, and the glory of the Gentiles like a flowing stream: then shall ye suck, ye shall be borne upon her sides, and be dandled upon her knees.
dangerous (1)
	Acts 27.9 Now when much time was spent, and when sailing was now dangerous, because the fast was now already past, Paul admonished them,
danjaan (1)
	2 Samuel 24.6 Then they came to Gilead, and to the land of Tahtimhodshi; and they came to Danjaan, and about to Zidon,
dannah (1)
	Joshua 15.49 And Dannah, and Kirjathsannah, which is Debir,
dara (1)
	1 Chronicles 2.6 And the sons of Zerah; Zimri, and Ethan, and Heman, and Calcol, and Dara: five of them in all.
darda (1)
	1 Kings 4.31 For he was wiser than all men; than Ethan the Ezrahite, and Heman, and Chalcol, and Darda, the sons of Mahol: and his fame was in all nations round about.
darken (1)
	Amos 8.9 And it shall come to pass in that day, saith the Lord GOD, that I will cause the sun to go down at noon, and I will darken the earth in the clear day:
darkeneth (1)
	Job 38.2 Who is this that darkeneth counsel by words without knowledge?
darkish (1)
	Leviticus 13.39 Then the priest shall look: and, behold, if the bright spots in the skin of their flesh be darkish white; it is a freckled spot that groweth in the skin; he is clean.
darkly (1)
	1 Corinthians 13.12 For now we see through a glass, darkly; but then face to face: now I know in part; but then shall I know even as also I am known.
daub (1)
	Ezekiel 13.11 Say unto them which daub it with untempered morter, that it shall fall: there shall be an overflowing shower; and ye, O great hailstones, shall fall; and a stormy wind shall rend it.
daubing (1)
	Ezekiel 13.12 Lo, when the wall is fallen, shall it not be said unto you, Where is the daubing wherewith ye have daubed it?
daysman (1)
	Job 9.33 Neither is there any daysman betwixt us, that might lay his hand upon us both.
deadness (1)
	Romans 4.19 And being not weak in faith, he considered not his own body now dead, when he was about an hundred years old, neither yet the deadness of Sarah's womb:
dealer (1)
	Isaiah 21.2 A grievous vision is declared unto me; the treacherous dealer dealeth treacherously, and the spoiler spoileth. Go up, O Elam: besiege, O Media; all the sighing thereof have I made to cease.
dealing (1)
	Psalms (prose) 7.16 His mischief shall return upon his own head, and his violent dealing shall come down upon his own pate.
debase (1)
	Isaiah 57.9 And thou wentest to the king with ointment, and didst increase thy perfumes, and didst send thy messengers far off, and didst debase thyself even unto hell.
debates (1)
	2 Corinthians 12.20 For I fear, lest, when I come, I shall not find you such as I would, and that I shall be found unto you such as ye would not: lest there be debates, envyings, wraths, strifes, backbitings, whisperings, swellings, tumults:
decay (1)
	Leviticus 25.35 And if thy brother be waxen poor, and fallen in decay with thee; then thou shalt relieve him: yea, though he be a stranger, or a sojourner; that he may live with thee.
deceivableness (1)
	2 Thessalonians 2.10 And with all deceivableness of unrighteousness in them that perish; because they received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved.
deceivings (1)
	2 Peter 2.13 And shall receive the reward of unrighteousness, as they that count it pleasure to riot in the day time. Spots they are and blemishes, sporting themselves with their own deceivings while they feast with you;
decently (1)
	1 Corinthians 14.40 Let all things be done decently and in order.
decided (1)
	1 Kings 20.40 And as thy servant was busy here and there, he was gone. And the king of Israel said unto him, So shall thy judgment be; thyself hast decided it.
deckest (1)
	Jeremiah 4.30 And when thou art spoiled, what wilt thou do? Though thou clothest thyself with crimson, though thou deckest thee with ornaments of gold, though thou rentest thy face with painting, in vain shalt thou make thyself fair; thy lovers will despise thee, they will seek thy life.
decketh (1)
	Isaiah 61.10 I will greatly rejoice in the LORD, my soul shall be joyful in my God; for he hath clothed me with the garments of salvation, he hath covered me with the robe of righteousness, as a bridegroom decketh himself with ornaments, and as a bride adorneth herself with her jewels.
decreased (1)
	Genesis 8.5 And the waters decreased continually until the tenth month: in the tenth month, on the first day of the month, were the tops of the mountains seen.
dedanim (1)
	Isaiah 21.13 The burden upon Arabia. In the forest in Arabia shall ye lodge, O ye travelling companies of Dedanim.
deemed (1)
	Acts 27.27 But when the fourteenth night was come, as we were driven up and down in Adria, about midnight the shipmen deemed that they drew near to some country;
deepness (1)
	Matthew 13.5 Some fell upon stony places, where they had not much earth: and forthwith they sprung up, because they had no deepness of earth:
deer (1)
	Deuteronomy 14.5 The hart, and the roebuck, and the fallow deer, and the wild goat, and the pygarg, and the wild ox, and the chamois.
defamed (1)
	1 Corinthians 4.13 Being defamed, we intreat: we are made as the filth of the world, and are the offscouring of all things unto this day.
defaming (1)
	Jeremiah 20.10 For I heard the defaming of many, fear on every side. Report, say they, and we will report it. All my familiars watched for my halting, saying, Peradventure he will be enticed, and we shall prevail against him, and we shall take our revenge on him.
defendest (1)
	Psalms (prose) 5.11 But let all those that put their trust in thee rejoice: let them ever shout for joy, because thou defendest them: let them also that love thy name be joyful in thee.
defending (1)
	Isaiah 31.5 As birds flying, so will the LORD of hosts defend Jerusalem; defending also he will deliver it; and passing over he will preserve it.
deferreth (1)
	Proverbs 19.11 The discretion of a man deferreth his anger; and it is his glory to pass over a transgression.
defiledst (1)
	Genesis 49.4 Unstable as water, thou shalt not excel; because thou wentest up to thy father's bed; then defiledst thou it: he went up to my couch.
degenerate (1)
	Jeremiah 2.21 Yet I had planted thee a noble vine, wholly a right seed: how then art thou turned into the degenerate plant of a strange vine unto me?
dehavites (1)
	Ezra 4.9 Then wrote Rehum the chancellor, and Shimshai the scribe, and the rest of their companions; the Dinaites, the Apharsathchites, the Tarpelites, the Apharsites, the Archevites, the Babylonians, the Susanchites, the Dehavites, and the Elamites,
dekar (1)
	1 Kings 4.9 The son of Dekar, in Makaz, and in Shaalbim, and Bethshemesh, and Elonbethhanan:
delectable (1)
	Isaiah 44.9 They that make a graven image are all of them vanity; and their delectable things shall not profit; and they are their own witnesses; they see not, nor know; that they may be ashamed.
delicacies (1)
	Revelation 18.3 For all nations have drunk of the wine of the wrath of her fornication, and the kings of the earth have committed fornication with her, and the merchants of the earth are waxed rich through the abundance of her delicacies.
delicateness (1)
	Deuteronomy 28.56 The tender and delicate woman among you, which would not adventure to set the sole of her foot upon the ground for delicateness and tenderness, her eye shall be evil toward the husband of her bosom, and toward her son, and toward her daughter,
delicates (1)
	Jeremiah 51.34 Nebuchadrezzar the king of Babylon hath devoured me, he hath crushed me, he hath made me an empty vessel, he hath swallowed me up like a dragon, he hath filled his belly with my delicates, he hath cast me out.
delightest (1)
	Psalms (prose) 51.16 For thou desirest not sacrifice; else would I give it: thou delightest not in burnt offering.
delightsome (1)
	Malachi 3.12 And all nations shall call you blessed: for ye shall be a delightsome land, saith the LORD of hosts.
deliverances (1)
	Psalms (prose) 44.4 Thou art my King, O God: command deliverances for Jacob.
delivery (1)
	Isaiah 26.17 Like as a woman with child, that draweth near the time of her delivery, is in pain, and crieth out in her pangs; so have we been in thy sight, O LORD.
delusion (1)
	2 Thessalonians 2.11 And for this cause God shall send them strong delusion, that they should believe a lie:
delusions (1)
	Isaiah 66.4 I also will choose their delusions, and will bring their fears upon them; because when I called, none did answer; when I spake, they did not hear: but they did evil before mine eyes, and chose that in which I delighted not.
demonstration (1)
	1 Corinthians 2.4 And my speech and my preaching was not with enticing words of man's wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit and of power:
denounce (1)
	Deuteronomy 30.18 I denounce unto you this day, that ye shall surely perish, and that ye shall not prolong your days upon the land, whither thou passest over Jordan to go to possess it.
deposed (1)
	Daniel 5.20 But when his heart was lifted up, and his mind hardened in pride, he was deposed from his kingly throne, and they took his glory from him:
deputed (1)
	2 Samuel 15.3 And Absalom said unto him, See, thy matters are good and right; but there is no man deputed of the king to hear thee.
deride (1)
	Habakkuk 1.10 And they shall scoff at the kings, and the princes shall be a scorn unto them: they shall deride every strong hold; for they shall heap dust, and take it.
descendeth (1)
	James 3.15 This wisdom descendeth not from above, but is earthly, sensual, devilish.
description (1)
	Joshua 18.6 Ye shall therefore describe the land into seven parts, and bring the description hither to me, that I may cast lots for you here before the LORD our God.
descry (1)
	Judges 1.23 And the house of Joseph sent to descry Bethel. (Now the name of the city before was Luz.)
deserve (1)
	Ezra 9.13 And after all that is come upon us for our evil deeds, and for our great trespass, seeing that thou our God hast punished us less than our iniquities deserve, and hast given us such deliverance as this;
deserveth (1)
	Job 11.6 And that he would shew thee the secrets of wisdom, that they are double to that which is! Know therefore that God exacteth of thee less than thine iniquity deserveth.
deserving (1)
	Judges 9.16 Now therefore, if ye have done truly and sincerely, in that ye have made Abimelech king, and if ye have dealt well with Jerubbaal and his house, and have done unto him according to the deserving of his hands;
despaired (1)
	2 Corinthians 1.8 For we would not, brethren, have you ignorant of our trouble which came to us in Asia, that we were pressed out of measure, above strength, insomuch that we despaired even of life:
desperately (1)
	Jeremiah 17.9 The heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked: who can know it?
despisest (1)
	Romans 2.4 Or despisest thou the riches of his goodness and forbearance and longsuffering; not knowing that the goodness of God leadeth thee to repentance?
despising (1)
	Hebrews 12.2 Looking unto Jesus the author and finisher of our faith; who for the joy that was set before him endured the cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the right hand of the throne of God.
detained (1)
	1 Samuel 21.7 Now a certain man of the servants of Saul was there that day, detained before the LORD; and his name was Doeg, an Edomite, the chiefest of the herdmen that belonged to Saul.
determinate (1)
	Acts 2.23 Him, being delivered by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God, ye have taken, and by wicked hands have crucified and slain:
determination (1)
	Zephaniah 3.8 Therefore wait ye upon me, saith the LORD, until the day that I rise up to the prey: for my determination is to gather the nations, that I may assemble the kingdoms, to pour upon them mine indignation, even all my fierce anger: for all the earth shall be devoured with the fire of my jealousy.
determine (1)
	Exodus 21.22 If men strive, and hurt a woman with child, so that her fruit depart from her, and yet no mischief follow: he shall be surely punished, according as the woman's husband will lay upon him; and he shall pay as the judges determine.
detest (1)
	Deuteronomy 7.26 Neither shalt thou bring an abomination into thine house, lest thou be a cursed thing like it: but thou shalt utterly detest it, and thou shalt utterly abhor it; for it is a cursed thing.
devilish (1)
	James 3.15 This wisdom descendeth not from above, but is earthly, sensual, devilish.
devote (1)
	Leviticus 27.28 Notwithstanding no devoted thing, that a man shall devote unto the LORD of all that he hath, both of man and beast, and of the field of his possession, shall be sold or redeemed: every devoted thing is most holy unto the LORD.
devotions (1)
	Acts 17.23 For as I passed by, and beheld your devotions, I found an altar with this inscription, TO THE UNKNOWN GOD. Whom therefore ye ignorantly worship, him declare I unto you.
devourer (1)
	Malachi 3.11 And I will rebuke the devourer for your sakes, and he shall not destroy the fruits of your ground; neither shall your vine cast her fruit before the time in the field, saith the LORD of hosts.
devourest (1)
	Ezekiel 36.13 Thus saith the Lord GOD; Because they say unto you, Thou land devourest up men, and hast bereaved thy nations:
diblaim (1)
	Hosea 1.3 So he went and took Gomer the daughter of Diblaim; which conceived, and bare him a son.
diblath (1)
	Ezekiel 6.14 So will I stretch out my hand upon them, and make the land desolate, yea, more desolate than the wilderness toward Diblath, in all their habitations: and they shall know that I am the LORD.
dibri (1)
	Leviticus 24.11 And the Israelitish woman's son blasphemed the name of the Lord, and cursed. And they brought him unto Moses: (and his mother's name was Shelomith, the daughter of Dibri, of the tribe of Dan:)
diddest (1)
	Acts 7.28 Wilt thou kill me, as thou diddest the Egyptian yesterday?
diest (1)
	Ruth 1.17 Where thou diest, will I die, and there will I be buried: the LORD do so to me, and more also, if ought but death part thee and me.
differ (1)
	1 Corinthians 4.7 For who maketh thee to differ from another? and what hast thou that thou didst not receive? now if thou didst receive it, why dost thou glory, as if thou hadst not received it?
differences (1)
	1 Corinthians 12.5 And there are differences of administrations, but the same Lord.
differing (1)
	Romans 12.6 Having then gifts differing according to the grace that is given to us, whether prophecy, let us prophesy according to the proportion of faith;
diggedst (1)
	Deuteronomy 6.11 And houses full of all good things, which thou filledst not, and wells digged, which thou diggedst not, vineyards and olive trees, which thou plantedst not; when thou shalt have eaten and be full;
dilean (1)
	Joshua 15.38 And Dilean, and Mizpeh, and Joktheel,
diminishing (1)
	Romans 11.12 Now if the fall of them be the riches of the world, and the diminishing of them the riches of the Gentiles; how much more their fulness?
dimnah (1)
	Joshua 21.35 Dimnah with her suburbs, Nahalal with her suburbs; four cities.
dimonah (1)
	Joshua 15.22 And Kinah, and Dimonah, and Adadah,
dinahs (1)
	Genesis 34.25 And it came to pass on the third day, when they were sore, that two of the sons of Jacob, Simeon and Levi, Dinah's brethren, took each man his sword, and came upon the city boldly, and slew all the males.
dinaites (1)
	Ezra 4.9 Then wrote Rehum the chancellor, and Shimshai the scribe, and the rest of their companions; the Dinaites, the Apharsathchites, the Tarpelites, the Apharsites, the Archevites, the Babylonians, the Susanchites, the Dehavites, and the Elamites,
dined (1)
	John 21.15 So when they had dined, Jesus saith to Simon Peter, Simon, son of Jonas, lovest thou me more than these? He saith unto him, Yea, Lord; thou knowest that I love thee. He saith unto him, Feed my lambs.
dionysius (1)
	Acts 17.34 Howbeit certain men clave unto him, and believed: among the which was Dionysius the Areopagite, and a woman named Damaris, and others with them.
diotrephes (1)
	3 John 1.9 I wrote unto the church: but Diotrephes, who loveth to have the preeminence among them, receiveth us not.
direction (1)
	Numbers 21.18 The princes digged the well, the nobles of the people digged it, by the direction of the lawgiver, with their staves. And from the wilderness they went to Mattanah:
disallow (1)
	Numbers 30.5 But if her father disallow her in the day that he heareth; not any of her vows, or of her bonds wherewith she hath bound her soul, shall stand: and the LORD shall forgive her, because her father disallowed her.
disannulled (1)
	Isaiah 28.18 And your covenant with death shall be disannulled, and your agreement with hell shall not stand; when the overflowing scourge shall pass through, then ye shall be trodden down by it.
disannulleth (1)
	Galatians 3.15 Brethren, I speak after the manner of men; Though it be but a man's covenant, yet if it be confirmed, no man disannulleth, or addeth thereto.
disannulling (1)
	Hebrews 7.18 For there is verily a disannulling of the commandment going before for the weakness and unprofitableness thereof.
disappoint (1)
	Psalms (prose) 17.13 Arise, O LORD, disappoint him, cast him down: deliver my soul from the wicked, which is thy sword:
disappointed (1)
	Proverbs 15.22 Without counsel purposes are disappointed: but in the multitude of counsellors they are established.
disappointeth (1)
	Job 5.12 He disappointeth the devices of the crafty, so that their hands cannot perform their enterprise.
discerner (1)
	Hebrews 4.12 For the word of God is quick, and powerful, and sharper than any twoedged sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of the joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart.
discerneth (1)
	Ecclesiastes 8.5 Whoso keepeth the commandment shall feel no evil thing: and a wise man's heart discerneth both time and judgment.
discharge (1)
	Ecclesiastes 8.8 There is no man that hath power over the spirit to retain the spirit; neither hath he power in the day of death: and there is no discharge in that war; neither shall wickedness deliver those that are given to it.
discharged (1)
	1 Kings 5.9 My servants shall bring them down from Lebanon unto the sea: and I will convey them by sea in floats unto the place that thou shalt appoint me, and will cause them to be discharged there, and thou shalt receive them: and thou shalt accomplish my desire, in giving food for my household.
discipline (1)
	Job 36.10 He openeth also their ear to discipline, and commandeth that they return from iniquity.
disclose (1)
	Isaiah 26.21 For, behold, the LORD cometh out of his place to punish the inhabitants of the earth for their iniquity: the earth also shall disclose her blood, and shall no more cover her slain.
discomfiture (1)
	1 Samuel 14.20 And Saul and all the people that were with him assembled themselves, and they came to the battle: and, behold, every man's sword was against his fellow, and there was a very great discomfiture.
discontented (1)
	1 Samuel 22.2 And every one that was in distress, and every one that was in debt, and every one that was discontented, gathered themselves unto him; and he became a captain over them: and there were with him about four hundred men.
discontinue (1)
	Jeremiah 17.4 And thou, even thyself, shalt discontinue from thine heritage that I gave thee; and I will cause thee to serve thine enemies in the land which thou knowest not: for ye have kindled a fire in mine anger, which shall burn for ever.
discourage (1)
	Numbers 32.7 And wherefore discourage ye the heart of the children of Israel from going over into the land which the LORD hath given them?
discovering (1)
	Habakkuk 3.13 Thou wentest forth for the salvation of thy people, even for salvation with thine anointed; thou woundedst the head out of the house of the wicked, by discovering the foundation unto the neck. Selah.
discreetly (1)
	Mark 12.34 And when Jesus saw that he answered discreetly, he said unto him, Thou art not far from the kingdom of God. And no man after that durst ask him any question.
disfigure (1)
	Matthew 6.16 Moreover when ye fast, be not, as the hypocrites, of a sad countenance: for they disfigure their faces, that they may appear unto men to fast. Verily I say unto you, They have their reward.
disgrace (1)
	Jeremiah 14.21 Do not abhor us, for thy name's sake, do not disgrace the throne of thy glory: remember, break not thy covenant with us.
disguiseth (1)
	Job 24.15 The eye also of the adulterer waiteth for the twilight, saying, No eye shall see me: and disguiseth his face.
dishonesty (1)
	2 Corinthians 4.2 But have renounced the hidden things of dishonesty, not walking in craftiness, nor handling the word of God deceitfully; but by manifestation of the truth commending ourselves to every man's conscience in the sight of God.
dishonourest (1)
	Romans 2.23 Thou that makest thy boast of the law, through breaking the law dishonourest thou God?
disinherit (1)
	Numbers 14.12 I will smite them with the pestilence, and disinherit them, and will make of thee a greater nation and mightier than they.
dismaying (1)
	Jeremiah 48.39 They shall howl, saying, How is it broken down! how hath Moab turned the back with shame! so shall Moab be a derision and a dismaying to all them about him.
disobeyed (1)
	1 Kings 13.21 And he cried unto the man of God that came from Judah, saying, Thus saith the LORD, Forasmuch as thou hast disobeyed the mouth of the LORD, and hast not kept the commandment which the LORD thy God commanded thee,
dispatch (1)
	Ezekiel 23.47 And the company shall stone them with stones, and dispatch them with their swords; they shall slay their sons and their daughters, and burn up their houses with fire.
dispersions (1)
	Jeremiah 25.34 Howl, ye shepherds, and cry; and wallow yourselves in the ashes, ye principal of the flock: for the days of your slaughter and of your dispersions are accomplished; and ye shall fall like a pleasant vessel.
displayed (1)
	Psalms (prose) 60.4 Thou hast given a banner to them that fear thee, that it may be displayed because of the truth. Selah.
disposing (1)
	Proverbs 16.33 The lot is cast into the lap; but the whole disposing thereof is of the LORD.
disposition (1)
	Acts 7.53 Who have received the law by the disposition of angels, and have not kept it.
disputation (1)
	Acts 15.2 When therefore Paul and Barnabas had no small dissension and disputation with them, they determined that Paul and Barnabas, and certain other of them, should go up to Jerusalem unto the apostles and elders about this question.
disputations (1)
	Romans 14.1 Him that is weak in the faith receive ye, but not to doubtful disputations.
dispute (1)
	Job 23.7 There the righteous might dispute with him; so should I be delivered for ever from my judge.
disputer (1)
	1 Corinthians 1.20 Where is the wise? where is the scribe? where is the disputer of this world? hath not God made foolish the wisdom of this world?
disquiet (1)
	Jeremiah 50.34 Their Redeemer is strong; the LORD of hosts is his name: he shall throughly plead their cause, that he may give rest to the land, and disquiet the inhabitants of Babylon.
disquietness (1)
	Psalms (prose) 38.8 I am feeble and sore broken: I have roared by reason of the disquietness of my heart.
dissemblers (1)
	Psalms (prose) 26.4 I have not sat with vain persons, neither will I go in with dissemblers.
dissembleth (1)
	Proverbs 26.24 He that hateth dissembleth with his lips, and layeth up deceit within him;
dissolve (1)
	Daniel 5.16 And I have heard of thee, that thou canst make interpretations, and dissolve doubts: now if thou canst read the writing, and make known to me the interpretation thereof, thou shalt be clothed with scarlet, and have a chain of gold about thy neck, and shalt be the third ruler in the kingdom.
dissolvest (1)
	Job 30.22 Thou liftest me up to the wind; thou causest me to ride upon it, and dissolvest my substance.
dissolving (1)
	Daniel 5.12 Forasmuch as an excellent spirit, and knowledge, and understanding, interpreting of dreams, and shewing of hard sentences, and dissolving of doubts, were found in the same Daniel, whom the king named Belteshazzar: now let Daniel be called, and he will shew the interpretation.
distaff (1)
	Proverbs 31.19 She layeth her hands to the spindle, and her hands hold the distaff.
distant (1)
	Exodus 36.22 One board had two tenons, equally distant one from another: thus did he make for all the boards of the tabernacle.
distinction (1)
	1 Corinthians 14.7 And even things without life giving sound, whether pipe or harp, except they give a distinction in the sounds, how shall it be known what is piped or harped?
distinctly (1)
	Nehemiah 8.8 So they read in the book in the law of God distinctly, and gave the sense, and caused them to understand the reading.
distracted (1)
	Psalms (prose) 88.15 I am afflicted and ready to die from my youth up: while I suffer thy terrors I am distracted.
distraction (1)
	1 Corinthians 7.35 And this I speak for your own profit; not that I may cast a snare upon you, but for that which is comely, and that ye may attend upon the Lord without distraction.
distributeth (1)
	Job 21.17 How oft is the candle of the wicked put out! and how oft cometh their destruction upon them! God distributeth sorrows in his anger.
distributing (1)
	Romans 12.13 Distributing to the necessity of saints; given to hospitality.
ditches (1)
	2 Kings 3.16 And he said, Thus saith the LORD, Make this valley full of ditches.
divider (1)
	Luke 12.14 And he said unto him, Man, who made me a judge or a divider over you?
divinations (1)
	Ezekiel 13.23 Therefore ye shall see no more vanity, nor divine divinations: for I will deliver my people out of your hand: and ye shall know that I am the LORD.
divineth (1)
	Genesis 44.5 Is not this it in which my lord drinketh, and whereby indeed he divineth? ye have done evil in so doing.
divining (1)
	Ezekiel 22.28 And her prophets have daubed them with untempered morter, seeing vanity, and divining lies unto them, saying, Thus saith the Lord GOD, when the LORD hath not spoken.
divorce (1)
	Jeremiah 3.8 And I saw, when for all the causes whereby backsliding Israel committed adultery I had put her away, and given her a bill of divorce; yet her treacherous sister Judah feared not, but went and played the harlot also.
dizahab (1)
	Deuteronomy 1.1 These be the words which Moses spake unto all Israel on this side Jordan in the wilderness, in the plain over against the Red sea, between Paran, and Tophel, and Laban, and Hazeroth, and Dizahab.
doctor (1)
	Acts 5.34 Then stood there up one in the council, a Pharisee, named Gamaliel, a doctor of the law, had in reputation among all the people, and commanded to put the apostles forth a little space;
dodai (1)
	1 Chronicles 27.4 And over the course of the second month was Dodai an Ahohite, and of his course was Mikloth also the ruler: in his course likewise were twenty and four thousand.
dodavah (1)
	2 Chronicles 20.37 Then Eliezer the son of Dodavah of Mareshah prophesied against Jehoshaphat, saying, Because thou hast joined thyself with Ahaziah, the LORD hath broken thy works. And the ships were broken, that they were not able to go to Tarshish.
doorkeeper (1)
	Psalms (prose) 84.10 For a day in thy courts is better than a thousand. I had rather be a doorkeeper in the house of my God, than to dwell in the tents of wickedness.
dote (1)
	Jeremiah 50.36 A sword is upon the liars; and they shall dote: a sword is upon her mighty men; and they shall be dismayed.
doting (1)
	1 Timothy 6.4 He is proud, knowing nothing, but doting about questions and strifes of words, whereof cometh envy, strife, railings, evil surmisings,
doubletongued (1)
	1 Timothy 3.8 Likewise must the deacons be grave, not doubletongued, not given to much wine, not greedy of filthy lucre;
doubteth (1)
	Romans 14.23 And he that doubteth is damned if he eat, because he eateth not of faith: for whatsoever is not of faith is sin.
downsitting (1)
	Psalms (prose) 139.2 Thou knowest my downsitting and mine uprising, thou understandest my thought afar off.
dragging (1)
	John 21.8 And the other disciples came in a little ship; (for they were not far from land, but as it were two hundred cubits,) dragging the net with fishes.
drawer (1)
	Deuteronomy 29.11 Your little ones, your wives, and thy stranger that is in thy camp, from the hewer of thy wood unto the drawer of thy water:
dresser (1)
	Luke 13.7 Then said he unto the dresser of his vineyard, Behold, these three years I come seeking fruit on this fig tree, and find none: cut it down; why cumbereth it the ground?
dressers (1)
	2 Chronicles 26.10 Also he built towers in the desert, and digged many wells: for he had much cattle, both in the low country, and in the plains: husbandmen also, and vine dressers in the mountains, and in Carmel: for he loved husbandry.
dresseth (1)
	Exodus 30.7 And Aaron shall burn thereon sweet incense every morning: when he dresseth the lamps, he shall burn incense upon it.
drewest (1)
	Lamentations 3.57 Thou drewest near in the day that I called upon thee: thou saidst, Fear not.
driedst (1)
	Psalms (prose) 74.15 Thou didst cleave the fountain and the flood: thou driedst up mighty rivers.
drinkers (1)
	Joel 1.5 Awake, ye drunkards, and weep; and howl, all ye drinkers of wine, because of the new wine; for it is cut off from your mouth.
drinks (1)
	Hebrews 9.10 Which stood only in meats and drinks, and divers washings, and carnal ordinances, imposed on them until the time of reformation.
dromedary (1)
	Jeremiah 2.23 How canst thou say, I am not polluted, I have not gone after Baalim?  see thy way in the valley, know what thou hast done: thou art a swift dromedary traversing her ways;
droppeth (1)
	Ecclesiastes 10.18 By much slothfulness the building decayeth; and through idleness of the hands the house droppeth through.
dropsy (1)
	Luke 14.2 And, behold, there was a certain man before him which had the dropsy.
droves (1)
	Genesis 32.19 And so commanded he the second, and the third, and all that followed the droves, saying, On this manner shall ye speak unto Esau, when ye find him.
drowsiness (1)
	Proverbs 23.21 For the drunkard and the glutton shall come to poverty: and drowsiness shall clothe a man with rags.
drusilla (1)
	Acts 24.24 And after certain days, when Felix came with his wife Drusilla, which was a Jewess, he sent for Paul, and heard him concerning the faith in Christ.
dryshod (1)
	Isaiah 11.15 And the LORD shall utterly destroy the tongue of the Egyptian sea; and with his mighty wind shall he shake his hand over the river, and shall smite it in the seven streams, and make men go over dryshod.
dues (1)
	Romans 13.7 Render therefore to all their dues: tribute to whom tribute is due; custom to whom custom; fear to whom fear; honour to whom honour.
dunghills (1)
	Lamentations 4.5 They that did feed delicately are desolate in the streets: they that were brought up in scarlet embrace dunghills.
dura (1)
	Daniel 3.1 Nebuchadnezzar the king made an image of gold, whose height was threescore cubits, and the breadth thereof six cubits: he set it up in the plain of Dura, in the province of Babylon.
dureth (1)
	Matthew 13.21 Yet hath he not root in himself, but dureth for a while: for when tribulation or persecution ariseth because of the word, by and by he is offended.
duties (1)
	Ezekiel 18.11 And that doeth not any of those duties, but even hath eaten upon the mountains, and defiled his neighbour's wife,
dwarf (1)
	Leviticus 21.20 Or crookbackt, or a dwarf, or that hath a blemish in his eye, or be scurvy, or scabbed, or hath his stones broken;
eared (1)
	Deuteronomy 21.4 And the elders of that city shall bring down the heifer unto a rough valley, which is neither eared nor sown, and shall strike off the heifer's neck there in the valley:
easter (1)
	Acts 12.4 And when he had apprehended him, he put him in prison, and delivered him to four quaternions of soldiers to keep him; intending after Easter to bring him forth to the people.
eaters (1)
	Proverbs 23.20 Be not among winebibbers; among riotous eaters of flesh:
ebony (1)
	Ezekiel 27.15 The men of Dedan were thy merchants; many isles were the merchandise of thine hand: they brought thee for a present horns of ivory and ebony.
ed (1)
	Joshua 22.34 And the children of Reuben and the children of Gad called the altar Ed: for it shall be a witness between us that the LORD is God.
edar (1)
	Genesis 35.21 And Israel journeyed, and spread his tent beyond the tower of Edar.
effected (1)
	2 Chronicles 7.11 Thus Solomon finished the house of the LORD, and the king's house: and all that came into Solomon's heart to make in the house of the LORD, and in his own house, he prosperously effected.
effeminate (1)
	1 Corinthians 6.9 Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God?  Be not deceived: neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with mankind,
eglaim (1)
	Isaiah 15.8 For the cry is gone round about the borders of Moab; the howling thereof unto Eglaim, and the howling thereof unto Beerelim.
ehi (1)
	Genesis 46.21 And the sons of Benjamin were Belah, and Becher, and Ashbel, Gera, and Naaman, Ehi, and Rosh, Muppim, and Huppim, and Ard.
eightieth (1)
	1 Kings 6.1 And it came to pass in the four hundred and eightieth year after the children of Israel were come out of the land of Egypt, in the fourth year of Solomon's reign over Israel, in the month Zif, which is the second month, that he began to build the house of the LORD.
eker (1)
	1 Chronicles 2.27 And the sons of Ram the firstborn of Jerahmeel were, Maaz, and Jamin, and Eker.
eladah (1)
	1 Chronicles 7.20 And the sons of Ephraim; Shuthelah, and Bered his son, and Tahath his son, and Eladah his son, and Tahath his son,
elbethel (1)
	Genesis 35.7 And he built there an altar, and called the place Elbethel: because there God appeared unto him, when he fled from the face of his brother.
elead (1)
	1 Chronicles 7.21 And Zabad his son, and Shuthelah his son, and Ezer, and Elead, whom the men of Gath that were born in that land slew, because they came down to take away their cattle.
elected (1)
	1 Peter 5.13 The church that is at Babylon, elected together with you, saluteth you; and so doth Marcus my son.
eleloheisrael (1)
	Genesis 33.20 And he erected there an altar, and called it EleloheIsrael.
eleph (1)
	Joshua 18.28 And Zelah, Eleph, and Jebusi, which is Jerusalem, Gibeath, and Kirjath; fourteen cities with their villages. This is the inheritance of the children of Benjamin according to their families.
eliabs (1)
	1 Samuel 17.28 And Eliab his eldest brother heard when he spake unto the men; and Eliab's anger was kindled against David, and he said, Why camest thou down hither? and with whom hast thou left those few sheep in the wilderness? I know thy pride, and the naughtiness of thine heart; for thou art come down that thou mightest see the battle.
eliadah (1)
	1 Kings 11.23 And God stirred him up another adversary, Rezon the son of Eliadah, which fled from his lord Hadadezer king of Zobah:
elidad (1)
	Numbers 34.21 Of the tribe of Benjamin, Elidad the son of Chislon.
elienai (1)
	1 Chronicles 8.20 And Elienai, and Zilthai, and Eliel,
elihoenai (1)
	Ezra 8.4 Of the sons of Pahathmoab; Elihoenai the son of Zerahiah, and with him two hundred males.
elihoreph (1)
	1 Kings 4.3 Elihoreph and Ahiah, the sons of Shisha, scribes; Jehoshaphat the son of Ahilud, the recorder.
elika (1)
	2 Samuel 23.25 Shammah the Harodite, Elika the Harodite,
eliphal (1)
	1 Chronicles 11.35 Ahiam the son of Sacar the Hararite, Eliphal the son of Ur,
elis (1)
	1 Samuel 3.14 And therefore I have sworn unto the house of Eli, that the iniquity of Eli's house shall not be purged with sacrifice nor offering for ever.
elisabeths (1)
	Luke 1.57 Now Elisabeth's full time came that she should be delivered; and she brought forth a son.
eliseus (1)
	Luke 4.27 And many lepers were in Israel in the time of Eliseus the prophet; and none of them was cleansed, saving Naaman the Syrian.
elishaphat (1)
	2 Chronicles 23.1 And in the seventh year Jehoiada strengthened himself, and took the captains of hundreds, Azariah the son of Jeroham, and Ishmael the son of Jehohanan, and Azariah the son of Obed, and Maaseiah the son of Adaiah, and Elishaphat the son of Zichri, into covenant with him.
elisheba (1)
	Exodus 6.23 And Aaron took him Elisheba, daughter of Amminadab, sister of Naashon, to wife; and she bare him Nadab, and Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar.
elkoshite (1)
	Nahum 1.1 The burden of Nineveh. The book of the vision of Nahum the Elkoshite.
elmodam (1)
	Luke 3.28 Which was the son of Melchi, which was the son of Addi, which was the son of Cosam, which was the son of Elmodam, which was the son of Er,
elms (1)
	Hosea 4.13 They sacrifice upon the tops of the mountains, and burn incense upon the hills, under oaks and poplars and elms, because the shadow thereof is good: therefore your daughters shall commit whoredom, and your spouses shall commit adultery.
elnaam (1)
	1 Chronicles 11.46 Eliel the Mahavite, and Jeribai, and Joshaviah, the sons of Elnaam, and Ithmah the Moabite,
elonbethhanan (1)
	1 Kings 4.9 The son of Dekar, in Makaz, and in Shaalbim, and Bethshemesh, and Elonbethhanan:
elonites (1)
	Numbers 26.26 Of the sons of Zebulun after their families: of Sered, the family of the Sardites: of Elon, the family of the Elonites: of Jahleel, the family of the Jahleelites.
elpalet (1)
	1 Chronicles 14.5 And Ibhar, and Elishua, and Elpalet,
elparan (1)
	Genesis 14.6 And the Horites in their mount Seir, unto Elparan, which is by the wilderness.
eltekon (1)
	Joshua 15.59 And Maarath, and Bethanoth, and Eltekon; six cities with their villages:
elul (1)
	Nehemiah 6.15 So the wall was finished in the twenty and fifth day of the month Elul, in fifty and two days.
eluzai (1)
	1 Chronicles 12.5 Eluzai, and Jerimoth, and Bealiah, and Shemariah, and Shephatiah the Haruphite,
elymas (1)
	Acts 13.8 But Elymas the sorcerer (for so is his name by interpretation) withstood them, seeking to turn away the deputy from the faith.
embalm (1)
	Genesis 50.2 And Joseph commanded his servants the physicians to embalm his father: and the physicians embalmed Israel.
emboldened (1)
	1 Corinthians 8.10 For if any man see thee which hast knowledge sit at meat in the idol's temple, shall not the conscience of him which is weak be emboldened to eat those things which are offered to idols;
emboldeneth (1)
	Job 16.3 Shall vain words have an end? or what emboldeneth thee that thou answerest?
embroider (1)
	Exodus 28.39 And thou shalt embroider the coat of fine linen, and thou shalt make the mitre of fine linen, and thou shalt make the girdle of needlework.
emeralds (1)
	Ezekiel 27.16 Syria was thy merchant by reason of the multitude of the wares of thy making: they occupied in thy fairs with emeralds, purple, and broidered work, and fine linen, and coral, and agate.
emins (1)
	Genesis 14.5 And in the fourteenth year came Chedorlaomer, and the kings that were with him, and smote the Rephaims in Ashteroth Karnaim, and the Zuzims in Ham, and the Emins in Shaveh Kiriathaim,
emmanuel (1)
	Matthew 1.23 Behold, a virgin shall be with child, and shall bring forth a son, and they shall call his name Emmanuel, which being interpreted is, God with us.
emmaus (1)
	Luke 24.13 And, behold, two of them went that same day to a village called Emmaus, which was from Jerusalem about threescore furlongs.
emmor (1)
	Acts 7.16 And were carried over into Sychem, and laid in the sepulchre that Abraham bought for a sum of money of the sons of Emmor the father of Sychem.
empire (1)
	Esther 1.20 And when the king's decree which he shall make shall be published throughout all his empire, (for it is great,) all the wives shall give to their husbands honour, both to great and small.
employ (1)
	Deuteronomy 20.19 When thou shalt besiege a city a long time, in making war against it to take it, thou shalt not destroy the trees thereof by forcing an axe against them: for thou mayest eat of them, and thou shalt not cut them down (for the tree of the field is man's life) to employ them in the siege:
employment (1)
	Ezekiel 39.14 And they shall sever out men of continual employment, passing through the land to bury with the passengers those that remain upon the face of the earth, to cleanse it: after the end of seven months shall they search.
emptiers (1)
	Nahum 2.2 For the LORD hath turned away the excellency of Jacob, as the excellency of Israel: for the emptiers have emptied them out, and marred their vine branches.
emptiness (1)
	Isaiah 34.11 But the cormorant and the bittern shall possess it; the owl also and the raven shall dwell in it: and he shall stretch out upon it the line of confusion, and the stones of emptiness.
emulation (1)
	Romans 11.14 If by any means I may provoke to emulation them which are my flesh, and might save some of them.
emulations (1)
	Galatians 5.20 Idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, variance, emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies,
enabled (1)
	1 Timothy 1.12 And I thank Christ Jesus our Lord, who hath enabled me, for that he counted me faithful, putting me into the ministry;
enam (1)
	Joshua 15.34 And Zanoah, and Engannim, Tappuah, and Enam,
encamping (1)
	Exodus 14.9 But the Egyptians pursued after them, all the horses and chariots of Pharaoh, and his horsemen, and his army, and overtook them encamping by the sea, beside Pihahiroth, before Baalzephon.
enchanter (1)
	Deuteronomy 18.10 There shall not be found among you any one that maketh his son or his daughter to pass through the fire, or that useth divination, or an observer of times, or an enchanter, or a witch.
enchanters (1)
	Jeremiah 27.9 Therefore hearken not ye to your prophets, nor to your diviners, nor to your dreamers, nor to your enchanters, nor to your sorcerers, which speak unto you, saying, Ye shall not serve the king of Babylon:
encountered (1)
	Acts 17.18 Then certain philosophers of the Epicureans, and of the Stoicks, encountered him. And some said, What will this babbler say? other some, He seemeth to be a setter forth of strange gods: because he preached unto them Jesus, and the resurrection.
endamage (1)
	Ezra 4.13 Be it known now unto the king, that, if this city be builded, and the walls set up again, then will they not pay toll, tribute, and custom, and so thou shalt endamage the revenue of the kings.
endanger (1)
	Daniel 1.10 And the prince of the eunuchs said unto Daniel, I fear my lord the king, who hath appointed your meat and your drink: for why should he see your faces worse liking than the children which are of your sort? then shall ye make me endanger my head to the king.
endangered (1)
	Ecclesiastes 10.9 Whoso removeth stones shall be hurt therewith; and he that cleaveth wood shall be endangered thereby.
endeavour (1)
	2 Peter 1.15 Moreover I will endeavour that ye may be able after my decease to have these things always in remembrance.
endeavouring (1)
	Ephesians 4.3 Endeavouring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace.
endeavours (1)
	Psalms (prose) 28.4 Give them according to their deeds, and according to the wickedness of their endeavours: give them after the work of their hands; render to them their desert.
endeth (1)
	Isaiah 24.8 The mirth of tabrets ceaseth, the noise of them that rejoice endeth, the joy of the harp ceaseth.
ending (1)
	Revelation 1.8 I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending, saith the Lord, which is, and which was, and which is to come, the Almighty.
endow (1)
	Exodus 22.16 And if a man entice a maid that is not betrothed, and lie with her, he shall surely endow her to be his wife.
eneglaim (1)
	Ezekiel 47.10 And it shall come to pass, that the fishers shall stand upon it from Engedi even unto Eneglaim; they shall be a place to spread forth nets; their fish shall be according to their kinds, as the fish of the great sea, exceeding many.
enflaming (1)
	Isaiah 57.5 Enflaming yourselves with idols under every green tree, slaying the children in the valleys under the clifts of the rocks?
engaged (1)
	Jeremiah 30.21 And their nobles shall be of themselves, and their governor shall proceed from the midst of them; and I will cause him to draw near, and he shall approach unto me: for who is this that engaged his heart to approach unto me? saith the LORD.
engrafted (1)
	James 1.21 Wherefore lay apart all filthiness and superfluity of naughtiness, and receive with meekness the engrafted word, which is able to save your souls.
engraven (1)
	2 Corinthians 3.7 But if the ministration of death, written and engraven in stones, was glorious, so that the children of Israel could not stedfastly behold the face of Moses for the glory of his countenance; which glory was to be done away:
enhaddah (1)
	Joshua 19.21 And Remeth, and Engannim, and Enhaddah, and Bethpazzez;
enhakkore (1)
	Judges 15.19 But God clave an hollow place that was in the jaw, and there came water thereout; and when he had drunk, his spirit came again, and he revived: wherefore he called the name thereof Enhakkore, which is in Lehi unto this day.
enhazor (1)
	Joshua 19.37 And Kedesh, and Edrei, and Enhazor,
enjoin (1)
	Philemon 1.8 Wherefore, though I might be much bold in Christ to enjoin thee that which is convenient,
enjoyed (1)
	2 Chronicles 36.21 To fulfil the word of the LORD by the mouth of Jeremiah, until the land had enjoyed her sabbaths: for as long as she lay desolate she kept sabbath, to fulfil threescore and ten years.
enlargement (1)
	Esther 4.14 For if thou altogether holdest thy peace at this time, then shall there enlargement and deliverance arise to the Jews from another place; but thou and thy father's house shall be destroyed: and who knoweth whether thou art come to the kingdom for such a time as this?
enlarging (1)
	Ezekiel 41.7 And there was an enlarging, and a winding about still upward to the side chambers: for the winding about of the house went still upward round about the house: therefore the breadth of the house was still upward, and so increased from the lowest chamber to the highest by the midst.
enlighten (1)
	Psalms (prose) 18.28 For thou wilt light my candle: the LORD my God will enlighten my darkness.
enlightening (1)
	Psalms (prose) 19.8 The statutes of the LORD are right, rejoicing the heart: the commandment of the LORD is pure, enlightening the eyes.
enmishpat (1)
	Genesis 14.7 And they returned, and came to Enmishpat, which is Kadesh, and smote all the country of the Amalekites, and also the Amorites, that dwelt in Hazezontamar.
enosh (1)
	1 Chronicles 1.1 Adam, Sheth, Enosh,
enquirest (1)
	Job 10.6 That thou enquirest after mine iniquity, and searchest after my sin?
enrichest (1)
	Psalms (prose) 65.9 Thou visitest the earth, and waterest it: thou greatly enrichest it with the river of God, which is full of water: thou preparest them corn, when thou hast so provided for it.
enrimmon (1)
	Nehemiah 11.29 And at Enrimmon, and at Zareah, and at Jarmuth,
ensigns (1)
	Psalms (prose) 74.4 Thine enemies roar in the midst of thy congregations; they set up their ensigns for signs.
ensnared (1)
	Job 34.30 That the hypocrite reign not, lest the people be ensnared.
ensue (1)
	1 Peter 3.11 Let him eschew evil, and do good; let him seek peace, and ensue it.
entangle (1)
	Matthew 22.15 Then went the Pharisees, and took counsel how they might entangle him in his talk.
entangleth (1)
	2 Timothy 2.4 No man that warreth entangleth himself with the affairs of this life; that he may please him who hath chosen him to be a soldier.
entappuah (1)
	Joshua 17.7 And the coast of Manasseh was from Asher to Michmethah, that lieth before Shechem; and the border went along on the right hand unto the inhabitants of Entappuah.
enterprise (1)
	Job 5.12 He disappointeth the devices of the crafty, so that their hands cannot perform their enterprise.
entertain (1)
	Hebrews 13.2 Be not forgetful to entertain strangers: for thereby some have entertained angels unawares.
entertained (1)
	Hebrews 13.2 Be not forgetful to entertain strangers: for thereby some have entertained angels unawares.
enticeth (1)
	Proverbs 16.29 A violent man enticeth his neighbour, and leadeth him into the way that is not good.
entire (1)
	James 1.4 But let patience have her perfect work, that ye may be perfect and entire, wanting nothing.
entrances (1)
	Micah 5.6 And they shall waste the land of Assyria with the sword, and the land of Nimrod in the entrances thereof: thus shall he deliver us from the Assyrian, when he cometh into our land, and when he treadeth within our borders.
entreateth (1)
	Job 24.21 He evil entreateth the barren that beareth not: and doeth not good to the widow.
entries (1)
	Ezekiel 40.38 And the chambers and the entries thereof were by the posts of the gates, where they washed the burnt offering.
envies (1)
	1 Peter 2.1 Wherefore laying aside all malice, and all guile, and hypocrisies, and envies, all evil speakings,
enviest (1)
	Numbers 11.29 And Moses said unto him, Enviest thou for my sake? would God that all the LORD's people were prophets, and that the LORD would put his spirit upon them!
envieth (1)
	1 Corinthians 13.4 Charity suffereth long, and is kind; charity envieth not; charity vaunteth not itself, is not puffed up,
environ (1)
	Joshua 7.9 For the Canaanites and all the inhabitants of the land shall hear of it, and shall environ us round, and cut off our name from the earth: and what wilt thou do unto thy great name?
epaenetus (1)
	Romans 16.5 Likewise greet the church that is in their house. Salute my well-beloved Epaenetus, who is the firstfruits of Achaia unto Christ.
ephai (1)
	Jeremiah 40.8 Then they came to Gedaliah to Mizpah, even Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, and Johanan and Jonathan the sons of Kareah, and Seraiah the son of Tanhumeth, and the sons of Ephai the Netophathite, and Jezaniah the son of a Maachathite, they and their men.
ephesdammim (1)
	1 Samuel 17.1 Now the Philistines gathered together their armies to battle, and were gathered together at Shochoh, which belongeth to Judah, and pitched between Shochoh and Azekah, in Ephesdammim.
ephesian (1)
	Acts 21.29 (For they had seen before with him in the city Trophimus an Ephesian, whom they supposed that Paul had brought into the temple.)
ephphatha (1)
	Mark 7.34 And looking up to heaven, he sighed, and saith unto him, Ephphatha, that is, Be opened.
ephraimite (1)
	Judges 12.5 And the Gileadites took the passages of Jordan before the Ephraimites: and it was so, that when those Ephraimites which were escaped said, Let me go over; that the men of Gilead said unto him, Art thou an Ephraimite? If he said, Nay;
ephrathites (1)
	Ruth 1.2 And the name of the man was Elimelech, and the name of his wife Naomi, and the name of his two sons Mahlon and Chilion, Ephrathites of Bethlehemjudah. And they came into the country of Moab, and continued there.
epicureans (1)
	Acts 17.18 Then certain philosophers of the Epicureans, and of the Stoicks, encountered him. And some said, What will this babbler say? other some, He seemeth to be a setter forth of strange gods: because he preached unto them Jesus, and the resurrection.
equally (1)
	Exodus 36.22 One board had two tenons, equally distant one from another: thus did he make for all the boards of the tabernacle.
equals (1)
	Galatians 1.14 And profited in the Jews' religion above many my equals in mine own nation, being more exceedingly zealous of the traditions of my fathers.
eran (1)
	Numbers 26.36 And these are the sons of Shuthelah: of Eran, the family of the Eranites.
eranites (1)
	Numbers 26.36 And these are the sons of Shuthelah: of Eran, the family of the Eranites.
erech (1)
	Genesis 10.10 And the beginning of his kingdom was Babel, and Erech, and Accad, and Calneh, in the land of Shinar.
erected (1)
	Genesis 33.20 And he erected there an altar, and called it EleloheIsrael.
erites (1)
	Numbers 26.16 Of Ozni, the family of the Oznites: of Eri, the family of the Erites:
escaping (1)
	Ezra 9.14 Should we again break thy commandments, and join in affinity with the people of these abominations? wouldest not thou be angry with us till thou hadst consumed us, so that there should be no remnant nor escaping?
eschew (1)
	1 Peter 3.11 Let him eschew evil, and do good; let him seek peace, and ensue it.
eschewed (1)
	Job 1.1 There was a man in the land of Uz, whose name was Job; and that man was perfect and upright, and one that feared God, and eschewed evil.
esek (1)
	Genesis 26.20 And the herdmen of Gerar did strive with Isaac's herdmen, saying, The water is ours: and he called the name of the well Esek; because they strove with him.
eshean (1)
	Joshua 15.52 Arab, and Dumah, and Eshean,
eshek (1)
	1 Chronicles 8.39 And the sons of Eshek his brother were, Ulam his firstborn, Jehush the second, and Eliphelet the third.
eshkalonites (1)
	Joshua 13.3 From Sihor, which is before Egypt, even unto the borders of Ekron northward, which is counted to the Canaanite: five lords of the Philistines; the Gazathites, and the Ashdothites, the Eshkalonites, the Gittites, and the Ekronites; also the Avites:
eshtaulites (1)
	1 Chronicles 2.53 And the families of Kirjathjearim; the Ithrites, and the Puhites, and the Shumathites, and the Mishraites; of them came the Zareathites, and the Eshtaulites,
eshtemoh (1)
	Joshua 15.50 And Anab, and Eshtemoh, and Anim,
esli (1)
	Luke 3.25 Which was the son of Mattathias, which was the son of Amos, which was the son of Naum, which was the son of Esli, which was the son of Nagge,
establishment (1)
	2 Chronicles 32.1 After these things, and the establishment thereof, Sennacherib king of Assyria came, and entered into Judah, and encamped against the fenced cities, and thought to win them for himself.
esteeming (1)
	Hebrews 11.26 Esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures in Egypt: for he had respect unto the recompence of the reward.
estimations (1)
	Leviticus 27.25 And all thy estimations shall be according to the shekel of the sanctuary: twenty gerahs shall be the shekel.
eternity (1)
	Isaiah 57.15 For thus saith the high and lofty One that inhabiteth eternity, whose name is Holy; I dwell in the high and holy place, with him also that is of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of the contrite ones.
ethanim (1)
	1 Kings 8.2 And all the men of Israel assembled themselves unto king Solomon at the feast in the month Ethanim, which is the seventh month.
ethbaal (1)
	1 Kings 16.31 And it came to pass, as if it had been a light thing for him to walk in the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, that he took to wife Jezebel the daughter of Ethbaal king of the Zidonians, and went and served Baal, and worshipped him.
ethnan (1)
	1 Chronicles 4.7 And the sons of Helah were, Zereth, and Jezoar, and Ethnan.
ethni (1)
	1 Chronicles 6.41 The son of Ethni, the son of Zerah, the son of Adaiah,
eubulus (1)
	2 Timothy 4.21 Do thy diligence to come before winter. Eubulus greeteth thee, and Pudens, and Linus, and Claudia, and all the brethren.
eunice (1)
	2 Timothy 1.5 When I call to remembrance the unfeigned faith that is in thee, which dwelt first in thy grandmother Lois, and thy mother Eunice; and I am persuaded that in thee also.
euodias (1)
	Philippians 4.2 I beseech Euodias, and beseech Syntyche, that they be of the same mind in the Lord.
euroclydon (1)
	Acts 27.14 But not long after there arose against it a tempestuous wind, called Euroclydon.
eutychus (1)
	Acts 20.9 And there sat in a window a certain young man named Eutychus, being fallen into a deep sleep: and as Paul was long preaching, he sunk down with sleep, and fell down from the third loft, and was taken up dead.
evangelists (1)
	Ephesians 4.11 And he gave some, apostles; and some, prophets; and some, evangelists; and some, pastors and teachers;
evenings (1)
	Jeremiah 5.6 Wherefore a lion out of the forest shall slay them, and a wolf of the evenings shall spoil them, a leopard shall watch over their cities: every one that goeth out thence shall be torn in pieces: because their transgressions are many, and their backslidings are increased.
evilfavouredness (1)
	Deuteronomy 17.1 Thou shalt not sacrifice unto the LORD thy God any bullock, or sheep, wherein is blemish, or any evilfavouredness: for that is an abomination unto the LORD thy God.
exacteth (1)
	Job 11.6 And that he would shew thee the secrets of wisdom, that they are double to that which is! Know therefore that God exacteth of thee less than thine iniquity deserveth.
exaction (1)
	Nehemiah 10.31 And if the people of the land bring ware or any victuals on the sabbath day to sell, that we would not buy it of them on the sabbath, or on the holy day: and that we would leave the seventh year, and the exaction of every debt.
exactions (1)
	Ezekiel 45.9 Thus saith the Lord GOD; Let it suffice you, O princes of Israel: remove violence and spoil, and execute judgment and justice, take away your exactions from my people, saith the Lord GOD.
exactors (1)
	Isaiah 60.17 For brass I will bring gold, and for iron I will bring silver, and for wood brass, and for stones iron: I will also make thy officers peace, and thine exactors righteousness.
exaltest (1)
	Exodus 9.17 As yet exaltest thou thyself against my people, that thou wilt not let them go?
examination (1)
	Acts 25.26 Of whom I have no certain thing to write unto my lord. Wherefore I have brought him forth before you, and specially before thee, O king Agrippa, that, after examination had, I might have somewhat to write.
examining (1)
	Acts 24.8 Commanding his accusers to come unto thee: by examining of whom thyself mayest take knowledge of all these things, whereof we accuse him.
examples (1)
	1 Corinthians 10.6 Now these things were our examples, to the intent we should not lust after evil things, as they also lusted.
exceedest (1)
	2 Chronicles 9.6 Howbeit I believed not their words, until I came, and mine eyes had seen it: and, behold, the one half of the greatness of thy wisdom was not told me: for thou exceedest the fame that I heard.
exceedeth (1)
	1 Kings 10.7 Howbeit I believed not the words, until I came, and mine eyes had seen it: and, behold, the half was not told me: thy wisdom and prosperity exceedeth the fame which I heard.
excelled (1)
	1 Kings 4.30 And Solomon's wisdom excelled the wisdom of all the children of the east country, and all the wisdom of Egypt.
excellest (1)
	Proverbs 31.29 Many daughters have done virtuously, but thou excellest them all.
excepted (1)
	1 Corinthians 15.27 For he hath put all things under his feet. But when he saith all things are put under him, it is manifest that he is excepted, which did put all things under him.
exchangers (1)
	Matthew 25.27 Thou oughtest therefore to have put my money to the exchangers, and then at my coming I should have received mine own with usury.
exclude (1)
	Galatians 4.17 They zealously affect you, but not well; yea, they would exclude you, that ye might affect them.
excluded (1)
	Romans 3.27 Where is boasting then? It is excluded. By what law? of works? Nay: but by the law of faith.
excusing (1)
	Romans 2.15 Which shew the work of the law written in their hearts, their conscience also bearing witness, and their thoughts the mean while accusing or else excusing one another;)
executedst (1)
	1 Samuel 28.18 Because thou obeyedst not the voice of the LORD, nor executedst his fierce wrath upon Amalek, therefore hath the LORD done this thing unto thee this day.
executest (1)
	Psalms (prose) 99.4 The king's strength also loveth judgment; thou dost establish equity, thou executest judgment and righteousness in Jacob.
execution (1)
	Esther 9.1 Now in the twelfth month, that is, the month Adar, on the thirteenth day of the same, when the king's commandment and his decree drew near to be put in execution, in the day that the enemies of the Jews hoped to have power over them, (though it was turned to the contrary, that the Jews had rule over them that hated them;)
executioner (1)
	Mark 6.27 And immediately the king sent an executioner, and commanded his head to be brought: and he went and beheaded him in the prison,
exempted (1)
	1 Kings 15.22 Then king Asa made a proclamation throughout all Judah; none was exempted: and they took away the stones of Ramah, and the timber thereof, wherewith Baasha had builded; and king Asa built with them Geba of Benjamin, and Mizpah.
exerciseth (1)
	Revelation 13.12 And he exerciseth all the power of the first beast before him, and causeth the earth and them which dwell therein to worship the first beast, whose deadly wound was healed.
exhorteth (1)
	Romans 12.8 Or he that exhorteth, on exhortation: he that giveth, let him do it with simplicity; he that ruleth, with diligence; he that sheweth mercy, with cheerfulness.
exorcists (1)
	Acts 19.13 Then certain of the vagabond Jews, exorcists, took upon them to call over them which had evil spirits the name of the LORD Jesus, saying, We adjure you by Jesus whom Paul preacheth.
expected (1)
	Jeremiah 29.11 For I know the thoughts that I think toward you, saith the LORD, thoughts of peace, and not of evil, to give you an expected end.
experiment (1)
	2 Corinthians 9.13 Whiles by the experiment of this ministration they glorify God for your professed subjection unto the gospel of Christ, and for your liberal distribution unto them, and unto all men;
expound (1)
	Judges 14.14 And he said unto them, Out of the eater came forth meat, and out of the strong came forth sweetness. And they could not in three days expound the riddle.
express (1)
	Hebrews 1.3 Who being the brightness of his glory, and the express image of his person, and upholding all things by the word of his power, when he had by himself purged our sins, sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high:
extendeth (1)
	Psalms (prose) 16.2 O my soul, thou hast said unto the LORD, Thou art my Lord: my goodness extendeth not to thee;
extreme (1)
	Deuteronomy 28.22 The LORD shall smite thee with a consumption, and with a fever, and with an inflammation, and with an extreme burning, and with the sword, and with blasting, and with mildew; and they shall pursue thee until thou perish.
extremity (1)
	Job 35.15 But now, because it is not so, he hath visited in his anger; yet he knoweth it not in great extremity:
eyebrows (1)
	Leviticus 14.9 But it shall be on the seventh day, that he shall shave all his hair off his head and his beard and his eyebrows, even all his hair he shall shave off: and he shall wash his clothes, also he shall wash his flesh in water, and he shall be clean.
eyesalve (1)
	Revelation 3.18 I counsel thee to buy of me gold tried in the fire, that thou mayest be rich; and white raiment, that thou mayest be clothed, and that the shame of thy nakedness do not appear; and anoint thine eyes with eyesalve, that thou mayest see.
eyesight (1)
	Psalms (prose) 18.24 Therefore hath the LORD recompensed me according to my righteousness, according to the cleanness of my hands in his eyesight.
ezar (1)
	1 Chronicles 1.38 And the sons of Seir; Lotan, and Shobal, and Zibeon, and Anah, and Dishon, and Ezar, and Dishan.
ezbai (1)
	1 Chronicles 11.37 Hezro the Carmelite, Naarai the son of Ezbai,
ezel (1)
	1 Samuel 20.19 And when thou hast stayed three days, then thou shalt go down quickly, and come to the place where thou didst hide thyself when the business was in hand, and shalt remain by the stone Ezel.
ezem (1)
	1 Chronicles 4.29 And at Bilhah, and at Ezem, and at Tolad,
eznite (1)
	2 Samuel 23.8 These be the names of the mighty men whom David had: The Tachmonite that sat in the seat, chief among the captains; the same was Adino the Eznite: he lift up his spear against eight hundred, whom he slew at one time.
ezrahite (1)
	1 Kings 4.31 For he was wiser than all men; than Ethan the Ezrahite, and Heman, and Chalcol, and Darda, the sons of Mahol: and his fame was in all nations round about.
ezri (1)
	1 Chronicles 27.26 And over them that did the work of the field for tillage of the ground was Ezri the son of Chelub:
faintest (1)
	Job 4.5 But now it is come upon thee, and thou faintest; it toucheth thee, and thou art troubled.
faintness (1)
	Leviticus 26.36 And upon them that are left alive of you I will send a faintness into their hearts in the lands of their enemies; and the sound of a shaken leaf shall chase them; and they shall flee, as fleeing from a sword; and they shall fall when none pursueth.
fallest (1)
	Jeremiah 37.13 And when he was in the gate of Benjamin, a captain of the ward was there, whose name was Irijah, the son of Shelemiah, the son of Hananiah; and he took Jeremiah the prophet, saying, Thou fallest away to the Chaldeans.
fallowdeer (1)
	1 Kings 4.23 Ten fat oxen, and twenty oxen out of the pastures, and an hundred sheep, beside harts, and roebucks, and fallowdeer, and fatted fowl.
falsifying (1)
	Amos 8.5 Saying, When will the new moon be gone, that we may sell corn? and the sabbath, that we may set forth wheat, making the ephah small, and the shekel great, and falsifying the balances by deceit?
familiars (1)
	Jeremiah 20.10 For I heard the defaming of many, fear on every side. Report, say they, and we will report it. All my familiars watched for my halting, saying, Peradventure he will be enticed, and we shall prevail against him, and we shall take our revenge on him.
fanners (1)
	Jeremiah 51.2 And will send unto Babylon fanners, that shall fan her, and shall empty her land: for in the day of trouble they shall be against her round about.
fared (1)
	Luke 16.19 There was a certain rich man, which was clothed in purple and fine linen, and fared sumptuously every day:
farm (1)
	Matthew 22.5 But they made light of it, and went their ways, one to his farm, another to his merchandise:
farthings (1)
	Luke 12.6 Are not five sparrows sold for two farthings, and not one of them is forgotten before God?
fashioning (1)
	1 Peter 1.14 As obedient children, not fashioning yourselves according to the former lusts in your ignorance:
fashions (1)
	Ezekiel 42.11 And the way before them was like the appearance of the chambers which were toward the north, as long as they, and as broad as they: and all their goings out were both according to their fashions, and according to their doors.
fastening (1)
	Acts 3.4 And Peter, fastening his eyes upon him with John, said, Look on us.
fastest (1)
	Matthew 6.17 But thou, when thou fastest, anoint thine head, and wash thy face;
fatling (1)
	Isaiah 11.6 The wolf also shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie down with the kid; and the calf and the young lion and the fatling together; and a little child shall lead them.
fats (1)
	Joel 3.13 Put ye in the sickle, for the harvest is ripe: come, get you down; for the press is full, the fats overflow; for their wickedness is great.
fatter (1)
	Daniel 1.15 And at the end of ten days their countenances appeared fairer and fatter in flesh than all the children which did eat the portion of the king's meat.
favourest (1)
	Psalms (prose) 41.11 By this I know that thou favourest me, because mine enemy doth not triumph over me.
favoureth (1)
	2 Samuel 20.11 And one of Joab's men stood by him, and said, He that favoureth Joab, and he that is for David, let him go after Joab.
fearfully (1)
	Psalms (prose) 139.14 I will praise thee; for I am fearfully and wonderfully made: marvellous are thy works; and that my soul knoweth right well.
feasted (1)
	Job 1.4 And his sons went and feasted in their houses, every one his day; and sent and called for their three sisters to eat and to drink with them.
feebleminded (1)
	1 Thessalonians 5.14 Now we exhort you, brethren, warn them that are unruly, comfort the feebleminded, support the weak, be patient toward all men.
feebleness (1)
	Jeremiah 47.3 At the noise of the stamping of the hoofs of his strong horses, at the rushing of his chariots, and at the rumbling of his wheels, the fathers shall not look back to their children for feebleness of hands;
feebler (1)
	Genesis 30.42 But when the cattle were feeble, he put them not in: so the feebler were Laban's, and the stronger Jacob's.
feedingplace (1)
	Nahum 2.11 Where is the dwelling of the lions, and the feedingplace of the young lions, where the lion, even the old lion, walked, and the lion's whelp, and none made them afraid?
feignedly (1)
	Jeremiah 3.10 And yet for all this her treacherous sister Judah hath not turned unto me with her whole heart, but feignedly, saith the LORD.
felled (1)
	2 Kings 3.25 And they beat down the cities, and on every good piece of land cast every man his stone, and filled it; and they stopped all the wells of water, and felled all the good trees: only in Kirharaseth left they the stones thereof; howbeit the slingers went about it, and smote it.
feller (1)
	Isaiah 14.8 Yea, the fir trees rejoice at thee, and the cedars of Lebanon, saying, Since thou art laid down, no feller is come up against us.
fellest (1)
	2 Samuel 3.34 Thy hands were not bound, nor thy feet put into fetters: as a man falleth before wicked men, so fellest thou. And all the people wept again over him.
felling (1)
	2 Kings 6.5 But as one was felling a beam, the axe head fell into the water: and he cried, and said, Alas, master! for it was borrowed.
felloes (1)
	1 Kings 7.33 And the work of the wheels was like the work of a chariot wheel: their axletrees, and their naves, and their felloes, and their spokes, were all molten.
fellowcitizens (1)
	Ephesians 2.19 Now therefore ye are no more strangers and foreigners, but fellowcitizens with the saints, and of the household of God;
fellowdisciples (1)
	John 11.16 Then said Thomas, which is called Didymus, unto his fellowdisciples, Let us also go, that we may die with him.
fellowheirs (1)
	Ephesians 3.6 That the Gentiles should be fellowheirs, and of the same body, and partakers of his promise in Christ by the gospel:
fellowhelper (1)
	2 Corinthians 8.23 Whether any do enquire of Titus, he is my partner and fellowhelper concerning you: or our brethren be enquired of, they are the messengers of the churches, and the glory of Christ.
fellowhelpers (1)
	3 John 1.8 We therefore ought to receive such, that we might be fellowhelpers to the truth.
fellowprisoners (1)
	Romans 16.7 Salute Andronicus and Junia, my kinsmen, and my fellow-prisoners, who are of note among the apostles, who also were in Christ before me.
fellowworkers (1)
	Colossians 4.11  And Jesus, which is called Justus, who are of the circumcision. These only are my fellowworkers unto the kingdom of God, which have been a comfort unto me.
fence (1)
	Psalms (prose) 62.3 How long will ye imagine mischief against a man? ye shall be slain all of you: as a bowing wall shall ye be, and as a tottering fence.
fens (1)
	Job 40.21 He lieth under the shady trees, in the covert of the reed, and fens.
ferret (1)
	Leviticus 11.30 And the ferret, and the chameleon, and the lizard, and the snail, and the mole.
ferry (1)
	2 Samuel 19.18 And there went over a ferry boat to carry over the king's household, and to do what he thought good. And Shimei the son of Gera fell down before the king, as he was come over Jordan;
fetcheth (1)
	Deuteronomy 19.5 As when a man goeth into the wood with his neighbour to hew wood, and his hand fetcheth a stroke with the axe to cut down the tree, and the head slippeth from the helve, and lighteth upon his neighbour, that he die; he shall flee unto one of those cities, and live:
fetcht (1)
	Genesis 18.7 And Abraham ran unto the herd, and fetcht a calf tender and good, and gave it unto a young man; and he hasted to dress it.
fewer (1)
	Numbers 33.54 And ye shall divide the land by lot for an inheritance among your families: and to the more ye shall give the more inheritance, and to the fewer ye shall give the less inheritance: every man's inheritance shall be in the place where his lot falleth; according to the tribes of your fathers ye shall inherit.
fewest (1)
	Deuteronomy 7.7 The LORD did not set his love upon you, nor choose you, because ye were more in number than any people; for ye were the fewest of all people:
fewness (1)
	Leviticus 25.16 According to the multitude of years thou shalt increase the price thereof, and according to the fewness of years thou shalt diminish the price of it: for according to the number of the years of the fruits doth he sell unto thee.
fidelity (1)
	Titus 2.10 Not purloining, but shewing all good fidelity; that they may adorn the doctrine of God our Saviour in all things.
fiercer (1)
	2 Samuel 19.43 And the men of Israel answered the men of Judah, and said, We have ten parts in the king, and we have also more right in David than ye: why then did ye despise us, that our advice should not be first had in bringing back our king? And the words of the men of Judah were fiercer than the words of the men of Israel.
file (1)
	1 Samuel 13.21 Yet they had a file for the mattocks, and for the coulters, and for the forks, and for the axes, and to sharpen the goads.
fillest (1)
	Psalms (prose) 17.14 From men which are thy hand, O LORD, from men of the world, which have their portion in this life, and whose belly thou fillest with thy hid treasure: they are full of children, and leave the rest of their substance to their babes.
fillet (1)
	Jeremiah 52.21 And concerning the pillars, the height of one pillar was eighteen cubits; and a fillet of twelve cubits did compass it; and the thickness thereof was four fingers: it was hollow.
filling (1)
	Acts 14.17 Nevertheless he left not himself without witness, in that he did good, and gave us rain from heaven, and fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with food and gladness.
finer (1)
	Proverbs 25.4 Take away the dross from the silver, and there shall come forth a vessel for the finer.
finisher (1)
	Hebrews 12.2 Looking unto Jesus the author and finisher of our faith; who for the joy that was set before him endured the cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the right hand of the throne of God.
fires (1)
	Isaiah 24.15 Wherefore glorify ye the LORD in the fires, even the name of the LORD God of Israel in the isles of the sea.
firkins (1)
	John 2.6 And there were set there six waterpots of stone, after the manner of the purifying of the Jews, containing two or three firkins apiece.
firstbegotten (1)
	Hebrews 1.6 And again, when he bringeth in the firstbegotten into the world, he saith, And let all the angels of God worship him.
fishermen (1)
	Luke 5.2 And saw two ships standing by the lake: but the fishermen were gone out of them, and were washing their nets.
fishhooks (1)
	Amos 4.2 The Lord GOD hath sworn by his holiness, that, lo, the days shall come upon you, that he will take you away with hooks, and your posterity with fishhooks.
fishing (1)
	John 21.3 Simon Peter saith unto them, I go a fishing. They say unto him, We also go with thee. They went forth, and entered into a ship immediately; and that night they caught nothing.
fishpools (1)
	Song of Songs 7.4 Thy neck is as a tower of ivory; thine eyes like the fishpools in Heshbon, by the gate of Bathrabbim: thy nose is as the tower of Lebanon which looketh toward Damascus.
fishs (1)
	Jonah 2.1 Then Jonah prayed unto the LORD his God out of the fish's belly,
fists (1)
	Proverbs 30.4 Who hath ascended up into heaven, or descended? who hath gathered the wind in his fists? who hath bound the waters in a garment? who hath established all the ends of the earth? what is his name, and what is his son's name, if thou canst tell?
fitteth (1)
	Isaiah 44.13 The carpenter stretcheth out his rule; he marketh it out with a line; he fitteth it with planes, and he marketh it out with the compass, and maketh it after the figure of a man, according to the beauty of a man; that it may remain in the house.
flag (1)
	Job 8.11 Can the rush grow up without mire? can the flag grow without water?
flakes (1)
	Job 41.23 The flakes of his flesh are joined together: they are firm in themselves; they cannot be moved.
flash (1)
	Ezekiel 1.14 And the living creatures ran and returned as the appearance of a flash of lightning.
flayed (1)
	2 Chronicles 35.11 And they killed the passover, and the priests sprinkled the blood from their hands, and the Levites flayed them.
fleshy (1)
	2 Corinthians 3.3 Forasmuch as ye are manifestly declared to be the epistle of Christ ministered by us, written not with ink, but with the Spirit of the living God; not in tables of stone, but in fleshy tables of the heart.
flinty (1)
	Deuteronomy 32.13 He made him ride on the high places of the earth, that he might eat the increase of the fields; and he made him to suck honey out of the rock, and oil out of the flinty rock;
fluttereth (1)
	Deuteronomy 32.11 As an eagle stirreth up her nest, fluttereth over her young, spreadeth abroad her wings, taketh them, beareth them on her wings:
flux (1)
	Acts 28.8 And it came to pass, that the father of Publius lay sick of a fever and of a bloody flux: to whom Paul entered in, and prayed, and laid his hands on him, and healed him.
foals (1)
	Genesis 32.15 Thirty milch camels with their colts, forty kine, and ten bulls, twenty she asses, and ten foals.
foam (1)
	Hosea 10.7 As for Samaria, her king is cut off as the foam upon the water.
fodder (1)
	Job 6.5 Doth the wild ass bray when he hath grass? or loweth the ox over his fodder?
folden (1)
	Nahum 1.10 For while they be folden together as thorns, and while they are drunken as drunkards, they shall be devoured as stubble fully dry.
foldeth (1)
	Ecclesiastes 4.5 The fool foldeth his hands together, and eateth his own flesh.
folks (1)
	Acts 5.16 There came also a multitude out of the cities round about unto Jerusalem, bringing sick folks, and them which were vexed with unclean spirits: and they were healed every one.
followedst (1)
	Ruth 3.10 And he said, Blessed be thou of the LORD, my daughter: for thou hast shewed more kindness in the latter end than at the beginning, inasmuch as thou followedst not young men, whether poor or rich.
forbiddeth (1)
	3 John 1.10 Wherefore, if I come, I will remember his deeds which he doeth, prating against us with malicious words: and not content therewith, neither doth he himself receive the brethren, and forbiddeth them that would, and casteth them out of the church.
forborn (1)
	Jeremiah 51.30 The mighty men of Babylon have forborn to fight, they have remained in their holds: their might hath failed; they became as women: they have burned her dwellingplaces; her bars are broken.
forcible (1)
	Job 6.25 How forcible are right words! but what doth your arguing reprove?
ford (1)
	Genesis 32.22 And he rose up that night, and took his two wives, and his two womenservants, and his eleven sons, and passed over the ford Jabbok.
foreknew (1)
	Romans 11.2 God hath not cast away his people which he foreknew. Wot ye not what the scripture saith of Elias? how he maketh intercession to God against Israel saying,
foreknow (1)
	Romans 8.29 For whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate to be conformed to the image of his Son, that he might be the firstborn among many brethren.
foreordained (1)
	1 Peter 1.20 Who verily was foreordained before the foundation of the world, but was manifest in these last times for you,
forerunner (1)
	Hebrews 6.20 Whither the forerunner is for us entered, even Jesus, made an high priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec.
foresaw (1)
	Acts 2.25 For David speaketh concerning him, I foresaw the Lord always before my face, for he is on my right hand, that I should not be moved:
foreseeing (1)
	Galatians 3.8 And the scripture, foreseeing that God would justify the heathen through faith, preached before the gospel unto Abraham, saying, In thee shall all nations be blessed.
foreship (1)
	Acts 27.30 And as the shipmen were about to flee out of the ship, when they had let down the boat into the sea, under colour as though they would have cast anchors out of the foreship,
foretell (1)
	2 Corinthians 13.2 I told you before, and foretell you, as if I were present, the second time; and being absent now I write to them which heretofore have sinned, and to all other, that, if I come again, I will not spare:
forewarn (1)
	Luke 12.5 But I will forewarn you whom ye shall fear: Fear him, which after he hath killed hath power to cast into hell; yea, I say unto you, Fear him.
forewarned (1)
	1 Thessalonians 4.6 That no man go beyond and defraud his brother in any matter: because that the Lord is the avenger of all such, as we also have forewarned you and testified.
forfeited (1)
	Ezra 10.8 And that whosoever would not come within three days, according to the counsel of the princes and the elders, all his substance should be forfeited, and himself separated from the congregation of those that had been carried away.
forged (1)
	Psalms (prose) 119.69 The proud have forged a lie against me: but I will keep thy precepts with my whole heart.
forgers (1)
	Job 13.4 But ye are forgers of lies, ye are all physicians of no value.
forgetfulness (1)
	Psalms (prose) 88.12 Shall thy wonders be known in the dark? and thy righteousness in the land of forgetfulness?
forgetting (1)
	Philippians 3.13 Brethren, I count not myself to have apprehended: but this one thing I do, forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching forth unto those things which are before,
forgivenesses (1)
	Daniel 9.9 To the Lord our God belong mercies and forgivenesses, though we have rebelled against him;
forgot (1)
	Deuteronomy 24.19 When thou cuttest down thine harvest in thy field, and hast forgot a sheaf in the field, thou shalt not go again to fetch it: it shall be for the stranger, for the fatherless, and for the widow: that the LORD thy God may bless thee in all the work of thine hands.
forks (1)
	1 Samuel 13.21 Yet they had a file for the mattocks, and for the coulters, and for the forks, and for the axes, and to sharpen the goads.
forsomuch (1)
	Luke 19.9 And Jesus said unto him, This day is salvation come to this house, forsomuch as he also is a son of Abraham.
forswear (1)
	Matthew 5.33 Again, ye have heard that it hath been said by them of old time, Thou shalt not forswear thyself, but shalt perform unto the Lord thine oaths:
fortunatus (1)
	1 Corinthians 16.17 I am glad of the coming of Stephanas and Fortunatus and Achaicus: for that which was lacking on your part they have supplied.
fortys (1)
	Genesis 18.29 And he spake unto him yet again, and said, Peradventure there shall be forty found there. And he said, I will not do it for forty's sake.
forum (1)
	Acts 28.15 And from thence, when the brethren heard of us, they came to meet us as far as Appii forum, and The three taverns: whom when Paul saw, he thanked God, and took courage.
fouled (1)
	Ezekiel 34.19 And as for my flock, they eat that which ye have trodden with your feet; and they drink that which ye have fouled with your feet.
fouledst (1)
	Ezekiel 32.2 Son of man, take up a lamentation for Pharaoh king of Egypt, and say unto him, Thou art like a young lion of the nations, and thou art as a whale in the seas: and thou camest forth with thy rivers, and troubledst the waters with thy feet, and fouledst their rivers.
foundest (1)
	Nehemiah 9.8 And foundest his heart faithful before thee, and madest a covenant with him to give the land of the Canaanites, the Hittites, the Amorites, and the Perizzites, and the Jebusites, and the Girgashites, to give it, I say, to his seed, and hast performed thy words; for thou art righteous:
fowlers (1)
	Psalms (prose) 124.7 Our soul is escaped as a bird out of the snare of the fowlers: the snare is broken, and we are escaped.
frail (1)
	Psalms (prose) 39.4 LORD, make me to know mine end, and the measure of my days, what it is: that I may know how frail I am.
frankly (1)
	Luke 7.42 And when they had nothing to pay, he frankly forgave them both. Tell me therefore, which of them will love him most?
freckled (1)
	Leviticus 13.39 Then the priest shall look: and, behold, if the bright spots in the skin of their flesh be darkish white; it is a freckled spot that groweth in the skin; he is clean.
freeman (1)
	1 Corinthians 7.22 For he that is called in the Lord, being a servant, is the Lord's freeman: likewise also he that is called, being free, is Christ's servant.
frequent (1)
	2 Corinthians 11.23 Are they ministers of Christ? (I speak as a fool) I am more; in labours more abundant, in stripes above measure, in prisons more frequent, in deaths oft.
fresher (1)
	Job 33.25 His flesh shall be fresher than a child's: he shall return to the days of his youth:
fretted (1)
	Ezekiel 16.43 Because thou hast not remembered the days of thy youth, but hast fretted me in all these things; behold, therefore I also will recompense thy way upon thine head, saith the Lord GOD: and thou shalt not commit this lewdness above all thine abominations.
fretteth (1)
	Proverbs 19.3 The foolishness of man perverteth his way: and his heart fretteth against the LORD.
frontiers (1)
	Ezekiel 25.9 Therefore, behold, I will open the side of Moab from the cities, from his cities which are on his frontiers, the glory of the country, Bethjeshimoth, Baalmeon, and Kiriathaim,
frowardly (1)
	Isaiah 57.17 For the iniquity of his covetousness was I wroth, and smote him: I hid me, and was wroth, and he went on frowardly in the way of his heart.
frozen (1)
	Job 38.30 The waters are hid as with a stone, and the face of the deep is frozen.
frustrateth (1)
	Isaiah 44.25 That frustrateth the tokens of the liars, and maketh diviners mad; that turneth wise men backward, and maketh their knowledge foolish;
fuller (1)
	Mark 9.3 And his raiment became shining, exceeding white as snow; so as no fuller on earth can white them.
furbish (1)
	Jeremiah 46.4 Harness the horses; and get up, ye horsemen, and stand forth with your helmets; furbish the spears, and put on the brigandines.
furrow (1)
	Job 39.10 Canst thou bind the unicorn with his band in the furrow? or will he harrow the valleys after thee?
furthered (1)
	Ezra 8.36 And they delivered the king's commissions unto the king's lieutenants, and to the governors on this side the river: and they furthered the people, and the house of God.
gabbai (1)
	Nehemiah 11.8 And after him Gabbai, Sallai, nine hundred twenty and eight.
gabbatha (1)
	John 19.13 When Pilate therefore heard that saying, he brought Jesus forth, and sat down in the judgment seat in a place that is called the Pavement, but in the Hebrew, Gabbatha.
gaddest (1)
	Jeremiah 2.36 Why gaddest thou about so much to change thy way? thou also shalt be ashamed of Egypt, as thou wast ashamed of Assyria.
gaddi (1)
	Numbers 13.11 Of the tribe of Joseph, namely, of the tribe of Manasseh, Gaddi the son of Susi.
gaddiel (1)
	Numbers 13.10 Of the tribe of Zebulun, Gaddiel the son of Sodi.
gadite (1)
	2 Samuel 23.36 Igal the son of Nathan of Zobah, Bani the Gadite,
gaham (1)
	Genesis 22.24 And his concubine, whose name was Reumah, she bare also Tebah, and Gaham, and Thahash, and Maachah.
gains (1)
	Acts 16.19 And when her masters saw that the hope of their gains was gone, they caught Paul and Silas, and drew them into the marketplace unto the rulers,
gainsay (1)
	Luke 21.15 For I will give you a mouth and wisdom, which all your adversaries shall not be able to gainsay nor resist.
gainsayers (1)
	Titus 1.9 Holding fast the faithful word as he hath been taught, that he may be able by sound doctrine both to exhort and to convince the gainsayers.
galatians (1)
	Galatians 3.1 O foolish Galatians, who hath bewitched you, that ye should not obey the truth, before whose eyes Jesus Christ hath been evidently set forth, crucified among you?
galbanum (1)
	Exodus 30.34 And the LORD said unto Moses, Take unto thee sweet spices, stacte, and onycha, and galbanum; these sweet spices with pure frankincense: of each shall there be a like weight:
gallant (1)
	Isaiah 33.21 But there the glorious LORD will be unto us a place of broad rivers and streams; wherein shall go no galley with oars, neither shall gallant ship pass thereby.
galley (1)
	Isaiah 33.21 But there the glorious LORD will be unto us a place of broad rivers and streams; wherein shall go no galley with oars, neither shall gallant ship pass thereby.
gammadims (1)
	Ezekiel 27.11 The men of Arvad with thine army were upon thy walls round about, and the Gammadims were in thy towers: they hanged their shields upon thy walls round about; they have made thy beauty perfect.
gamul (1)
	1 Chronicles 24.17 The one and twentieth to Jachin, the two and twentieth to Gamul,
gap (1)
	Ezekiel 22.30 And I sought for a man among them, that should make up the hedge, and stand in the gap before me for the land, that I should not destroy it: but I found none.
gaps (1)
	Ezekiel 13.5 Ye have not gone up into the gaps, neither made up the hedge for the house of Israel to stand in the battle in the day of the LORD.
gardener (1)
	John 20.15 Jesus saith unto her, Woman, why weepest thou? whom seekest thou?  She, supposing him to be the gardener, saith unto him, Sir, if thou have borne him hence, tell me where thou hast laid him, and I will take him away.
garlands (1)
	Acts 14.13 Then the priest of Jupiter, which was before their city, brought oxen and garlands unto the gates, and would have done sacrifice with the people.
garlick (1)
	Numbers 11.5 We remember the fish, which we did eat in Egypt freely; the cucumbers, and the melons, and the leeks, and the onions, and the garlick:
garmite (1)
	1 Chronicles 4.19 And the sons of his wife Hodiah the sister of Naham, the father of Keilah the Garmite, and Eshtemoa the Maachathite.
garnish (1)
	Matthew 23.29 Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! because ye build the tombs of the prophets, and garnish the sepulchres of the righteous,
gashmu (1)
	Nehemiah 6.6 Wherein was written, It is reported among the heathen, and Gashmu saith it, that thou and the Jews think to rebel: for which cause thou buildest the wall, that thou mayest be their king, according to these words.
gatherer (1)
	Amos 7.14 Then answered Amos, and said to Amaziah, I was no prophet, neither was I a prophet's son; but I was an herdman, and a gatherer of sycomore fruit:
gatherest (1)
	Deuteronomy 24.21 When thou gatherest the grapes of thy vineyard, thou shalt not glean it afterward: it shall be for the stranger, for the fatherless, and for the widow.
gatherings (1)
	1 Corinthians 16.2 Upon the first day of the week let every one of you lay by him in store, as God hath prospered him, that there be no gatherings when I come.
gathhepher (1)
	2 Kings 14.25 He restored the coast of Israel from the entering of Hamath unto the sea of the plain, according to the word of the LORD God of Israel, which he spake by the hand of his servant Jonah, the son of Amittai, the prophet, which was of Gathhepher.
gay (1)
	James 2.3 And ye have respect to him that weareth the gay clothing, and say unto him, Sit thou here in a good place; and say to the poor, Stand thou there, or sit here under my footstool:
gazathites (1)
	Joshua 13.3 From Sihor, which is before Egypt, even unto the borders of Ekron northward, which is counted to the Canaanite: five lords of the Philistines; the Gazathites, and the Ashdothites, the Eshkalonites, the Gittites, and the Ekronites; also the Avites:
gaze (1)
	Exodus 19.21 And the LORD said unto Moses, Go down, charge the people, lest they break through unto the LORD to gaze, and many of them perish.
gazing (1)
	Acts 1.11 Which also said, Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into heaven? this same Jesus, which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven.
gazites (1)
	Judges 16.2 And it was told the Gazites, saying, Samson is come hither. And they compassed him in, and laid wait for him all night in the gate of the city, and were quiet all the night, saying, In the morning, when it is day, we shall kill him.
gebim (1)
	Isaiah 10.31 Madmenah is removed; the inhabitants of Gebim gather themselves to flee.
gedeon (1)
	Hebrews 11.32 And what shall I more say? for the time would fail me to tell of Gedeon, and of Barak, and of Samson, and of Jephthae; of David also, and Samuel, and of the prophets:
geder (1)
	Joshua 12.13 The king of Debir, one; the king of Geder, one;
gederah (1)
	Joshua 15.36 And Sharaim, and Adithaim, and Gederah, and Gederothaim; fourteen cities with their villages:
gederathite (1)
	1 Chronicles 12.4 And Ismaiah the Gibeonite, a mighty man among the thirty, and over the thirty; and Jeremiah, and Jahaziel, and Johanan, and Josabad the Gederathite,
gederite (1)
	1 Chronicles 27.28 And over the olive trees and the sycomore trees that were in the low plains was Baalhanan the Gederite: and over the cellars of oil was Joash:
gederothaim (1)
	Joshua 15.36 And Sharaim, and Adithaim, and Gederah, and Gederothaim; fourteen cities with their villages:
geliloth (1)
	Joshua 18.17 And was drawn from the north, and went forth to Enshemesh, and went forth toward Geliloth, which is over against the going up of Adummim, and descended to the stone of Bohan the son of Reuben,
gemalli (1)
	Numbers 13.12 Of the tribe of Dan, Ammiel the son of Gemalli.
gendered (1)
	Job 38.29 Out of whose womb came the ice? and the hoary frost of heaven, who hath gendered it?
gergesenes (1)
	Matthew 8.28 And when he was come to the other side into the country of the Gergesenes, there met him two possessed with devils, coming out of the tombs, exceeding fierce, so that no man might pass by that way.
gesham (1)
	1 Chronicles 2.47 And the sons of Jahdai; Regem, and Jotham, and Gesham, and Pelet, and Ephah, and Shaaph.
geuel (1)
	Numbers 13.15 Of the tribe of Gad, Geuel the son of Machi.
gezrites (1)
	1 Samuel 27.8 And David and his men went up, and invaded the Geshurites, and the Gezrites, and the Amalekites: for those nations were of old the inhabitants of the land, as thou goest to Shur, even unto the land of Egypt.
giah (1)
	2 Samuel 2.24 Joab also and Abishai pursued after Abner: and the sun went down when they were come to the hill of Ammah, that lieth before Giah by the way of the wilderness of Gibeon.
gibbar (1)
	Ezra 2.20 The children of Gibbar, ninety and five.
gibea (1)
	1 Chronicles 2.49 She bare also Shaaph the father of Madmannah, Sheva the father of Machbenah, and the father of Gibea: and the daughter of Caleb was Achsa.
gibeath (1)
	Joshua 18.28 And Zelah, Eleph, and Jebusi, which is Jerusalem, Gibeath, and Kirjath; fourteen cities with their villages. This is the inheritance of the children of Benjamin according to their families.
gibeathite (1)
	1 Chronicles 12.3 The chief was Ahiezer, then Joash, the sons of Shemaah the Gibeathite; and Jeziel, and Pelet, the sons of Azmaveth; and Berachah, and Jehu the Antothite.
giblites (1)
	Joshua 13.5 And the land of the Giblites, and all Lebanon, toward the sunrising, from Baalgad under mount Hermon unto the entering into Hamath.
gidom (1)
	Judges 20.45 And they turned and fled toward the wilderness unto the rock of Rimmon: and they gleaned of them in the highways five thousand men; and pursued hard after them unto Gidom, and slew two thousand men of them.
gilalai (1)
	Nehemiah 12.36 And his brethren, Shemaiah, and Azarael, Milalai, Gilalai, Maai, Nethaneel, and Judah, Hanani, with the musical instruments of David the man of God, and Ezra the scribe before them.
gileads (1)
	Judges 11.2 And Gilead's wife bare him sons; and his wife's sons grew up, and they thrust out Jephthah, and said unto him, Thou shalt not inherit in our father's house; for thou art the son of a strange woman.
gimzo (1)
	2 Chronicles 28.18 The Philistines also had invaded the cities of the low country, and of the south of Judah, and had taken Bethshemesh, and Ajalon, and Gederoth, and Shocho with the villages thereof, and Timnah with the villages thereof, Gimzo also and the villages thereof: and they dwelt there.
ginnetho (1)
	Nehemiah 12.4 Iddo, Ginnetho, Abijah,
girdest (1)
	John 21.18 Verily, verily, I say unto thee, When thou wast young, thou girdest thyself, and walkedst whither thou wouldest: but when thou shalt be old, thou shalt stretch forth thy hands, and another shall gird thee, and carry thee whither thou wouldest not.
girgashite (1)
	1 Chronicles 1.14 The Jebusite also, and the Amorite, and the Girgashite,
girgasite (1)
	Genesis 10.16 And the Jebusite, and the Amorite, and the Girgasite,
girl (1)
	Joel 3.3 And they have cast lots for my people; and have given a boy for an harlot, and sold a girl for wine, that they might drink.
girls (1)
	Zechariah 8.5 And the streets of the city shall be full of boys and girls playing in the streets thereof.
gispa (1)
	Nehemiah 11.21 But the Nethinims dwelt in Ophel: and Ziha and Gispa were over the Nethinims.
gittahhepher (1)
	Joshua 19.13 And from thence passeth on along on the east to Gittahhepher, to Ittahkazin, and goeth out to Remmonmethoar to Neah;
gizonite (1)
	1 Chronicles 11.34 The sons of Hashem the Gizonite, Jonathan the son of Shage the Hararite,
glasses (1)
	Isaiah 3.23 The glasses, and the fine linen, and the hoods, and the vails.
gleanings (1)
	Leviticus 19.9 And when ye reap the harvest of your land, thou shalt not wholly reap the corners of thy field, neither shalt thou gather the gleanings of thy harvest.
glede (1)
	Deuteronomy 14.13 And the glede, and the kite, and the vulture after his kind,
glitter (1)
	Ezekiel 21.10 It is sharpened to make a sore slaughter; it is furbished that it may glitter: should we then make mirth? it contemneth the rod of my son, as every tree.
gloriest (1)
	Jeremiah 49.4 Wherefore gloriest thou in the valleys, thy flowing valley, O backsliding daughter? that trusted in her treasures, saying, Who shall come unto me?
glorifieth (1)
	Psalms (prose) 50.23 Whoso offereth praise glorifieth me: and to him that ordereth his conversation aright will I shew the salvation of God.
gnat (1)
	Matthew 23.24 Ye blind guides, which strain at a gnat, and swallow a camel.
gnaw (1)
	Zephaniah 3.3 Her princes within her are roaring lions; her judges are evening wolves; they gnaw not the bones till the morrow.
gnawed (1)
	Revelation 16.10 And the fifth angel poured out his vial upon the seat of the beast; and his kingdom was full of darkness; and they gnawed their tongues for pain,
goad (1)
	Judges 3.31 And after him was Shamgar the son of Anath, which slew of the Philistines six hundred men with an ox goad: and he also delivered Israel.
goath (1)
	Jeremiah 31.39 And the measuring line shall yet go forth over against it upon the hill Gareb, and shall compass about to Goath.
goatskins (1)
	Hebrews 11.37 They were stoned, they were sawn asunder, were tempted, were slain with the sword: they wandered about in sheepskins and goatskins; being destitute, afflicted, tormented;
goblet (1)
	Song of Songs 7.2 Thy navel is like a round goblet, which wanteth not liquor: thy belly is like an heap of wheat set about with lilies.
godfor (1)
	Leviticus 25.17 Ye shall not therefore oppress one another; but thou shalt fear thy God:for I am the LORD your God.
goodlier (1)
	1 Samuel 9.2 And he had a son, whose name was Saul, a choice young man, and a goodly: and there was not among the children of Israel a goodlier person than he: from his shoulders and upward he was higher than any of the people.
goodliness (1)
	Isaiah 40.6 The voice said, Cry. And he said, What shall I cry? All flesh is grass, and all the goodliness thereof is as the flower of the field:
gopher (1)
	Genesis 6.14 Make thee an ark of gopher wood; rooms shalt thou make in the ark, and shalt pitch it within and without with pitch.
gore (1)
	Exodus 21.28 If an ox gore a man or a woman, that they die: then the ox shall be surely stoned, and his flesh shall not be eaten; but the owner of the ox shall be quit.
gorgeous (1)
	Luke 23.11 And Herod with his men of war set him at nought, and mocked him, and arrayed him in a gorgeous robe, and sent him again to Pilate.
gourds (1)
	2 Kings 4.39 And one went out into the field to gather herbs, and found a wild vine, and gathered thereof wild gourds his lap full, and came and shred them into the pot of pottage: for they knew them not.
governments (1)
	1 Corinthians 12.28 And God hath set some in the church, first apostles, secondarily prophets, thirdly teachers, after that miracles, then gifts of healings, helps, governments, diversities of tongues.
graff (1)
	Romans 11.23 And they also, if they abide not still in unbelief, shall be graffed in: for God is able to graff them in again.
grandmother (1)
	2 Timothy 1.5 When I call to remembrance the unfeigned faith that is in thee, which dwelt first in thy grandmother Lois, and thy mother Eunice; and I am persuaded that in thee also.
grapegatherer (1)
	Jeremiah 6.9 Thus saith the LORD of hosts, They shall throughly glean the remnant of Israel as a vine: turn back thine hand as a grapegatherer into the baskets.
grapegleanings (1)
	Micah 7.1 Woe is me! for I am as when they have gathered the summer fruits, as the grapegleanings of the vintage: there is no cluster to eat: my soul desired the firstripe fruit.
graveclothes (1)
	John 11.44 And he that was dead came forth, bound hand and foot with graveclothes: and his face was bound about with a napkin. Jesus saith unto them, Loose him, and let him go.
graveth (1)
	Isaiah 22.16 What hast thou here? and whom hast thou here, that thou hast hewed thee out a sepulchre here, as he that heweth him out a sepulchre on high, and that graveth an habitation for himself in a rock?
gravings (1)
	1 Kings 7.31 And the mouth of it within the chapiter and above was a cubit: but the mouth thereof was round after the work of the base, a cubit and an half: and also upon the mouth of it were gravings with their borders, foursquare, not round.
grease (1)
	Psalms (prose) 119.70 Their heart is as fat as grease; but I delight in thy law.
greaves (1)
	1 Samuel 17.6 And he had greaves of brass upon his legs, and a target of brass between his shoulders.
greediness (1)
	Ephesians 4.19 Who being past feeling have given themselves over unto lasciviousness, to work all uncleanness with greediness.
greenness (1)
	Job 8.12 Whilst it is yet in his greenness, and not cut down, it withereth before any other herb.
greeteth (1)
	2 Timothy 4.21 Do thy diligence to come before winter. Eubulus greeteth thee, and Pudens, and Linus, and Claudia, and all the brethren.
grey (1)
	Proverbs 20.29 The glory of young men is their strength: and the beauty of old men is the grey head.
greyheaded (1)
	Psalms (prose) 71.18 Now also when I am old and greyheaded, O God, forsake me not; until I have shewed thy strength unto this generation, and thy power to every one that is to come.
greyhound (1)
	Proverbs 30.31 A greyhound; an he goat also; and a king, against whom there is no rising up.
griefs (1)
	Isaiah 53.4 Surely he hath borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows: yet we did esteem him stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted.
grievance (1)
	Habakkuk 1.3 Why dost thou shew me iniquity, and cause me to behold grievance? for spoiling and violence are before me: and there are that raise up strife and contention.
grieving (1)
	Ezekiel 28.24 And there shall be no more a pricking brier unto the house of Israel, nor any grieving thorn of all that are round about them, that despised them; and they shall know that I am the Lord GOD.
grinders (1)
	Ecclesiastes 12.3 In the day when the keepers of the house shall tremble, and the strong men shall bow themselves, and the grinders cease because they are few, and those that look out of the windows be darkened,
groaned (1)
	John 11.33 When Jesus therefore saw her weeping, and the Jews also weeping which came with her, he groaned in the spirit, and was troubled.
groaneth (1)
	Romans 8.22 For we know that the whole creation groaneth and travaileth in pain together until now.
gropeth (1)
	Deuteronomy 28.29 And thou shalt grope at noonday, as the blind gropeth in darkness, and thou shalt not prosper in thy ways: and thou shalt be only oppressed and spoiled evermore, and no man shall save thee.
grudging (1)
	1 Peter 4.9 Use hospitality one to another without grudging.
grudgingly (1)
	2 Corinthians 9.7 Every man according as he purposeth in his heart, so let him give; not grudgingly, or of necessity: for God loveth a cheerful giver.
guards (1)
	Genesis 41.10 Pharaoh was wroth with his servants, and put me in ward in the captain of the guard's house, both me and the chief baker:
guest (1)
	Luke 19.7 And when they saw it, they all murmured, saying, That he was gone to be guest with a man that is a sinner.
guiding (1)
	Genesis 48.14 And Israel stretched out his right hand, and laid it upon Ephraim's head, who was the younger, and his left hand upon Manasseh's head, guiding his hands wittingly; for Manasseh was the firstborn.
guiltiness (1)
	Genesis 26.10 And Abimelech said, What is this thou hast done unto us? one of the people might lightly have lien with thy wife, and thou shouldest have brought guiltiness upon us.
gulf (1)
	Luke 16.26 And beside all this, between us and you there is a great gulf fixed: so that they which would pass from hence to you cannot; neither can they pass to us, that would come from thence.
gunites (1)
	Numbers 26.48 Of the sons of Naphtali after their families: of Jahzeel, the family of the Jahzeelites: of Guni, the family of the Gunites:
gur (1)
	2 Kings 9.27 But when Ahaziah the king of Judah saw this, he fled by the way of the garden house. And Jehu followed after him, and said, Smite him also in the chariot. And they did so at the going up to Gur, which is by Ibleam. And he fled to Megiddo, and died there.
gurbaal (1)
	2 Chronicles 26.7 And God helped him against the Philistines, and against the Arabians that dwelt in Gurbaal, and the Mehunims.
gush (1)
	Jeremiah 9.18 And let them make haste, and take up a wailing for us, that our eyes may run down with tears, and our eyelids gush out with waters.
gutter (1)
	2 Samuel 5.8 And David said on that day, Whosoever getteth up to the gutter, and smiteth the Jebusites, and the lame and the blind that are hated of David's soul, he shall be chief and captain. Wherefore they said, The blind and the lame shall not come into the house.
haahashtari (1)
	1 Chronicles 4.6 And Naarah bare him Ahuzam, and Hepher, and Temeni, and Haahashtari. These were the sons of Naarah.
habaziniah (1)
	Jeremiah 35.3 Then I took Jaazaniah the son of Jeremiah, the son of Habaziniah, and his brethren, and all his sons, and the whole house of the Rechabites;
habitable (1)
	Proverbs 8.31 Rejoicing in the habitable part of his earth; and my delights were with the sons of men.
hachmoni (1)
	1 Chronicles 27.32 Also Jonathan David's uncle was a counsellor, a wise man, and a scribe: and Jehiel the son of Hachmoni was with the king's sons:
hachmonite (1)
	1 Chronicles 11.11 And this is the number of the mighty men whom David had; Jashobeam, an Hachmonite, the chief of the captains: he lifted up his spear against three hundred slain by him at one time.
hadadrimmon (1)
	Zechariah 12.11 In that day shall there be a great mourning in Jerusalem, as the mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valley of Megiddon.
hadashah (1)
	Joshua 15.37 Zenan, and Hadashah, and Migdalgad,
hadassah (1)
	Esther 2.7 And he brought up Hadassah, that is, Esther, his uncle's daughter: for she had neither father nor mother, and the maid was fair and beautiful; whom Mordecai, when her father and mother were dead, took for his own daughter.
hadattah (1)
	Joshua 15.25 And Hazor, Hadattah, and Kerioth, and Hezron, which is Hazor,
hadlai (1)
	2 Chronicles 28.12 Then certain of the heads of the children of Ephraim, Azariah the son of Johanan, Berechiah the son of Meshillemoth, and Jehizkiah the son of Shallum, and Amasa the son of Hadlai, stood up against them that came from the war,
hadrach (1)
	Zechariah 9.1 The burden of the word of the LORD in the land of Hadrach, and Damascus shall be the rest thereof: when the eyes of man, as of all the tribes of Israel, shall be toward the LORD.
haft (1)
	Judges 3.22 And the haft also went in after the blade; and the fat closed upon the blade, so that he could not draw the dagger out of his belly; and the dirt came out.
hagab (1)
	Ezra 2.46 The children of Hagab, the children of Shalmai, the children of Hanan,
hagaba (1)
	Nehemiah 7.48 The children of Lebana, the children of Hagaba, the children of Shalmai,
hagabah (1)
	Ezra 2.45 The children of Lebanah, the children of Hagabah, the children of Akkub,
hagarenes (1)
	Psalms (prose) 83.6 The tabernacles of Edom, and the Ishmaelites; of Moab, and the Hagarenes;
hagerite (1)
	1 Chronicles 27.31 And over the flocks was Jaziz the Hagerite. All these were the rulers of the substance which was king David's.
haggeri (1)
	1 Chronicles 11.38 Joel the brother of Nathan, Mibhar the son of Haggeri,
haggiah (1)
	1 Chronicles 6.30 Shimea his son, Haggiah his son, Asaiah his son.
haggites (1)
	Numbers 26.15 The children of Gad after their families: of Zephon, the family of the Zephonites: of Haggi, the family of the Haggites: of Shuni, the family of the Shunites:
hakkatan (1)
	Ezra 8.12 And of the sons of Azgad; Johanan the son of Hakkatan, and with him an hundred and ten males.
hakkoz (1)
	1 Chronicles 24.10 The seventh to Hakkoz, the eighth to Abijah,
hale (1)
	Luke 12.58 When thou goest with thine adversary to the magistrate, as thou art in the way, give diligence that thou mayest be delivered from him; lest he hale thee to the judge, and the judge deliver thee to the officer, and the officer cast thee into prison.
halhul (1)
	Joshua 15.58 Halhul, Bethzur, and Gedor,
hali (1)
	Joshua 19.25 And their border was Helkath, and Hali, and Beten, and Achshaph,
haling (1)
	Acts 8.3 As for Saul, he made havock of the church, entering into every house, and haling men and women committed them to prison.
hallohesh (1)
	Nehemiah 10.24 Hallohesh, Pileha, Shobek,
halohesh (1)
	Nehemiah 3.12 And next unto him repaired Shallum the son of Halohesh, the ruler of the half part of Jerusalem, he and his daughters.
halting (1)
	Jeremiah 20.10 For I heard the defaming of many, fear on every side. Report, say they, and we will report it. All my familiars watched for my halting, saying, Peradventure he will be enticed, and we shall prevail against him, and we shall take our revenge on him.
hamathzobah (1)
	2 Chronicles 8.3 And Solomon went to Hamathzobah, and prevailed against it.
hammath (1)
	Joshua 19.35 And the fenced cities are Ziddim, Zer, and Hammath, Rakkath, and Chinnereth,
hammoleketh (1)
	1 Chronicles 7.18 And his sister Hammoleketh bare Ishod, and Abiezer, and Mahalah.
hammothdor (1)
	Joshua 21.32 And out of the tribe of Naphtali, Kedesh in Galilee with her suburbs, to be a city of refuge for the slayer; and Hammothdor with her suburbs, and Kartan with her suburbs; three cities.
hamonah (1)
	Ezekiel 39.16 And also the name of the city shall be Hamonah. Thus shall they cleanse the land.
hamors (1)
	Genesis 34.18 And their words pleased Hamor, and Shechem Hamor's son.
hamuel (1)
	1 Chronicles 4.26 And the sons of Mishma; Hamuel his son, Zacchur his son, Shimei his son.
hamulites (1)
	Numbers 26.21 And the sons of Pharez were; of Hezron, the family of the Hezronites: of Hamul, the family of the Hamulites.
handed (1)
	2 Samuel 17.2 And I will come upon him while he is weary and weak handed, and will make him afraid: and all the people that are with him shall flee; and I will smite the king only:
handkerchiefs (1)
	Acts 19.12 So that from his body were brought unto the sick handkerchiefs or aprons, and the diseases departed from them, and the evil spirits went out of them.
handles (1)
	Song of Songs 5.5 I rose up to open to my beloved; and my hands dropped with myrrh, and my fingers with sweet smelling myrrh, upon the handles of the lock.
handmaiden (1)
	Luke 1.48 For he hath regarded the low estate of his handmaiden: for, behold, from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed.
handstaves (1)
	Ezekiel 39.9 And they that dwell in the cities of Israel shall go forth, and shall set on fire and burn the weapons, both the shields and the bucklers, the bows and the arrows, and the handstaves, and the spears, and they shall burn them with fire seven years:
handwriting (1)
	Colossians 2.14  Blotting out the handwriting of ordinances that was against us, which was contrary to us, and took it out of the way, nailing it to his cross;
handywork (1)
	Psalms (prose) 19.1 The heavens declare the glory of God; and the firmament sheweth his handywork.
hanes (1)
	Isaiah 30.4 For his princes were at Zoan, and his ambassadors came to Hanes.
haniel (1)
	1 Chronicles 7.39 And the sons of Ulla; Arah, and Haniel, and Rezia.
hannathon (1)
	Joshua 19.14 And the border compasseth it on the north side to Hannathon: and the outgoings thereof are in the valley of Jiphthahel:
hanniel (1)
	Numbers 34.23 The prince of the children of Joseph, for the tribe of the children of Manasseh, Hanniel the son of Ephod.
hanochites (1)
	Numbers 26.5 Reuben, the eldest son of Israel: the children of Reuben; Hanoch, of whom cometh the family of the Hanochites: of Pallu, the family of the Palluites:
hap (1)
	Ruth 2.3 And she went, and came, and gleaned in the field after the reapers: and her hap was to light on a part of the field belonging unto Boaz, who was of the kindred of Elimelech.
haphraim (1)
	Joshua 19.19 And Haphraim, and Shihon, and Anaharath,
happier (1)
	1 Corinthians 7.40 But she is happier if she so abide, after my judgment: and I think also that I have the Spirit of God.
hara (1)
	1 Chronicles 5.26 And the God of Israel stirred up the spirit of Pul king of Assyria, and the spirit of Tilgathpilneser king of Assyria, and he carried them away, even the Reubenites, and the Gadites, and the half tribe of Manasseh, and brought them unto Halah, and Habor, and Hara, and to the river Gozan, unto this day.
harbona (1)
	Esther 1.10 On the seventh day, when the heart of the king was merry with wine, he commanded Mehuman, Biztha, Harbona, Bigtha, and Abagtha, Zethar, and Carcas, the seven chamberlains that served in the presence of Ahasuerus the king,
harbonah (1)
	Esther 7.9 And Harbonah, one of the chamberlains, said before the king, Behold also, the gallows fifty cubits high, which Haman had made for Mordecai, who spoken good for the king, standeth in the house of Haman. Then the king said, Hang him thereon.
hardhearted (1)
	Ezekiel 3.7 But the house of Israel will not hearken unto thee; for they will not hearken unto me: for all the house of Israel are impudent and hardhearted.
hareph (1)
	1 Chronicles 2.51 Salma the father of Bethlehem, Hareph the father of Bethgader.
hareth (1)
	1 Samuel 22.5 And the prophet Gad said unto David, Abide not in the hold; depart, and get thee into the land of Judah. Then David departed, and came into the forest of Hareth.
harhaiah (1)
	Nehemiah 3.8 Next unto him repaired Uzziel the son of Harhaiah, of the goldsmiths. Next unto him also repaired Hananiah the son of one of the apothecaries, and they fortified Jerusalem unto the broad wall.
harhas (1)
	2 Kings 22.14 So Hilkiah the priest, and Ahikam, and Achbor, and Shaphan, and Asahiah, went unto Huldah the prophetess, the wife of Shallum the son of Tikvah, the son of Harhas, keeper of the wardrobe; (now she dwelt in Jerusalem in the college;) and they communed with her.
harnepher (1)
	1 Chronicles 7.36 The sons of Zophah; Suah, and Harnepher, and Shual, and Beri, and Imrah,
harnessed (1)
	Exodus 13.18 But God led the people about, through the way of the wilderness of the Red sea: and the children of Israel went up harnessed out of the land of Egypt.
harod (1)
	Judges 7.1 Then Jerubbaal, who is Gideon, and all the people that were with him, rose up early, and pitched beside the well of Harod: so that the host of the Midianites were on the north side of them, by the hill of Moreh, in the valley.
haroeh (1)
	1 Chronicles 2.52 And Shobal the father of Kirjathjearim had sons; Haroeh, and half of the Manahethites.
harorite (1)
	1 Chronicles 11.27 Shammoth the Harorite, Helez the Pelonite,
harped (1)
	1 Corinthians 14.7 And even things without life giving sound, whether pipe or harp, except they give a distinction in the sounds, how shall it be known what is piped or harped?
harping (1)
	Revelation 14.2 And I heard a voice from heaven, as the voice of many waters, and as the voice of a great thunder: and I heard the voice of harpers harping with their harps:
harrow (1)
	Job 39.10 Canst thou bind the unicorn with his band in the furrow? or will he harrow the valleys after thee?
harum (1)
	1 Chronicles 4.8 And Coz begat Anub, and Zobebah, and the families of Aharhel the son of Harum.
harumaph (1)
	Nehemiah 3.10 And next unto them repaired Jedaiah the son of Harumaph, even over against his house. And next unto him repaired Hattush the son of Hashabniah.
haruphite (1)
	1 Chronicles 12.5 Eluzai, and Jerimoth, and Bealiah, and Shemariah, and Shephatiah the Haruphite,
haruz (1)
	2 Kings 21.19 Amon was twenty and two years old when he began to reign, and he reigned two years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Meshullemeth, the daughter of Haruz of Jotbah.
has (1)
	Isaiah 60.15 Whereas thou has been forsaken and hated, so that no man went through thee, I will make thee an eternal excellency, a joy of many generations.
hasadiah (1)
	1 Chronicles 3.20 And Hashubah, and Ohel, and Berechiah, and Hasadiah, Jushabhesed, five.
hasenuah (1)
	1 Chronicles 9.7 And of the sons of Benjamin; Sallu the son of Meshullam, the son of Hodaviah, the son of Hasenuah,
hashabnah (1)
	Nehemiah 10.25 Rehum, Hashabnah, Maaseiah,
hashbadana (1)
	Nehemiah 8.4 And Ezra the scribe stood upon a pulpit of wood, which they had made for the purpose; and beside him stood Mattithiah, and Shema, and Anaiah, and Urijah, and Hilkiah, and Maaseiah, on his right hand; and on his left hand, Pedaiah, and Mishael, and Malchiah, and Hashum, and Hashbadana, Zechariah, and Meshullam.
hashem (1)
	1 Chronicles 11.34 The sons of Hashem the Gizonite, Jonathan the son of Shage the Hararite,
hashubah (1)
	1 Chronicles 3.20 And Hashubah, and Ohel, and Berechiah, and Hasadiah, Jushabhesed, five.
hashupha (1)
	Nehemiah 7.46 The Nethinims: the children of Ziha, the children of Hashupha, the children of Tabbaoth,
hasrah (1)
	2 Chronicles 34.22 And Hilkiah, and they that the king had appointed, went to Huldah the prophetess, the wife of Shallum the son of Tikvath, the son of Hasrah, keeper of the wardrobe; (now she dwelt in Jerusalem in the college:) and they spake to her to that effect.
hassenaah (1)
	Nehemiah 3.3 But the fish gate did the sons of Hassenaah build, who also laid the beams thereof, and set up the doors thereof, the locks thereof, and the bars thereof.
hasshub (1)
	1 Chronicles 9.14 And of the Levites; Shemaiah the son of Hasshub, the son of Azrikam, the son of Hashabiah, of the sons of Merari;
hasteneth (1)
	Isaiah 51.14 The captive exile hasteneth that he may be loosed, and that he should not die in the pit, nor that his bread should fail.
hasupha (1)
	Ezra 2.43 The Nethinims: the children of Ziha, the children of Hasupha, the children of Tabbaoth,
hatcheth (1)
	Jeremiah 17.11 As the partridge sitteth on eggs, and hatcheth them not; so he that getteth riches, and not by right, shall leave them in the midst of his days, and at his end shall be a fool.
hatefully (1)
	Ezekiel 23.29 And they shall deal with thee hatefully, and shall take away all thy labour, and shall leave thee naked and bare: and the nakedness of thy whoredoms shall be discovered, both thy lewdness and thy whoredoms.
hathath (1)
	1 Chronicles 4.13 And the sons of Kenaz; Othniel, and Seraiah: and the sons of Othniel; Hathath.
hats (1)
	Daniel 3.21 Then these men were bound in their coats, their hosen, and their hats, and their other garments, and were cast into the midst of the burning fiery furnace.
haughtily (1)
	Micah 2.3 Therefore thus saith the LORD; Behold, against this family do I devise an evil, from which ye shall not remove your necks; neither shall ye go haughtily: for this time is evil.
havens (1)
	Acts 27.8 And, hardly passing it, came unto a place which is called The fair havens; nigh whereunto was the city of Lasea.
havock (1)
	Acts 8.3 As for Saul, he made havock of the church, entering into every house, and haling men and women committed them to prison.
hazaiah (1)
	Nehemiah 11.5 And Maaseiah the son of Baruch, the son of Colhozeh, the son of Hazaiah, the son of Adaiah, the son of Joiarib, the son of Zechariah, the son of Shiloni.
hazaraddar (1)
	Numbers 34.4 And your border shall turn from the south to the ascent of Akrabbim, and pass on to Zin: and the going forth thereof shall be from the south to Kadeshbarnea, and shall go on to Hazaraddar, and pass on to Azmon:
hazarded (1)
	Acts 15.26 Men that have hazarded their lives for the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.
hazargaddah (1)
	Joshua 15.27 And Hazargaddah, and Heshmon, and Bethpalet,
hazarhatticon (1)
	Ezekiel 47.16 Hamath, Berothah, Sibraim, which is between the border of Damascus and the border of Hamath; Hazarhatticon, which is by the coast of Hauran.
hazarsusah (1)
	Joshua 19.5 And Ziklag, and Bethmarcaboth, and Hazarsusah,
hazarsusim (1)
	1 Chronicles 4.31 And at Bethmarcaboth, and Hazarsusim, and at Bethbirei, and at Shaaraim. These were their cities unto the reign of David.
hazazontamar (1)
	2 Chronicles 20.2 Then there came some that told Jehoshaphat, saying, There cometh a great multitude against thee from beyond the sea on this side Syria; and, behold, they be in Hazazontamar, which is Engedi.
hazel (1)
	Genesis 30.37 And Jacob took him rods of green poplar, and of the hazel and chestnut tree; and pilled white strakes in them, and made the white appear which was in the rods.
hazelelponi (1)
	1 Chronicles 4.3 And these were of the father of Etam; Jezreel, and Ishma, and Idbash: and the name of their sister was Hazelelponi:
hazerim (1)
	Deuteronomy 2.23 And the Avims which dwelt in Hazerim, even unto Azzah, the Caphtorims, which came forth out of Caphtor, destroyed them, and dwelt in their stead.)
hazezontamar (1)
	Genesis 14.7 And they returned, and came to Enmishpat, which is Kadesh, and smote all the country of the Amalekites, and also the Amorites, that dwelt in Hazezontamar.
haziel (1)
	1 Chronicles 23.9 The sons of Shimei; Shelomith, and Haziel, and Haran, three. These were the chief of the fathers of Laadan.
hazo (1)
	Genesis 22.22 And Chesed, and Hazo, and Pildash, and Jidlaph, and Bethuel.
headbands (1)
	Isaiah 3.20 The bonnets, and the ornaments of the legs, and the headbands, and the tablets, and the earrings,
headstone (1)
	Zechariah 4.7 Who art thou, O great mountain? before Zerubbabel thou shalt become a plain: and he shall bring forth the headstone thereof with shoutings, crying, Grace, grace unto it.
heady (1)
	2 Timothy 3.4 Traitors, heady, highminded, lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God;
healer (1)
	Isaiah 3.7 In that day shall he swear, saying, I will not be an healer; for in my house is neither bread nor clothing: make me not a ruler of the people.
healings (1)
	1 Corinthians 12.28 And God hath set some in the church, first apostles, secondarily prophets, thirdly teachers, after that miracles, then gifts of healings, helps, governments, diversities of tongues.
hearkenedst (1)
	Deuteronomy 28.45 Moreover all these curses shall come upon thee, and shall pursue thee, and overtake thee, till thou be destroyed; because thou hearkenedst not unto the voice of the LORD thy God, to keep his commandments and his statutes which he commanded thee:
hearkening (1)
	Psalms (prose) 103.20 Bless the LORD, ye his angels, that excel in strength, that do his commandments, hearkening unto the voice of his word.
heartily (1)
	Colossians 3.23  And whatsoever ye do, do it heartily, as to the Lord, and not unto men;
hearty (1)
	Proverbs 27.9 Ointment and perfume rejoice the heart: so doth the sweetness of a man's friend by hearty counsel.
heberites (1)
	Numbers 26.45 Of the sons of Beriah: of Heber, the family of the Heberites: of Malchiel, the family of the Malchielites.
hebers (1)
	Judges 4.21 Then Jael Heber's wife took a nail of the tent, and took an hammer in her hand, and went softly unto him, and smote the nail into his temples, and fastened it into the ground: for he was fast asleep and weary. So he died.
hebrewess (1)
	Jeremiah 34.9 That every man should let his manservant, and every man his maidservant, being an Hebrew or an Hebrewess, go free; that none should serve himself of them, to wit, of a Jew his brother.
hege (1)
	Esther 2.3 And let the king appoint officers in all the provinces of his kingdom, that they may gather together all the fair young virgins unto Shushan the palace, to the house of the women, unto the custody of Hege the king's chamberlain, keeper of the women; and let their things for purification be given them:
heifers (1)
	Deuteronomy 21.4 And the elders of that city shall bring down the heifer unto a rough valley, which is neither eared nor sown, and shall strike off the heifer's neck there in the valley:
heinous (1)
	Job 31.11 For this is an heinous crime; yea, it is an iniquity to be punished by the judges.
helbah (1)
	Judges 1.31 Neither did Asher drive out the inhabitants of Accho, nor the inhabitants of Zidon, nor of Ahlab, nor of Achzib, nor of Helbah, nor of Aphik, nor of Rehob:
helbon (1)
	Ezekiel 27.18 Damascus was thy merchant in the multitude of the wares of thy making, for the multitude of all riches; in the wine of Helbon, and white wool.
heleb (1)
	2 Samuel 23.29 Heleb the son of Baanah, a Netophathite, Ittai the son of Ribai out of Gibeah of the children of Benjamin,
heled (1)
	1 Chronicles 11.30 Maharai the Netophathite, Heled the son of Baanah the Netophathite,
helekites (1)
	Numbers 26.30 These are the sons of Gilead: of Jeezer, the family of the Jeezerites: of Helek, the family of the Helekites:
heleph (1)
	Joshua 19.33 And their coast was from Heleph, from Allon to Zaanannim, and Adami, Nekeb, and Jabneel, unto Lakum; and the outgoings thereof were at Jordan:
heli (1)
	Luke 3.23 And Jesus himself began to be about thirty years of age, being (as was supposed) the son of Joseph, which was the son of Heli,
helkai (1)
	Nehemiah 12.15 Of Harim, Adna; of Meraioth, Helkai;
helkathhazzurim (1)
	2 Samuel 2.16 And they caught every one his fellow by the head, and thrust his sword in his fellow's side; so they fell down together: wherefore that place was called Helkathhazzurim, which is in Gibeon.
helm (1)
	James 3.4 Behold also the ships, which though they be so great, and are driven of fierce winds, yet are they turned about with a very small helm, whithersoever the governor listeth.
helve (1)
	Deuteronomy 19.5 As when a man goeth into the wood with his neighbour to hew wood, and his hand fetcheth a stroke with the axe to cut down the tree, and the head slippeth from the helve, and lighteth upon his neighbour, that he die; he shall flee unto one of those cities, and live:
hemam (1)
	Genesis 36.22 And the children of Lotan were Hori and Hemam; and Lotan's sister was Timna.
hemdan (1)
	Genesis 36.26 And these are the children of Dishon; Hemdan, and Eshban, and Ithran, and Cheran.
hems (1)
	Exodus 39.24 And they made upon the hems of the robe pomegranates of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and twined linen.
hepherites (1)
	Numbers 26.32 And of Shemida, the family of the Shemidaites: and of Hepher, the family of the Hepherites.
herald (1)
	Daniel 3.4 Then an herald cried aloud, To you it is commanded, O people, nations, and languages,
herdman (1)
	Amos 7.14 Then answered Amos, and said to Amaziah, I was no prophet, neither was I a prophet's son; but I was an herdman, and a gatherer of sycomore fruit:
heres (1)
	Judges 1.35 But the Amorites would dwell in mount Heres in Aijalon, and in Shaalbim: yet the hand of the house of Joseph prevailed, so that they became tributaries.
heresh (1)
	1 Chronicles 9.15 And Bakbakkar, Heresh, and Galal, and Mattaniah the son of Micah, the son of Zichri, the son of Asaph;
heresy (1)
	Acts 24.14 But this I confess unto thee, that after the way which they call heresy, so worship I the God of my fathers, believing all things which are written in the law and in the prophets:
heretick (1)
	Titus 3.10 A man that is an heretick after the first and second admonition reject;
herewith (1)
	Malachi 3.10 Bring ye all the tithes into the storehouse, that there may be meat in mine house, and prove me now herewith, saith the LORD of hosts, if I will not open you the windows of heaven, and pour you out a blessing, that there shall not be room enough to receive it.
heritages (1)
	Isaiah 49.8 Thus saith the LORD, In an acceptable time have I heard thee, and in a day of salvation have I helped thee: and I will preserve thee, and give thee for a covenant of the people, to establish the earth, to cause to inherit the desolate heritages;
hermas (1)
	Romans 16.14 Salute Asyncritus, Phlegon, Hermas, Patrobas, Hermes, and the brethren which are with them.
hermes (1)
	Romans 16.14 Salute Asyncritus, Phlegon, Hermas, Patrobas, Hermes, and the brethren which are with them.
hermogenes (1)
	2 Timothy 1.15 This thou knowest, that all they which are in Asia be turned away from me; of whom are Phygellus and Hermogenes.
hermonites (1)
	Psalms (prose) 42.6 O my God, my soul is cast down within me: therefore will I remember thee from the land of Jordan, and of the Hermonites, from the hill Mizar.
herodion (1)
	Romans 16.11 Salute Herodion my kinsman. Greet them that be of the household of Narcissus, which are in the Lord.
hesed (1)
	1 Kings 4.10 The son of Hesed, in Aruboth; to him pertained Sochoh, and all the land of Hepher:
heshmon (1)
	Joshua 15.27 And Hazargaddah, and Heshmon, and Bethpalet,
hewer (1)
	Deuteronomy 29.11 Your little ones, your wives, and thy stranger that is in thy camp, from the hewer of thy wood unto the drawer of thy water:
hezeki (1)
	1 Chronicles 8.17 And Zebadiah, and Meshullam, and Hezeki, and Heber,
hezion (1)
	1 Kings 15.18 Then Asa took all the silver and the gold that were left in the treasures of the house of the LORD, and the treasures of the king's house, and delivered them into the hand of his servants: and king Asa sent them to Benhadad, the son of Tabrimon, the son of Hezion, king of Syria, that dwelt at Damascus, saying,
hezrai (1)
	2 Samuel 23.35 Hezrai the Carmelite, Paarai the Arbite,
hezro (1)
	1 Chronicles 11.37 Hezro the Carmelite, Naarai the son of Ezbai,
hezrons (1)
	1 Chronicles 2.24 And after that Hezron was dead in Calebephratah, then Abiah Hezron's wife bare him Ashur the father of Tekoa.
hiddai (1)
	2 Samuel 23.30 Benaiah the Pirathonite, Hiddai of the brooks of Gaash,
hiel (1)
	1 Kings 16.34 In his days did Hiel the Bethelite build Jericho: he laid the foundation thereof in Abiram his firstborn, and set up the gates thereof in his youngest son Segub, according to the word of the LORD, which he spake by Joshua the son of Nun.
hierapolis (1)
	Colossians 4.13  For I bear him record, that he hath a great zeal for you, and them that are in Laodicea, and them in Hierapolis.
higgaion (1)
	Psalms (prose) 9.16 The LORD is known by the judgment which he executeth: the wicked is snared in the work of his own hands. Higgaion. Selah.
hilen (1)
	1 Chronicles 6.58 And Hilen with her suburbs, Debir with her suburbs,
hilkiahs (1)
	Isaiah 36.3 Then came forth unto him Eliakim, Hilkiah's son, which was over the house, and Shebna the scribe, and Joah, Asaph's son, the recorder.
hindereth (1)
	Isaiah 14.6 He who smote the people in wrath with a continual stroke, he that ruled the nations in anger, is persecuted, and none hindereth.
hip (1)
	Judges 15.8 And he smote them hip and thigh with a great slaughter: and he went down and dwelt in the top of the rock Etam.
hirams (1)
	1 Kings 5.18 And Solomon's builders and Hiram's builders did hew them, and the stonesquarers: so they prepared timber and stones to build the house.
hires (1)
	Micah 1.7 And all the graven images thereof shall be beaten to pieces, and all the hires thereof shall be burned with the fire, and all the idols thereof will I lay desolate: for she gathered it of the hire of an harlot, and they shall return to the hire of an harlot.
hirest (1)
	Ezekiel 16.33 They give gifts to all whores: but thou givest thy gifts to all thy lovers, and hirest them, that they may come unto thee on every side for thy whoredom.
hizkiah (1)
	Zephaniah 1.1 The word of the LORD which came unto Zephaniah the son of Cushi, the son of Gedaliah, the son of Amariah, the son of Hizkiah, in the days of Josiah the son of Amon, king of Judah.
hizkijah (1)
	Nehemiah 10.17 Ater, Hizkijah, Azzur,
hoarfrost (1)
	Psalms (prose) 147.16 He giveth snow like wool: he scattereth the hoarfrost like ashes.
hobah (1)
	Genesis 14.15 And he divided himself against them, he and his servants, by night, and smote them, and pursued them unto Hobah, which is on the left hand of Damascus.
hod (1)
	1 Chronicles 7.37 Bezer, and Hod, and Shamma, and Shilshah, and Ithran, and Beera.
hodaiah (1)
	1 Chronicles 3.24 And the sons of Elioenai were, Hodaiah, and Eliashib, and Pelaiah, and Akkub, and Johanan, and Dalaiah, and Anani, seven.
hodesh (1)
	1 Chronicles 8.9 And he begat of Hodesh his wife, Jobab, and Zibia, and Mesha, and Malcham,
hodevah (1)
	Nehemiah 7.43 The Levites: the children of Jeshua, of Kadmiel, and of the children of Hodevah, seventy and four.
hodiah (1)
	1 Chronicles 4.19 And the sons of his wife Hodiah the sister of Naham, the father of Keilah the Garmite, and Eshtemoa the Maachathite.
hoham (1)
	Joshua 10.3 Wherefore Adonizedec king of Jerusalem, sent unto Hoham king of Hebron, and unto Piram king of Jarmuth, and unto Japhia king of Lachish, and unto Debir king of Eglon, saying,
hoised (1)
	Acts 27.40 And when they had taken up the anchors, they committed themselves unto the sea, and loosed the rudder bands, and hoised up the mainsail to the wind, and made toward shore.
holier (1)
	Isaiah 65.5 Which say, Stand by thyself, come not near to me; for I am holier than thou. These are a smoke in my nose, a fire that burneth all the day.
holily (1)
	1 Thessalonians 2.10 Ye are witnesses, and God also, how holily and justly and unblameably we behaved ourselves among you that believe:
homam (1)
	1 Chronicles 1.39 And the sons of Lotan; Hori, and Homam: and Timna was Lotan's sister.
homers (1)
	Numbers 11.32 And the people stood up all that day, and all that night, and all the next day, and they gathered the quails: he that gathered least gathered ten homers: and they spread them all abroad for themselves round about the camp.
honesty (1)
	1 Timothy 2.2 For kings, and for all that are in authority; that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty.
honor (1)
	Leviticus 19.15 Ye shall do no unrighteousness in judgment: thou shalt not respect the person of the poor, nor honor the person of the mighty: but in righteousness shalt thou judge thy neighbour.
honourest (1)
	1 Samuel 2.29 Wherefore kick ye at my sacrifice and at mine offering, which I have commanded in my habitation; and honourest thy sons above me, to make yourselves fat with the chiefest of all the offerings of Israel my people?
honours (1)
	Acts 28.10 Who also honoured us with many honours; and when we departed, they laded us with such things as were necessary.
hoods (1)
	Isaiah 3.23 The glasses, and the fine linen, and the hoods, and the vails.
hopes (1)
	Acts 26.7 Unto which promise our twelve tribes, instantly serving God day and night, hope to come. For which hope's sake, king Agrippa, I am accused of the Jews.
hopeth (1)
	1 Corinthians 13.7 Beareth all things, believeth all things, hopeth all things, endureth all things.
horam (1)
	Joshua 10.33 Then Horam king of Gezer came up to help Lachish; and Joshua smote him and his people, until he had left him none remaining.
horem (1)
	Joshua 19.38 And Iron, and Migdalel, Horem, and Bethanath, and Bethshemesh; nineteen cities with their villages.
horite (1)
	Genesis 36.20 These are the sons of Seir the Horite, who inhabited the land; Lotan, and Shobal, and Zibeon, and Anah,
hornets (1)
	Exodus 23.28 And I will send hornets before thee, which shall drive out the Hivite, the Canaanite, and the Hittite, from before thee.
horsehoofs (1)
	Judges 5.22 Then were the horsehoofs broken by the means of the pransings, the pransings of their mighty ones.
horseleech (1)
	Proverbs 30.15 The horseleech hath two daughters, crying, Give, give. There are three things that are never satisfied, yea, four things say not, It is enough:
hosen (1)
	Daniel 3.21 Then these men were bound in their coats, their hosen, and their hats, and their other garments, and were cast into the midst of the burning fiery furnace.
hoshama (1)
	1 Chronicles 3.18 Malchiram also, and Pedaiah, and Shenazar, Jecamiah, Hoshama, and Nedabiah.
hoshaphat (1)
	2 Kings 8.16 And in the fifth year of Joram the son of Ahab king of Israel, Jehoshaphat being then king of Judah, Jehoram the son of Je hoshaphat king of Judah began to reign.
hotham (1)
	1 Chronicles 7.32 And Heber begat Japhlet, and Shomer, and Hotham, and Shua their sister.
hothan (1)
	1 Chronicles 11.44 Uzzia the Ashterathite, Shama and Jehiel the sons of Hothan the Aroerite,
hotly (1)
	Genesis 31.36 And Jacob was wroth, and chode with Laban: and Jacob answered and said to Laban, What is my trespass? what is my sin, that thou hast so hotly pursued after me?
hottest (1)
	2 Samuel 11.15 And he wrote in the letter, saying, Set ye Uriah in the forefront of the hottest battle, and retire ye from him, that he may be smitten, and die.
hough (1)
	Joshua 11.6 And the LORD said unto Joshua, Be not afraid because of them: for to morrow about this time will I deliver them up all slain before Israel: thou shalt hough their horses, and burn their chariots with fire.
howled (1)
	Hosea 7.14 And they have not cried unto me with their heart, when they howled upon their beds: they assemble themselves for corn and wine, and they rebel against me.
howlings (1)
	Amos 8.3 And the songs of the temple shall be howlings in that day, saith the Lord GOD: there shall be many dead bodies in every place; they shall cast them forth with silence.
huge (1)
	2 Chronicles 16.8 Were not the Ethiopians and the Lubims a huge host, with very many chariots and horsemen? yet, because thou didst rely on the LORD, he delivered them into thine hand.
hukkok (1)
	Joshua 19.34 And then the coast turneth westward to Aznothtabor, and goeth out from thence to Hukkok, and reacheth to Zebulun on the south side, and reacheth to Asher on the west side, and to Judah upon Jordan toward the sunrising.
hukok (1)
	1 Chronicles 6.75 And Hukok with her suburbs, and Rehob with her suburbs:
humbledst (1)
	2 Chronicles 34.27 Because thine heart was tender, and thou didst humble thyself before God, when thou heardest his words against this place, and against the inhabitants thereof, and humbledst thyself before me, and didst rend thy clothes, and weep before me; I have even heard thee also, saith the LORD.
humbleness (1)
	Colossians 3.12  Put on therefore, as the elect of God, holy and beloved, bowels of mercies, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, longsuffering;
humiliation (1)
	Acts 8.33 In his humiliation his judgment was taken away: and who shall declare his generation? for his life is taken from the earth.
humtah (1)
	Joshua 15.54 And Humtah, and Kirjatharba, which is Hebron, and Zior; nine cities with their villages:
hungerbitten (1)
	Job 18.12 His strength shall be hungerbitten, and destruction shall be ready at his side.
hunted (1)
	Ezekiel 13.21 Your kerchiefs also will I tear, and deliver my people out of your hand, and they shall be no more in your hand to be hunted; and ye shall know that I am the LORD.
hunters (1)
	Jeremiah 16.16 Behold, I will send for many fishers, saith the LORD, and they shall fish them; and after will I send for many hunters, and they shall hunt them from every mountain, and from every hill, and out of the holes of the rocks.
hunteth (1)
	Leviticus 17.13 And whatsoever man there be of the children of Israel, or of the strangers that sojourn among you, which hunteth and catcheth any beast or fowl that may be eaten; he shall even pour out the blood thereof, and cover it with dust.
hupham (1)
	Numbers 26.39 Of Shupham, the family of the Shuphamites: of Hupham, the family of the Huphamites.
huphamites (1)
	Numbers 26.39 Of Shupham, the family of the Shuphamites: of Hupham, the family of the Huphamites.
huppah (1)
	1 Chronicles 24.13 The thirteenth to Huppah, the fourteenth to Jeshebeab,
hurai (1)
	1 Chronicles 11.32 Hurai of the brooks of Gaash, Abiel the Arbathite,
huri (1)
	1 Chronicles 5.14 These are the children of Abihail the son of Huri, the son of Jaroah, the son of Gilead, the son of Michael, the son of Jeshishai, the son of Jahdo, the son of Buz;
hurl (1)
	Numbers 35.20 But if he thrust him of hatred, or hurl at him by laying of wait, that he die;
hurleth (1)
	Job 27.21 The east wind carrieth him away, and he departeth: and as a storm hurleth him out of his place.
hurling (1)
	1 Chronicles 12.2 They were armed with bows, and could use both the right hand and the left in hurling stones and shooting arrows out of a bow, even of Saul's brethren of Benjamin.
hurting (1)
	1 Samuel 25.34 For in very deed, as the LORD God of Israel liveth, which hath kept me back from hurting thee, except thou hadst hasted and come to meet me, surely there had not been left unto Nabal by the morning light any that pisseth against the wall.
hushah (1)
	1 Chronicles 4.4 And Penuel the father of Gedor, and Ezer the father of Hushah. These are the sons of Hur, the firstborn of Ephratah, the father of Bethlehem.
husks (1)
	Luke 15.16 And he would fain have filled his belly with the husks that the swine did eat: and no man gave unto him.
huz (1)
	Genesis 22.21 Huz his firstborn, and Buz his brother, and Kemuel the father of Aram,
huzzab (1)
	Nahum 2.7 And Huzzab shall be led away captive, she shall be brought up, and her maids shall lead her as with the voice of doves, tabering upon their breasts.
hypocrisies (1)
	1 Peter 2.1 Wherefore laying aside all malice, and all guile, and hypocrisies, and envies, all evil speakings,
ibneiah (1)
	1 Chronicles 9.8 And Ibneiah the son of Jeroham, and Elah the son of Uzzi, the son of Michri, and Meshullam the son of Shephathiah, the son of Reuel, the son of Ibnijah;
ibnijah (1)
	1 Chronicles 9.8 And Ibneiah the son of Jeroham, and Elah the son of Uzzi, the son of Michri, and Meshullam the son of Shephathiah, the son of Reuel, the son of Ibnijah;
ibri (1)
	1 Chronicles 24.27 The sons of Merari by Jaaziah; Beno, and Shoham, and Zaccur, and Ibri.
ichabod (1)
	1 Samuel 4.21 And she named the child Ichabod, saying, The glory is departed from Israel: because the ark of God was taken, and because of her father in law and her husband.
ichabods (1)
	1 Samuel 14.3 And Ahiah, the son of Ahitub, Ichabod's brother, the son of Phinehas, the son of Eli, the LORD's priest in Shiloh, wearing an ephod. And the people knew not that Jonathan was gone.
idalah (1)
	Joshua 19.15 And Kattath, and Nahallal, and Shimron, and Idalah, and Bethlehem: twelve cities with their villages.
idbash (1)
	1 Chronicles 4.3 And these were of the father of Etam; Jezreel, and Ishma, and Idbash: and the name of their sister was Hazelelponi:
idolatries (1)
	1 Peter 4.3 For the time past of our life may suffice us to have wrought the will of the Gentiles, when we walked in lasciviousness, lusts, excess of wine, revellings, banquetings, and abominable idolatries:
idolatrous (1)
	2 Kings 23.5 And he put down the idolatrous priests, whom the kings of Judah had ordained to burn incense in the high places in the cities of Judah, and in the places round about Jerusalem; them also that burned incense unto Baal, to the sun, and to the moon, and to the planets, and to all the host of heaven.
idumaea (1)
	Mark 3.8 And from Jerusalem, and from Idumaea, and from beyond Jordan; and they about Tyre and Sidon, a great multitude, when they had heard what great things he did, came unto him.
igdaliah (1)
	Jeremiah 35.4 And I brought them into the house of the LORD, into the chamber of the sons of Hanan, the son of Igdaliah, a man of God, which was by the chamber of the princes, which was above the chamber of Maaseiah the son of Shallum, the keeper of the door:
igeal (1)
	1 Chronicles 3.22 And the sons of Shechaniah; Shemaiah: and the sons of Shemaiah; Hattush, and Igeal, and Bariah, and Neariah, and Shaphat, six.
ignominy (1)
	Proverbs 18.3 When the wicked cometh, then cometh also contempt, and with ignominy reproach.
ilai (1)
	1 Chronicles 11.29 Sibbecai the Hushathite, Ilai the Ahohite,
illuminated (1)
	Hebrews 10.32 But call to remembrance the former days, in which, after ye were illuminated, ye endured a great fight of afflictions;
illyricum (1)
	Romans 15.19 Through mighty signs and wonders, by the power of the Spirit of God; so that from Jerusalem, and round about unto Illyricum, I have fully preached the gospel of Christ.
imagery (1)
	Ezekiel 8.12 Then said he unto me, Son of man, hast thou seen what the ancients of the house of Israel do in the dark, every man in the chambers of his imagery? for they say, the LORD seeth us not; the LORD hath forsaken the earth.
imagineth (1)
	Nahum 1.11 There is one come out of thee, that imagineth evil against the LORD, a wicked counsellor.
immortal (1)
	1 Timothy 1.17 Now unto the King eternal, immortal, invisible, the only wise God, be honour and glory for ever and ever. Amen.
immutability (1)
	Hebrews 6.17 Wherein God, willing more abundantly to shew unto the heirs of promise the immutability of his counsel, confirmed it by an oath:
immutable (1)
	Hebrews 6.18 That by two immutable things, in which it was impossible for God to lie, we might have a strong consolation, who have fled for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set before us:
imna (1)
	1 Chronicles 7.35 And the sons of his brother Helem; Zophah, and Imna, and Shelesh, and Amal.
impediment (1)
	Mark 7.32 And they bring unto him one that was deaf, and had an impediment in his speech; and they beseech him to put his hand upon him.
impenitent (1)
	Romans 2.5 But after thy hardness and impenitent heart treasurest up unto thyself wrath against the day of wrath and revelation of the righteous judgment of God;
imperious (1)
	Ezekiel 16.30 How weak is thine heart, saith the LORD GOD, seeing thou doest all these things, the work of an imperious whorish woman;
implacable (1)
	Romans 1.31 Without understanding, covenantbreakers, without natural affection, implacable, unmerciful:
implead (1)
	Acts 19.38 Wherefore if Demetrius, and the craftsmen which are with him, have a matter against any man, the law is open, and there are deputies: let them implead one another.
importunity (1)
	Luke 11.8 I say unto you, Though he will not rise and give him, because he is his friend, yet because of his importunity he will rise and give him as many as he needeth.
impose (1)
	Ezra 7.24 Also we certify you, that touching any of the priests and Levites, singers, porters, Nethinims, or ministers of this house of God, it shall not be lawful to impose toll, tribute, or custom, upon them.
imposed (1)
	Hebrews 9.10 Which stood only in meats and drinks, and divers washings, and carnal ordinances, imposed on them until the time of reformation.
impoverish (1)
	Jeremiah 5.17 And they shall eat up thine harvest, and thy bread, which thy sons and thy daughters should eat: they shall eat up thy flocks and thine herds: they shall eat up thy vines and thy fig trees: they shall impoverish thy fenced cities, wherein thou trustedst, with the sword.
imprisoned (1)
	Acts 22.19 And I said, Lord, they know that I imprisoned and beat in every synagogue them that believed on thee:
imprisonments (1)
	2 Corinthians 6.5 In stripes, in imprisonments, in tumults, in labours, in watchings, in fastings;
imrah (1)
	1 Chronicles 7.36 The sons of Zophah; Suah, and Harnepher, and Shual, and Beri, and Imrah,
inclineth (1)
	Proverbs 2.18 For her house inclineth unto death, and her paths unto the dead.
inclose (1)
	Song of Songs 8.9 If she be a wall, we will build upon her a palace of silver: and if she be a door, we will inclose her with boards of cedar.
incontinency (1)
	1 Corinthians 7.5 Defraud ye not one the other, except it be with consent for a time, that ye may give yourselves to fasting and prayer; and come together again, that Satan tempt you not for your incontinency.
incontinent (1)
	2 Timothy 3.3 Without natural affection, trucebreakers, false accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are good,
increasest (1)
	Job 10.17 Thou renewest thy witnesses against me, and increasest thine indignation upon me; changes and war are against me.
increasing (1)
	Colossians 1.10  That ye might walk worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing, being fruitful in every good work, and increasing in the knowledge of God;
incredible (1)
	Acts 26.8 Why should it be thought a thing incredible with you, that God should raise the dead?
indebted (1)
	Luke 11.4 And forgive us our sins; for we also forgive every one that is indebted to us. And lead us not into temptation; but deliver us from evil.
inditing (1)
	Psalms (prose) 45.1 My heart is inditing a good matter: I speak of the things which I have made touching the king: my tongue is the pen of a ready writer.
industrious (1)
	1 Kings 11.28 And the man Jeroboam was a mighty man of valour: and Solomon seeing the young man that he was industrious, he made him ruler over all the charge of the house of Joseph.
inexcusable (1)
	Romans 2.1 Therefore thou art inexcusable, O man, whosoever thou art that judgest: for wherein thou judgest another, thou condemnest thyself; for thou that judgest doest the same things.
infallible (1)
	Acts 1.3 To whom also he shewed himself alive after his passion by many infallible proofs, being seen of them forty days, and speaking of the things pertaining to the kingdom of God:
infamous (1)
	Ezekiel 22.5 Those that be near, and those that be far from thee, shall mock thee, which art infamous and much vexed.
inflame (1)
	Isaiah 5.11 Woe unto them that rise up early in the morning, that they may follow strong drink; that continue until night, till wine inflame them!
inflicted (1)
	2 Corinthians 2.6 Sufficient to such a man is this punishment, which was inflicted of many.
influences (1)
	Job 38.31 Canst thou bind the sweet influences of Pleiades, or loose the bands of Orion?
infolding (1)
	Ezekiel 1.4 And I looked, and, behold, a whirlwind came out of the north, a great cloud, and a fire infolding itself, and a brightness was about it, and out of the midst thereof as the colour of amber, out of the midst of the fire.
inform (1)
	Deuteronomy 17.10 And thou shalt do according to the sentence, which they of that place which the LORD shall choose shall shew thee; and thou shalt observe to do according to all that they inform thee:
inhabitest (1)
	Psalms (prose) 22.3 But thou art holy, O thou that inhabitest the praises of Israel.
inhabiting (1)
	Psalms (prose) 74.14 Thou brakest the heads of leviathan in pieces, and gavest him to be meat to the people inhabiting the wilderness.
inheritances (1)
	Joshua 19.51 These are the inheritances, which Eleazar the priest, and Joshua the son of Nun, and the heads of the fathers of the tribes of the children of Israel, divided for an inheritance by lot in Shiloh before the LORD, at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation. So they made an end of dividing the country.
inheriteth (1)
	Numbers 35.8 And the cities which ye shall give shall be of the possession of the children of Israel: from them that have many ye shall give many; but from them that have few ye shall give few: every one shall give of his cities unto the Levites according to his inheritance which he inheriteth.
inheritor (1)
	Isaiah 65.9 And I will bring forth a seed out of Jacob, and out of Judah an inheritor of my mountains: and mine elect shall inherit it, and my servants shall dwell there.
injured (1)
	Galatians 4.12 Brethren, I beseech you, be as I am; for I am as ye are: ye have not injured me at all.
injurious (1)
	1 Timothy 1.13 Who was before a blasphemer, and a persecutor, and injurious: but I obtained mercy, because I did it ignorantly in unbelief.
injustice (1)
	Job 16.17 Not for any injustice in mine hands: also my prayer is pure.
inscription (1)
	Acts 17.23 For as I passed by, and beheld your devotions, I found an altar with this inscription, TO THE UNKNOWN GOD. Whom therefore ye ignorantly worship, him declare I unto you.
inside (1)
	1 Kings 6.15 And he built the walls of the house within with boards of cedar, both the floor of the house, and the walls of the ceiling: and he covered them on the inside with wood, and covered the floor of the house with planks of fir.
instructer (1)
	Genesis 4.22 And Zillah, she also bare Tubalcain, an instructer of every artificer in brass and iron: and the sister of Tubalcain was Naamah.
instructers (1)
	1 Corinthians 4.15 For though ye have ten thousand instructers in Christ, yet have ye not many fathers: for in Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the gospel.
instructing (1)
	2 Timothy 2.25 In meekness instructing those that oppose themselves; if God peradventure will give them repentance to the acknowledging of the truth;
instructor (1)
	Romans 2.20 An instructor of the foolish, a teacher of babes, which hast the form of knowledge and of the truth in the law.
intelligence (1)
	Daniel 11.30 For the ships of Chittim shall come against him: therefore he shall be grieved, and return, and have indignation against the holy covenant: so shall he do; he shall even return, and have intelligence with them that forsake the holy covenant.
intended (1)
	Psalms (prose) 21.11 For they intended evil against thee: they imagined a mischievous device, which they are not able to perform.
intendest (1)
	Exodus 2.14 And he said, Who made thee a prince and a judge over us? intendest thou to kill me, as thou killedst the Egyptian? And Moses feared, and said, Surely this thing is known.
intercessions (1)
	1 Timothy 2.1 I exhort therefore, that, first of all, supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks, be made for all men;
intercessor (1)
	Isaiah 59.16 And he saw that there was no man, and wondered that there was no intercessor: therefore his arm brought salvation unto him; and his righteousness, it sustained him.
intermeddle (1)
	Proverbs 14.10 The heart knoweth his own bitterness; and a stranger doth not intermeddle with his joy.
intermeddleth (1)
	Proverbs 18.1 Through desire a man, having separated himself, seeketh and intermeddleth with all wisdom.
intermission (1)
	Lamentations 3.49 Mine eye trickleth down, and ceaseth not, without any intermission.
interpreting (1)
	Daniel 5.12 Forasmuch as an excellent spirit, and knowledge, and understanding, interpreting of dreams, and shewing of hard sentences, and dissolving of doubts, were found in the same Daniel, whom the king named Belteshazzar: now let Daniel be called, and he will shew the interpretation.
intreaties (1)
	Proverbs 18.23 The poor useth intreaties; but the rich answereth roughly.
intreaty (1)
	2 Corinthians 8.4 Praying us with much intreaty that we would receive the gift, and take upon us the fellowship of the ministering to the saints.
intruding (1)
	Colossians 2.18  Let no man beguile you of your reward in a voluntary humility and worshipping of angels, intruding into those things which he hath not seen, vainly puffed up by his fleshly mind,
invasion (1)
	1 Samuel 30.14 We made an invasion upon the south of the Cherethites, and upon the coast which belongeth to Judah, and upon the south of Caleb; and we burned Ziklag with fire.
invent (1)
	Amos 6.5 That chant to the sound of the viol, and invent to themselves instruments of musick, like David;
invented (1)
	2 Chronicles 26.15 And he made in Jerusalem engines, invented by cunning men, to be on the towers and upon the bulwarks, to shoot arrows and great stones withal. And his name spread far abroad; for he was marvellously helped, till he was strong.
inventors (1)
	Romans 1.30 Backbiters, haters of God, despiteful, proud, boasters, inventors of evil things, disobedient to parents,
iphedeiah (1)
	1 Chronicles 8.25 And Iphedeiah, and Penuel, the sons of Shashak;
ir (1)
	1 Chronicles 7.12 Shuppim also, and Huppim, the children of Ir, and Hushim, the sons of Aher.
iri (1)
	1 Chronicles 7.7 And the sons of Bela; Ezbon, and Uzzi, and Uzziel, and Jerimoth, and Iri, five; heads of the house of their fathers, mighty men of valour; and were reckoned by their genealogies twenty and two thousand and thirty and four.
irnahash (1)
	1 Chronicles 4.12 And Eshton begat Bethrapha, and Paseah, and Tehinnah the father of Irnahash. These are the men of Rechah.
irons (1)
	Job 41.7 Canst thou fill his skin with barbed irons? or his head with fish spears?
irpeel (1)
	Joshua 18.27 And Rekem, and Irpeel, and Taralah,
irshemesh (1)
	Joshua 19.41 And the coast of their inheritance was Zorah, and Eshtaol, and Irshemesh,
iru (1)
	1 Chronicles 4.15 And the sons of Caleb the son of Jephunneh; Iru, Elah, and Naam: and the sons of Elah, even Kenaz.
iscah (1)
	Genesis 11.29 And Abram and Nahor took them wives: the name of Abram's wife was Sarai; and the name of Nahor's wife, Milcah, the daughter of Haran, the father of Milcah, and the father of Iscah.
ishbah (1)
	1 Chronicles 4.17 And the sons of Ezra were, Jether, and Mered, and Epher, and Jalon: and she bare Miriam, and Shammai, and Ishbah the father of Eshtemoa.
ishbibenob (1)
	2 Samuel 21.16 And Ishbibenob, which was of the sons of the giant, the weight of whose spear weighed three hundred shekels of brass in weight, he being girded with a new sword, thought to have slain David.
ishiah (1)
	1 Chronicles 7.3 And the sons of Uzzi; Izrahiah: and the sons of Izrahiah; Michael, and Obadiah, and Joel, Ishiah, five: all of them chief men.
ishijah (1)
	Ezra 10.31 And of the sons of Harim; Eliezer, Ishijah, Malchiah, Shemaiah, Shimeon,
ishma (1)
	1 Chronicles 4.3 And these were of the father of Etam; Jezreel, and Ishma, and Idbash: and the name of their sister was Hazelelponi:
ishmaelite (1)
	1 Chronicles 27.30 Over the camels also was Obil the Ishmaelite: and over the asses was Jehdeiah the Meronothite:
ishmaels (1)
	Genesis 36.3 And Bashemath Ishmael's daughter, sister of Nebajoth.
ishmaiah (1)
	1 Chronicles 27.19 Of Zebulun, Ishmaiah the son of Obadiah: of Naphtali, Jerimoth the son of Azriel:
ishmeelite (1)
	1 Chronicles 2.17 And Abigail bare Amasa: and the father of Amasa was Jether the Ishmeelite.
ishmerai (1)
	1 Chronicles 8.18 Ishmerai also, and Jezliah, and Jobab, the sons of Elpaal;
ishod (1)
	1 Chronicles 7.18 And his sister Hammoleketh bare Ishod, and Abiezer, and Mahalah.
ishpan (1)
	1 Chronicles 8.22 And Ishpan, and Heber, and Eliel,
ishuah (1)
	Genesis 46.17 And the sons of Asher; Jimnah, and Ishuah, and Isui, and Beriah, and Serah their sister: and the sons of Beriah; Heber, and Malchiel.
ishuai (1)
	1 Chronicles 7.30 The sons of Asher; Imnah, and Isuah, and Ishuai, and Beriah, and Serah their sister.
ishui (1)
	1 Samuel 14.49 Now the sons of Saul were Jonathan, and Ishui, and Melchishua: and the names of his two daughters were these; the name of the firstborn Merab, and the name of the younger Michal:
ismachiah (1)
	2 Chronicles 31.13 And Jehiel, and Azaziah, and Nahath, and Asahel, and Jerimoth, and Jozabad, and Eliel, and Ismachiah, and Mahath, and Benaiah, were overseers under the hand of Cononiah and Shimei his brother, at the commandment of Hezekiah the king, and Azariah the ruler of the house of God.
ismaiah (1)
	1 Chronicles 12.4 And Ismaiah the Gibeonite, a mighty man among the thirty, and over the thirty; and Jeremiah, and Jahaziel, and Johanan, and Josabad the Gederathite,
ispah (1)
	1 Chronicles 8.16 And Michael, and Ispah, and Joha, the sons of Beriah;
isuah (1)
	1 Chronicles 7.30 The sons of Asher; Imnah, and Isuah, and Ishuai, and Beriah, and Serah their sister.
isui (1)
	Genesis 46.17 And the sons of Asher; Jimnah, and Ishuah, and Isui, and Beriah, and Serah their sister: and the sons of Beriah; Heber, and Malchiel.
italian (1)
	Acts 10.1 There was a certain man in Caesarea called Cornelius, a centurion of the band called the Italian band,
itch (1)
	Deuteronomy 28.27 The LORD will smite thee with the botch of Egypt, and with the emerods, and with the scab, and with the itch, whereof thou canst not be healed.
itching (1)
	2 Timothy 4.3 For the time will come when they will not endure sound doctrine; but after their own lusts shall they heap to themselves teachers, having itching ears;
items (1)
	Exodus 23.17 Three items in the year all thy males shall appear before the LORD God.
ithai (1)
	1 Chronicles 11.31 Ithai the son of Ribai of Gibeah, that pertained to the children of Benjamin, Benaiah the Pirathonite,
ithmah (1)
	1 Chronicles 11.46 Eliel the Mahavite, and Jeribai, and Joshaviah, the sons of Elnaam, and Ithmah the Moabite,
ithnan (1)
	Joshua 15.23 And Kedesh, and Hazor, and Ithnan,
ithra (1)
	2 Samuel 17.25 And Absalom made Amasa captain of the host instead of Joab: which Amasa was a man's son, whose name was Ithra an Israelite, that went in to Abigail the daughter of Nahash, sister to Zeruiah Joab's mother.
ithrites (1)
	1 Chronicles 2.53 And the families of Kirjathjearim; the Ithrites, and the Puhites, and the Shumathites, and the Mishraites; of them came the Zareathites, and the Eshtaulites,
its (1)
	Leviticus 25.5 That which groweth of its own accord of thy harvest thou shalt not reap, neither gather the grapes of thy vine undressed: for it is a year of rest unto the land.
ittahkazin (1)
	Joshua 19.13 And from thence passeth on along on the east to Gittahhepher, to Ittahkazin, and goeth out to Remmonmethoar to Neah;
ituraea (1)
	Luke 3.1 Now in the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius Caesar, Pontius Pilate being governor of Judaea, and Herod being tetrarch of Galilee, and his brother Philip tetrarch of Ituraea and of the region of Trachonitis, and Lysanias the tetrarch of Abilene,
izehar (1)
	Numbers 3.19 And the sons of Kohath by their families; Amram, and Izehar, Hebron, and Uzziel.
izeharites (1)
	Numbers 3.27 And of Kohath was the family of the Amramites, and the family of the Izeharites, and the family of the Hebronites, and the family of the Uzzielites: these are the families of the Kohathites.
izrahite (1)
	1 Chronicles 27.8 The fifth captain for the fifth month was Shamhuth the Izrahite: and in his course were twenty and four thousand.
izri (1)
	1 Chronicles 25.11 The fourth to Izri, he, his sons, and his brethren, were twelve:
jaakan (1)
	Deuteronomy 10.6 And the children of Israel took their journey from Beeroth of the children of Jaakan to Mosera: there Aaron died, and there he was buried; and Eleazar his son ministered in the priest's office in his stead.
jaakobah (1)
	1 Chronicles 4.36 And Elioenai, and Jaakobah, and Jeshohaiah, and Asaiah, and Adiel, and Jesimiel, and Benaiah,
jaala (1)
	Nehemiah 7.58 The children of Jaala, the children of Darkon, the children of Giddel,
jaalah (1)
	Ezra 2.56 The children of Jaalah, the children of Darkon, the children of Giddel,
jaanai (1)
	1 Chronicles 5.12 Joel the chief, and Shapham the next, and Jaanai, and Shaphat in Bashan.
jaareoregim (1)
	2 Samuel 21.19 And there was again a battle in Gob with the Philistines, where Elhanan the son of Jaareoregim, a Bethlehemite, slew the brother of Goliath the Gittite, the staff of whose spear was like a weaver's beam.
jaasau (1)
	Ezra 10.37 Mattaniah, Mattenai, and Jaasau,
jaasiel (1)
	1 Chronicles 27.21 Of the half tribe of Manasseh in Gilead, Iddo the son of Zechariah: of Benjamin, Jaasiel the son of Abner:
jaaziel (1)
	1 Chronicles 15.18 And with them their brethren of the second degree, Zechariah, Ben, and Jaaziel, and Shemiramoth, and Jehiel, and Unni, Eliab, and Benaiah, and Maaseiah, and Mattithiah, and Elipheleh, and Mikneiah, and Obededom, and Jeiel, the porters.
jabal (1)
	Genesis 4.20 And Adah bare Jabal: he was the father of such as dwell in tents, and of such as have cattle.
jabins (1)
	Judges 4.7 And I will draw unto thee to the river Kishon Sisera, the captain of Jabin's army, with his chariots and his multitude; and I will deliver him into thine hand.
jabneh (1)
	2 Chronicles 26.6 And he went forth and warred against the Philistines, and brake down the wall of Gath, and the wall of Jabneh, and the wall of Ashdod, and built cities about Ashdod, and among the Philistines.
jachan (1)
	1 Chronicles 5.13 And their brethren of the house of their fathers were, Michael, and Meshullam, and Sheba, and Jorai, and Jachan, and Zia, and Heber, seven.
jachinites (1)
	Numbers 26.12 The sons of Simeon after their families: of Nemuel, the family of the Nemuelites: of Jamin, the family of the Jaminites: of Jachin, the family of the Jachinites:
jadau (1)
	Ezra 10.43 Of the sons of Nebo; Jeiel, Mattithiah, Zabad, Zebina, Jadau, and Joel, Benaiah.
jadon (1)
	Nehemiah 3.7 And next unto them repaired Melatiah the Gibeonite, and Jadon the Meronothite, the men of Gibeon, and of Mizpah, unto the throne of the governor on this side the river.
jagur (1)
	Joshua 15.21 And the uttermost cities of the tribe of the children of Judah toward the coast of Edom southward were Kabzeel, and Eder, and Jagur,
jah (1)
	Psalms (prose) 68.4 Sing unto God, sing praises to his name: extol him that rideth upon the heavens by his name JAH, and rejoice before him.
jahaza (1)
	Joshua 13.18 And Jahaza, and Kedemoth, and Mephaath,
jahaziah (1)
	Ezra 10.15 Only Jonathan the son of Asahel and Jahaziah the son of Tikvah were employed about this matter: and Meshullam and Shabbethai the Levite helped them.
jahdai (1)
	1 Chronicles 2.47 And the sons of Jahdai; Regem, and Jotham, and Gesham, and Pelet, and Ephah, and Shaaph.
jahdiel (1)
	1 Chronicles 5.24 And these were the heads of the house of their fathers, even Epher, and Ishi, and Eliel, and Azriel, and Jeremiah, and Hodaviah, and Jahdiel, mighty men of valour, famous men, and heads of the house of their fathers.
jahdo (1)
	1 Chronicles 5.14 These are the children of Abihail the son of Huri, the son of Jaroah, the son of Gilead, the son of Michael, the son of Jeshishai, the son of Jahdo, the son of Buz;
jahleelites (1)
	Numbers 26.26 Of the sons of Zebulun after their families: of Sered, the family of the Sardites: of Elon, the family of the Elonites: of Jahleel, the family of the Jahleelites.
jahmai (1)
	1 Chronicles 7.2 And the sons of Tola; Uzzi, and Rephaiah, and Jeriel, and Jahmai, and Jibsam, and Shemuel, heads of their father's house, to wit, of Tola: they were valiant men of might in their generations; whose number was in the days of David two and twenty thousand and six hundred.
jahzah (1)
	1 Chronicles 6.78 And on the other side Jordan by Jericho, on the east side of Jordan, were given them out of the tribe of Reuben, Bezer in the wilderness with her suburbs, and Jahzah with her suburbs,
jahzeelites (1)
	Numbers 26.48 Of the sons of Naphtali after their families: of Jahzeel, the family of the Jahzeelites: of Guni, the family of the Gunites:
jahzerah (1)
	1 Chronicles 9.12 And Adaiah the son of Jeroham, the son of Pashur, the son of Malchijah, and Maasiai the son of Adiel, the son of Jahzerah, the son of Meshullam, the son of Meshillemith, the son of Immer;
jahziel (1)
	1 Chronicles 7.13 The sons of Naphtali; Jahziel, and Guni, and Jezer, and Shallum, the sons of Bilhah.
jailor (1)
	Acts 16.23 And when they had laid many stripes upon them, they cast them into prison, charging the jailor to keep them safely:
jairite (1)
	2 Samuel 20.26 And Ira also the Jairite was a chief ruler about David.
jakan (1)
	1 Chronicles 1.42 The sons of Ezer; Bilhan, and Zavan, and Jakan. The sons of Dishan; Uz, and Aran.
jakeh (1)
	Proverbs 30.1 The words of Agur the son of Jakeh, even the prophecy: the man spake unto Ithiel, even unto Ithiel and Ucal,
jalon (1)
	1 Chronicles 4.17 And the sons of Ezra were, Jether, and Mered, and Epher, and Jalon: and she bare Miriam, and Shammai, and Ishbah the father of Eshtemoa.
jambres (1)
	2 Timothy 3.8 Now as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so do these also resist the truth: men of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the faith.
jaminites (1)
	Numbers 26.12 The sons of Simeon after their families: of Nemuel, the family of the Nemuelites: of Jamin, the family of the Jaminites: of Jachin, the family of the Jachinites:
jamlech (1)
	1 Chronicles 4.34 And Meshobab, and Jamlech, and Joshah, the son of Amaziah,
jangling (1)
	1 Timothy 1.6 From which some having swerved have turned aside unto vain jangling;
janna (1)
	Luke 3.24 Which was the son of Matthat, which was the son of Levi, which was the son of Melchi, which was the son of Janna, which was the son of Joseph,
jannes (1)
	2 Timothy 3.8 Now as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so do these also resist the truth: men of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the faith.
janoah (1)
	2 Kings 15.29 In the days of Pekah king of Israel came Tiglathpileser king of Assyria, and took Ijon, and Abelbethmaachah, and Janoah, and Kedesh, and Hazor, and Gilead, and Galilee, all the land of Naphtali, and carried them captive to Assyria.
janum (1)
	Joshua 15.53 And Janum, and Bethtappuah, and Aphekah,
japhleti (1)
	Joshua 16.3 And goeth down westward to the coast of Japhleti, unto the coast of Bethhoron the nether, and to Gezer; and the goings out thereof are at the sea.
japho (1)
	Joshua 19.46 And Mejarkon, and Rakkon, with the border before Japho.
jaresiah (1)
	1 Chronicles 8.27 And Jaresiah, and Eliah, and Zichri, the sons of Jeroham.
jaroah (1)
	1 Chronicles 5.14 These are the children of Abihail the son of Huri, the son of Jaroah, the son of Gilead, the son of Michael, the son of Jeshishai, the son of Jahdo, the son of Buz;
jashen (1)
	2 Samuel 23.32 Eliahba the Shaalbonite, of the sons of Jashen, Jonathan,
jashubilehem (1)
	1 Chronicles 4.22 And Jokim, and the men of Chozeba, and Joash, and Saraph, who had the dominion in Moab, and Jashubilehem. And these are ancient things.
jashubites (1)
	Numbers 26.24 Of Jashub, the family of the Jashubites: of Shimron, the family of the Shimronites.
jasiel (1)
	1 Chronicles 11.47 Eliel, and Obed, and Jasiel the Mesobaite.
jathniel (1)
	1 Chronicles 26.2 And the sons of Meshelemiah were, Zechariah the firstborn, Jediael the second, Zebadiah the third, Jathniel the fourth,
jaziz (1)
	1 Chronicles 27.31 And over the flocks was Jaziz the Hagerite. All these were the rulers of the substance which was king David's.
je (1)
	2 Kings 8.16 And in the fifth year of Joram the son of Ahab king of Israel, Jehoshaphat being then king of Judah, Jehoram the son of Je hoshaphat king of Judah began to reign.
jealousies (1)
	Numbers 5.29 This is the law of jealousies, when a wife goeth aside to another instead of her husband, and is defiled;
jearim (1)
	Joshua 15.10 And the border compassed from Baalah westward unto mount Seir, and passed along unto the side of mount Jearim, which is Chesalon, on the north side, and went down to Bethshemesh, and passed on to Timnah:
jeaterai (1)
	1 Chronicles 6.21 Joah his son, Iddo his son, Zerah his son, Jeaterai his son.
jeberechiah (1)
	Isaiah 8.2 And I took unto me faithful witnesses to record, Uriah the priest, and Zechariah the son of Jeberechiah.
jecamiah (1)
	1 Chronicles 3.18 Malchiram also, and Pedaiah, and Shenazar, Jecamiah, Hoshama, and Nedabiah.
jecholiah (1)
	2 Kings 15.2 Sixteen years old was he when he began to reign, and he reigned two and fifty years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Jecholiah of Jerusalem.
jecoliah (1)
	2 Chronicles 26.3 Sixteen years old was Uzziah when he began to reign, and he reigned fifty and two years in Jerusalem. His mother's name also was Jecoliah of Jerusalem.
jedidah (1)
	2 Kings 22.1 Josiah was eight years old when he began to reign, and he reigned thirty and one years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Jedidah, the daughter of Adaiah of Boscath.
jedidiah (1)
	2 Samuel 12.25 And he sent by the hand of Nathan the prophet; and he called his name Jedidiah, because of the LORD.
jeezer (1)
	Numbers 26.30 These are the sons of Gilead: of Jeezer, the family of the Jeezerites: of Helek, the family of the Helekites:
jeezerites (1)
	Numbers 26.30 These are the sons of Gilead: of Jeezer, the family of the Jeezerites: of Helek, the family of the Helekites:
jegarsahadutha (1)
	Genesis 31.47 And Laban called it Jegarsahadutha: but Jacob called it Galeed.
jehaleleel (1)
	1 Chronicles 4.16 And the sons of Jehaleleel; Ziph, and Ziphah, Tiria, and Asareel.
jehalelel (1)
	2 Chronicles 29.12 Then the Levites arose, Mahath the son of Amasai, and Joel the son of Azariah, of the sons of the Kohathites: and of the sons of Merari, Kish the son of Abdi, and Azariah the son of Jehalelel: and of the Gershonites; Joah the son of Zimmah, and Eden the son of Joah:
jehezekel (1)
	1 Chronicles 24.16 The nineteenth to Pethahiah, the twentieth to Jehezekel,
jehiah (1)
	1 Chronicles 15.24 And Shebaniah, and Jehoshaphat, and Nethaneel, and Amasai, and Zechariah, and Benaiah, and Eliezer, the priests, did blow with the trumpets before the ark of God: and Obededom and Jehiah were doorkeepers for the ark.
jehizkiah (1)
	2 Chronicles 28.12 Then certain of the heads of the children of Ephraim, Azariah the son of Johanan, Berechiah the son of Meshillemoth, and Jehizkiah the son of Shallum, and Amasa the son of Hadlai, stood up against them that came from the war,
jehoiachins (1)
	Ezekiel 1.2 In the fifth day of the month, which was the fifth year of king Jehoiachin's captivity,
jehosheba (1)
	2 Kings 11.2 But Jehosheba, the daughter of king Joram, sister of Ahaziah, took Joash the son of Ahaziah, and stole him from among the king's sons which were slain; and they hid him, even him and his nurse, in the bedchamber from Athaliah, so that he was not slain.
jehoshua (1)
	Numbers 13.16 These are the names of the men which Moses sent to spy out the land. And Moses called Oshea the son of Nun Jehoshua.
jehoshuah (1)
	1 Chronicles 7.27 Non his son, Jehoshuah his son.
jehovahjireh (1)
	Genesis 22.14 And Abraham called the name of that place Jehovahjireh: as it is said to this day, In the mount of the LORD it shall be seen.
jehovahnissi (1)
	Exodus 17.15 And Moses built an altar, and called the name of it Jehovahnissi:
jehovahshalom (1)
	Judges 6.24 Then Gideon built an altar there unto the LORD, and called it Jehovahshalom: unto this day it is yet in Ophrah of the Abiezrites.
jehubbah (1)
	1 Chronicles 7.34 And the sons of Shamer; Ahi, and Rohgah, Jehubbah, and Aram.
jehucal (1)
	Jeremiah 37.3 And Zedekiah the king sent Jehucal the son of Shelemiah and Zephaniah the son of Maaseiah the priest to the prophet Jeremiah, saying, Pray now unto the LORD our God for us.
jehud (1)
	Joshua 19.45 And Jehud, and Beneberak, and Gathrimmon,
jehudijah (1)
	1 Chronicles 4.18 And his wife Jehudijah bare Jered the father of Gedor, and Heber the father of Socho, and Jekuthiel the father of Zanoah. And these are the sons of Bithiah the daughter of Pharaoh, which Mered took.
jehush (1)
	1 Chronicles 8.39 And the sons of Eshek his brother were, Ulam his firstborn, Jehush the second, and Eliphelet the third.
jekabzeel (1)
	Nehemiah 11.25 And for the villages, with their fields, some of the children of Judah dwelt at Kirjatharba, and in the villages thereof, and at Dibon, and in the villages thereof, and at Jekabzeel, and in the villages thereof,
jekuthiel (1)
	1 Chronicles 4.18 And his wife Jehudijah bare Jered the father of Gedor, and Heber the father of Socho, and Jekuthiel the father of Zanoah. And these are the sons of Bithiah the daughter of Pharaoh, which Mered took.
jemima (1)
	Job 42.14 And he called the name of the first, Jemima; and the name of the second, Kezia; and the name of the third, Kerenhappuch.
jeoparded (1)
	Judges 5.18 Zebulun and Naphtali were a people that jeoparded their lives unto the death in the high places of the field.
jephthae (1)
	Hebrews 11.32 And what shall I more say? for the time would fail me to tell of Gedeon, and of Barak, and of Samson, and of Jephthae; of David also, and Samuel, and of the prophets:
jeremai (1)
	Ezra 10.33 Of the sons of Hashum; Mattenai, Mattathah, Zabad, Eliphelet, Jeremai, Manasseh, and Shimei.
jeremiahs (1)
	Jeremiah 28.10 Then Hananiah the prophet took the yoke from off the prophet Jeremiah's neck, and brake it.
jeremias (1)
	Matthew 16.14 And they said, Some say that thou art John the Baptist: some, Elias; and others, Jeremias, or one of the prophets.
jeribai (1)
	1 Chronicles 11.46 Eliel the Mahavite, and Jeribai, and Joshaviah, the sons of Elnaam, and Ithmah the Moabite,
jeriel (1)
	1 Chronicles 7.2 And the sons of Tola; Uzzi, and Rephaiah, and Jeriel, and Jahmai, and Jibsam, and Shemuel, heads of their father's house, to wit, of Tola: they were valiant men of might in their generations; whose number was in the days of David two and twenty thousand and six hundred.
jerijah (1)
	1 Chronicles 26.31 Among the Hebronites was Jerijah the chief, even among the Hebronites, according to the generations of his fathers. In the fortieth year of the reign of David they were sought for, and there were found among them mighty men of valour at Jazer of Gilead.
jerioth (1)
	1 Chronicles 2.18 And Caleb the son of Hezron begat children of Azubah his wife, and of Jerioth: her sons are these; Jesher, and Shobab, and Ardon.
jerubbesheth (1)
	2 Samuel 11.21 Who smote Abimelech the son of Jerubbesheth? did not a woman cast a piece of a millstone upon him from the wall, that he died in Thebez? why went ye nigh the wall? then say thou, Thy servant Uriah the Hittite is dead also.
jeruel (1)
	2 Chronicles 20.16 To morrow go ye down against them: behold, they come up by the cliff of Ziz; and ye shall find them at the end of the brook, before the wilderness of Jeruel.
jerusha (1)
	2 Kings 15.33 Five and twenty years old was he when he began to reign, and he reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Jerusha, the daughter of Zadok.
jerushah (1)
	2 Chronicles 27.1 Jotham was twenty and five years old when he began to reign, and he reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem. His mother's name also was Jerushah, the daughter of Zadok.
jeshanah (1)
	2 Chronicles 13.19 And Abijah pursued after Jeroboam, and took cities from him, Bethel with the towns thereof, and Jeshanah with the towns thereof, and Ephraim with the towns thereof.
jesharelah (1)
	1 Chronicles 25.14 The seventh to Jesharelah, he, his sons, and his brethren, were twelve:
jeshebeab (1)
	1 Chronicles 24.13 The thirteenth to Huppah, the fourteenth to Jeshebeab,
jesher (1)
	1 Chronicles 2.18 And Caleb the son of Hezron begat children of Azubah his wife, and of Jerioth: her sons are these; Jesher, and Shobab, and Ardon.
jeshishai (1)
	1 Chronicles 5.14 These are the children of Abihail the son of Huri, the son of Jaroah, the son of Gilead, the son of Michael, the son of Jeshishai, the son of Jahdo, the son of Buz;
jeshohaiah (1)
	1 Chronicles 4.36 And Elioenai, and Jaakobah, and Jeshohaiah, and Asaiah, and Adiel, and Jesimiel, and Benaiah,
jeshuah (1)
	1 Chronicles 24.11 The ninth to Jeshuah, the tenth to Shecaniah,
jesimiel (1)
	1 Chronicles 4.36 And Elioenai, and Jaakobah, and Jeshohaiah, and Asaiah, and Adiel, and Jesimiel, and Benaiah,
jesting (1)
	Ephesians 5.4 Neither filthiness, nor foolish talking, nor jesting, which are not convenient: but rather giving of thanks.
jesui (1)
	Numbers 26.44 Of the children of Asher after their families: of Jimna, the family of the Jimnites: of Jesui, the family of the Jesuites: of Beriah, the family of the Beriites.
jesuites (1)
	Numbers 26.44 Of the children of Asher after their families: of Jimna, the family of the Jimnites: of Jesui, the family of the Jesuites: of Beriah, the family of the Beriites.
jesurun (1)
	Isaiah 44.2 Thus saith the LORD that made thee, and formed thee from the womb, which will help thee; Fear not, O Jacob, my servant; and thou, Jesurun, whom I have chosen.
jethlah (1)
	Joshua 19.42 And Shaalabbin, and Ajalon, and Jethlah,
jeuel (1)
	1 Chronicles 9.6 And of the sons of Zerah; Jeuel, and their brethren, six hundred and ninety.
jeuz (1)
	1 Chronicles 8.10 And Jeuz, and Shachia, and Mirma. These were his sons, heads of the fathers.
jewish (1)
	Titus 1.14 Not giving heed to Jewish fables, and commandments of men, that turn from the truth.
jezebels (1)
	1 Kings 18.19 Now therefore send, and gather to me all Israel unto mount Carmel, and the prophets of Baal four hundred and fifty, and the prophets of the groves four hundred, which eat at Jezebel's table.
jezerites (1)
	Numbers 26.49 Of Jezer, the family of the Jezerites: of Shillem, the family of the Shillemites.
jeziah (1)
	Ezra 10.25 Moreover of Israel: of the sons of Parosh; Ramiah, and Jeziah, and Malchiah, and Miamin, and Eleazar, and Malchijah, and Benaiah.
jeziel (1)
	1 Chronicles 12.3 The chief was Ahiezer, then Joash, the sons of Shemaah the Gibeathite; and Jeziel, and Pelet, the sons of Azmaveth; and Berachah, and Jehu the Antothite.
jezliah (1)
	1 Chronicles 8.18 Ishmerai also, and Jezliah, and Jobab, the sons of Elpaal;
jezoar (1)
	1 Chronicles 4.7 And the sons of Helah were, Zereth, and Jezoar, and Ethnan.
jezrahiah (1)
	Nehemiah 12.42 And Maaseiah, and Shemaiah, and Eleazar, and Uzzi, and Jehohanan, and Malchijah, and Elam, and Ezer. And the singers sang loud, with Jezrahiah their overseer.
jibsam (1)
	1 Chronicles 7.2 And the sons of Tola; Uzzi, and Rephaiah, and Jeriel, and Jahmai, and Jibsam, and Shemuel, heads of their father's house, to wit, of Tola: they were valiant men of might in their generations; whose number was in the days of David two and twenty thousand and six hundred.
jidlaph (1)
	Genesis 22.22 And Chesed, and Hazo, and Pildash, and Jidlaph, and Bethuel.
jimna (1)
	Numbers 26.44 Of the children of Asher after their families: of Jimna, the family of the Jimnites: of Jesui, the family of the Jesuites: of Beriah, the family of the Beriites.
jimnah (1)
	Genesis 46.17 And the sons of Asher; Jimnah, and Ishuah, and Isui, and Beriah, and Serah their sister: and the sons of Beriah; Heber, and Malchiel.
jimnites (1)
	Numbers 26.44 Of the children of Asher after their families: of Jimna, the family of the Jimnites: of Jesui, the family of the Jesuites: of Beriah, the family of the Beriites.
jiphtah (1)
	Joshua 15.43 And Jiphtah, and Ashnah, and Nezib,
joahaz (1)
	2 Chronicles 34.8 Now in the eighteenth year of his reign, when he had purged the land, and the house, he sent Shaphan the son of Azaliah, and Maaseiah the governor of the city, and Joah the son of Joahaz the recorder, to repair the house of the LORD his God.
jobs (1)
	Job 2.11 Now when Job's three friends heard of all this evil that was come upon him, they came every one from his own place; Eliphaz the Temanite, and Bildad the Shuhite, and Zophar the Naamathite: for they had made an appointment together to come to mourn with him and to comfort him.
joed (1)
	Nehemiah 11.7 And these are the sons of Benjamin; Sallu the son of Meshullam, the son of Joed, the son of Pedaiah, the son of Kolaiah, the son of Maaseiah, the son of Ithiel, the son of Jesaiah.
joelah (1)
	1 Chronicles 12.7 And Joelah, and Zebadiah, the sons of Jeroham of Gedor.
joezer (1)
	1 Chronicles 12.6 Elkanah, and Jesiah, and Azareel, and Joezer, and Jashobeam, the Korhites,
jogli (1)
	Numbers 34.22 And the prince of the tribe of the children of Dan, Bukki the son of Jogli.
joining (1)
	2 Chronicles 3.12 And one wing of the other cherub was five cubits, reaching to the wall of the house: and the other wing was five cubits also, joining to the wing of the other cherub.
joinings (1)
	1 Chronicles 22.3 And David prepared iron in abundance for the nails for the doors of the gates, and for the joinings; and brass in abundance without weight;
jointheirs (1)
	Romans 8.17 And if children, then heirs; heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Christ; if so be that we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified together.
jokdeam (1)
	Joshua 15.56 And Jezreel, and Jokdeam, and Zanoah,
jokim (1)
	1 Chronicles 4.22 And Jokim, and the men of Chozeba, and Joash, and Saraph, who had the dominion in Moab, and Jashubilehem. And these are ancient things.
jokmeam (1)
	1 Chronicles 6.68 And Jokmeam with her suburbs, and Bethhoron with her suburbs,
jona (1)
	John 1.42 And he brought him to Jesus. And when Jesus beheld him, he said, Thou art Simon the son of Jona: thou shalt be called Cephas, which is by interpretation, A stone.
jonan (1)
	Luke 3.30 Which was the son of Simeon, which was the son of Juda, which was the son of Joseph, which was the son of Jonan, which was the son of Eliakim,
jorah (1)
	Ezra 2.18 The children of Jorah, an hundred and twelve.
jorai (1)
	1 Chronicles 5.13 And their brethren of the house of their fathers were, Michael, and Meshullam, and Sheba, and Jorai, and Jachan, and Zia, and Heber, seven.
jorim (1)
	Luke 3.29 Which was the son of Jose, which was the son of Eliezer, which was the son of Jorim, which was the son of Matthat, which was the son of Levi,
jorkoam (1)
	1 Chronicles 2.44 And Shema begat Raham, the father of Jorkoam: and Rekem begat Shammai.
josabad (1)
	1 Chronicles 12.4 And Ismaiah the Gibeonite, a mighty man among the thirty, and over the thirty; and Jeremiah, and Jahaziel, and Johanan, and Josabad the Gederathite,
jose (1)
	Luke 3.29 Which was the son of Jose, which was the son of Eliezer, which was the son of Jorim, which was the son of Matthat, which was the son of Levi,
joshah (1)
	1 Chronicles 4.34 And Meshobab, and Jamlech, and Joshah, the son of Amaziah,
joshaphat (1)
	1 Chronicles 11.43 Hanan the son of Maachah, and Joshaphat the Mithnite,
joshaviah (1)
	1 Chronicles 11.46 Eliel the Mahavite, and Jeribai, and Joshaviah, the sons of Elnaam, and Ithmah the Moabite,
josibiah (1)
	1 Chronicles 4.35 And Joel, and Jehu the son of Josibiah, the son of Seraiah, the son of Asiel,
josiphiah (1)
	Ezra 8.10 And of the sons of Shelomith; the son of Josiphiah, and with him an hundred and threescore males.
jot (1)
	Matthew 5.18 For verily I say unto you, Till heaven and earth pass, one jot or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the law, till all be fulfilled.
jotbah (1)
	2 Kings 21.19 Amon was twenty and two years old when he began to reign, and he reigned two years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Meshullemeth, the daughter of Haruz of Jotbah.
jotbath (1)
	Deuteronomy 10.7 From thence they journeyed unto Gudgodah; and from Gudgodah to Jotbath, a land of rivers of waters.
joyed (1)
	2 Corinthians 7.13 Therefore we were comforted in your comfort: yea, and exceedingly the more joyed we for the joy of Titus, because his spirit was refreshed by you all.
joying (1)
	Colossians 2.5  For though I be absent in the flesh, yet am I with you in the spirit, joying and beholding your order, and the stedfastness of your faith in Christ.
jozachar (1)
	2 Kings 12.21 For Jozachar the son of Shimeath, and Jehozabad the son of Shomer, his servants, smote him, and he died; and they buried him with his fathers in the city of David: and Amaziah his son reigned in his stead.
jubal (1)
	Genesis 4.21 And his brother's name was Jubal: he was the father of all such as handle the harp and organ.
jucal (1)
	Jeremiah 38.1 Then Shephatiah the son of Mattan, and Gedaliah the son of Pashur, and Jucal the son of Shelemiah, and Pashur the son of Malchiah, heard the words that Jeremiah had spoken unto all the people, saying,
jude (1)
	Jude 1.1 Jude, the servant of Jesus Christ, and brother of James, to them that are sanctified by God the Father, and preserved in Jesus Christ, and called:
judea (1)
	Ezra 5.8 Be it known unto the king, that we went into the province of Judea, to the house of the great God, which is builded with great stones, and timber is laid in the walls, and this work goeth fast on, and prospereth in their hands.
judith (1)
	Genesis 26.34 And Esau was forty years old when he took to wife Judith the daughter of Beeri the Hittite, and Bashemath the daughter of Elon the Hittite:
juice (1)
	Song of Songs 8.2 I would lead thee, and bring thee into my mother's house, who would instruct me: I would cause thee to drink of spiced wine of the juice of my pomegranate.
julia (1)
	Romans 16.15 Salute Philologus, and Julia, Nereus, and his sister, and Olympas, and all the saints which are with them.
jumping (1)
	Nahum 3.2 The noise of a whip, and the noise of the rattling of the wheels, and of the pransing horses, and of the jumping chariots.
junia (1)
	Romans 16.7 Salute Andronicus and Junia, my kinsmen, and my fellow-prisoners, who are of note among the apostles, who also were in Christ before me.
jurisdiction (1)
	Luke 23.7 And as soon as he knew that he belonged unto Herod's jurisdiction, he sent him to Herod, who himself also was at Jerusalem at that time.
jushabhesed (1)
	1 Chronicles 3.20 And Hashubah, and Ohel, and Berechiah, and Hasadiah, Jushabhesed, five.
justifier (1)
	Romans 3.26 To declare, I say, at this time his righteousness: that he might be just, and the justifier of him which believeth in Jesus.
justle (1)
	Nahum 2.4 The chariots shall rage in the streets, they shall justle one against another in the broad ways: they shall seem like torches, they shall run like the lightnings.
kadmonites (1)
	Genesis 15.19 The Kenites, and the Kenizzites, and the Kadmonites,
kallai (1)
	Nehemiah 12.20 Of Sallai, Kallai; of Amok, Eber;
karkaa (1)
	Joshua 15.3 And it went out to the south side to Maalehacrabbim, and passed along to Zin, and ascended up on the south side unto Kadeshbarnea, and passed along to Hezron, and went up to Adar, and fetched a compass to Karkaa:
karkor (1)
	Judges 8.10 Now Zebah and Zalmunna were in Karkor, and their hosts with them, about fifteen thousand men, all that were left of all the hosts of the children of the east: for there fell an hundred and twenty thousand men that drew sword.
karnaim (1)
	Genesis 14.5 And in the fourteenth year came Chedorlaomer, and the kings that were with him, and smote the Rephaims in Ashteroth Karnaim, and the Zuzims in Ham, and the Emins in Shaveh Kiriathaim,
kartah (1)
	Joshua 21.34 And unto the families of the children of Merari, the rest of the Levites, out of the tribe of Zebulun, Jokneam with her suburbs, and Kartah with her suburbs,
kartan (1)
	Joshua 21.32 And out of the tribe of Naphtali, Kedesh in Galilee with her suburbs, to be a city of refuge for the slayer; and Hammothdor with her suburbs, and Kartan with her suburbs; three cities.
kattath (1)
	Joshua 19.15 And Kattath, and Nahallal, and Shimron, and Idalah, and Bethlehem: twelve cities with their villages.
kedeshnaphtali (1)
	Judges 4.6 And she sent and called Barak the son of Abinoam out of Kedeshnaphtali, and said unto him, Hath not the LORD God of Israel commanded, saying, Go and draw toward mount Tabor, and take with thee ten thousand men of the children of Naphtali and of the children of Zebulun?
kelaiah (1)
	Ezra 10.23 Also of the Levites; Jozabad, and Shimei, and Kelaiah, (the same is Kelita,) Pethahiah, Judah, and Eliezer.
kenan (1)
	1 Chronicles 1.2 Kenan, Mahalaleel, Jered,
kenizzites (1)
	Genesis 15.19 The Kenites, and the Kenizzites, and the Kadmonites,
kerenhappuch (1)
	Job 42.14 And he called the name of the first, Jemima; and the name of the second, Kezia; and the name of the third, Kerenhappuch.
kernels (1)
	Numbers 6.4 All the days of his separation shall he eat nothing that is made of the vine tree, from the kernels even to the husk.
kettle (1)
	1 Samuel 2.14 And he struck it into the pan, or kettle, or caldron, or pot; all that the fleshhook brought up the priest took for himself. So they did in Shiloh unto all the Israelites that came thither.
kezia (1)
	Job 42.14 And he called the name of the first, Jemima; and the name of the second, Kezia; and the name of the third, Kerenhappuch.
keziz (1)
	Joshua 18.21 Now the cities of the tribe of the children of Benjamin according to their families were Jericho, and Bethhoglah, and the valley of Keziz,
kibzaim (1)
	Joshua 21.22 And Kibzaim with her suburbs, and Bethhoron with her suburbs; four cities.
kicked (1)
	Deuteronomy 32.15 But Jeshurun waxed fat, and kicked: thou art waxen fat, thou art grown thick, thou art covered with fatness; then he forsook God which made him, and lightly esteemed the Rock of his salvation.
kinah (1)
	Joshua 15.22 And Kinah, and Dimonah, and Adadah,
kingly (1)
	Daniel 5.20 But when his heart was lifted up, and his mind hardened in pride, he was deposed from his kingly throne, and they took his glory from him:
kinsmans (1)
	Ruth 3.13 Tarry this night, and it shall be in the morning, that if he will perform unto thee the part of a kinsman, well; let him do the kinsman's part: but if he will not do the part of a kinsman to thee, then will I do the part of a kinsman to thee, as the LORD liveth: lie down until the morning.
kinswomen (1)
	Leviticus 18.17 Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of a woman and her daughter, neither shalt thou take her son's daughter, or her daughter's daughter, to uncover her nakedness; for they are her near kinswomen: it is wickedness.
kirharaseth (1)
	2 Kings 3.25 And they beat down the cities, and on every good piece of land cast every man his stone, and filled it; and they stopped all the wells of water, and felled all the good trees: only in Kirharaseth left they the stones thereof; howbeit the slingers went about it, and smote it.
kirhareseth (1)
	Isaiah 16.7 Therefore shall Moab howl for Moab, every one shall howl: for the foundations of Kirhareseth shall ye mourn; surely they are stricken.
kirharesh (1)
	Isaiah 16.11 Wherefore my bowels shall sound like an harp for Moab, and mine inward parts for Kirharesh.
kirioth (1)
	Amos 2.2 But I will send a fire upon Moab, and it shall devour the palaces of Kirioth: and Moab shall die with tumult, with shouting, and with the sound of the trumpet:
kirjath (1)
	Joshua 18.28 And Zelah, Eleph, and Jebusi, which is Jerusalem, Gibeath, and Kirjath; fourteen cities with their villages. This is the inheritance of the children of Benjamin according to their families.
kirjatharim (1)
	Ezra 2.25 The children of Kirjatharim, Chephirah, and Beeroth, seven hundred and forty and three.
kirjathhuzoth (1)
	Numbers 22.39 And Balaam went with Balak, and they came unto Kirjathhuzoth.
kirjathsannah (1)
	Joshua 15.49 And Dannah, and Kirjathsannah, which is Debir,
kishi (1)
	1 Chronicles 6.44 And their brethren the sons of Merari stood on the left hand: Ethan the son of Kishi, the son of Abdi, the son of Malluch,
kishion (1)
	Joshua 19.20 And Rabbith, and Kishion, and Abez,
kison (1)
	Psalms (prose) 83.9 Do unto them as unto the Midianites; as to Sisera, as to Jabin, at the brook of Kison:
kithlish (1)
	Joshua 15.40 And Cabbon, and Lahmam, and Kithlish,
kitron (1)
	Judges 1.30 Neither did Zebulun drive out the inhabitants of Kitron, nor the inhabitants of Nahalol; but the Canaanites dwelt among them, and became tributaries.
knocked (1)
	Acts 12.13 And as Peter knocked at the door of the gate, a damsel came to hearken, named Rhoda.
knocking (1)
	Acts 12.16 But Peter continued knocking: and when they had opened the door, and saw him, they were astonished.
koa (1)
	Ezekiel 23.23 The Babylonians, and all the Chaldeans, Pekod, and Shoa, and Koa, and all the Assyrians with them: all of them desirable young men, captains and rulers, great lords and renowned, all of them riding upon horses.
korahite (1)
	1 Chronicles 9.31 And Mattithiah, one of the Levites, who was the firstborn of Shallum the Korahite, had the set office over the things that were made in the pans.
korahites (1)
	1 Chronicles 9.19 And Shallum the son of Kore, the son of Ebiasaph, the son of Korah, and his brethren, of the house of his father, the Korahites, were over the work of the service, keepers of the gates of the tabernacle: and their fathers, being over the host of the LORD, were keepers of the entry.
korathites (1)
	Numbers 26.58 These are the families of the Levites: the family of the Libnites, the family of the Hebronites, the family of the Mahlites, the family of the Mushites, the family of the Korathites. And Kohath begat Amram.
kushaiah (1)
	1 Chronicles 15.17 So the Levites appointed Heman the son of Joel; and of his brethren, Asaph the son of Berechiah; and of the sons of Merari their brethren, Ethan the son of Kushaiah;
laadah (1)
	1 Chronicles 4.21 The sons of Shelah the son of Judah were, Er the father of Lecah, and Laadah the father of Mareshah, and the families of the house of them that wrought fine linen, of the house of Ashbea,
ladder (1)
	Genesis 28.12 And he dreamed, and behold a ladder set up on the earth, and the top of it reached to heaven: and behold the angels of God ascending and descending on it.
ladeth (1)
	Habakkuk 2.6 Shall not all these take up a parable against him, and a taunting proverb against him, and say, Woe to him that increaseth that which is not his! how long? and to him that ladeth himself with thick clay!
lael (1)
	Numbers 3.24 And the chief of the house of the father of the Gershonites shall be Eliasaph the son of Lael.
lahad (1)
	1 Chronicles 4.2 And Reaiah the son of Shobal begat Jahath; and Jahath begat Ahumai, and Lahad. These are the families of the Zorathites.
lahmam (1)
	Joshua 15.40 And Cabbon, and Lahmam, and Kithlish,
lahmi (1)
	1 Chronicles 20.5 And there was war again with the Philistines; and Elhanan the son of Jair slew Lahmi the brother of Goliath the Gittite, whose spear staff was like a weaver's beam.
laidst (1)
	Psalms (prose) 66.11 Thou broughtest us into the net; thou laidst affliction upon our loins.
lakum (1)
	Joshua 19.33 And their coast was from Heleph, from Allon to Zaanannim, and Adami, Nekeb, and Jabneel, unto Lakum; and the outgoings thereof were at Jordan:
lamentable (1)
	Daniel 6.20 And when he came to the den, he cried with a lamentable voice unto Daniel: and the king spake and said to Daniel, O Daniel, servant of the living God, is thy God, whom thou servest continually, able to deliver thee from the lions?
lance (1)
	Jeremiah 50.42 They shall hold the bow and the lance: they are cruel, and will not shew mercy: their voice shall roar like the sea, and they shall ride upon horses, every one put in array, like a man to the battle, against thee, O daughter of Babylon.
lancets (1)
	1 Kings 18.28 And they cried aloud, and cut themselves after their manner with knives and lancets, till the blood gushed out upon them.
landing (1)
	Acts 28.12 And landing at Syracuse, we tarried there three days.
landmarks (1)
	Job 24.2 Some remove the landmarks; they violently take away flocks, and feed thereof.
lanes (1)
	Luke 14.21 So that servant came, and shewed his lord these things. Then the master of the house being angry said to his servant, Go out quickly into the streets and lanes of the city, and bring in hither the poor, and the maimed, and the halt, and the blind.
languished (1)
	Lamentations 2.8 The LORD hath purposed to destroy the wall of the daughter of Zion: he hath stretched out a line, he hath not withdrawn his hand from destroying: therefore he made the rampart and the wall to lament; they languished together.
languishing (1)
	Psalms (prose) 41.3 The LORD will strengthen him upon the bed of languishing: thou wilt make all his bed in his sickness.
lanterns (1)
	John 18.3 Judas then, having received a band of men and officers from the chief priests and Pharisees, cometh thither with lanterns and torches and weapons.
lapidoth (1)
	Judges 4.4 And Deborah, a prophetess, the wife of Lapidoth, she judged Israel at that time.
largeness (1)
	1 Kings 4.29 And God gave Solomon wisdom and understanding exceeding much, and largeness of heart, even as the sand that is on the sea shore.
lasea (1)
	Acts 27.8 And, hardly passing it, came unto a place which is called The fair havens; nigh whereunto was the city of Lasea.
lasha (1)
	Genesis 10.19 And the border of the Canaanites was from Sidon, as thou comest to Gerar, unto Gaza; as thou goest, unto Sodom, and Gomorrah, and Admah, and Zeboim, even unto Lasha.
lasharon (1)
	Joshua 12.18 The king of Aphek, one; the king of Lasharon, one;
lasted (1)
	Judges 14.17 And she wept before him the seven days, while their feast lasted: and it came to pass on the seventh day, that he told her, because she lay sore upon him: and she told the riddle to the children of her people.
lasting (1)
	Deuteronomy 33.15 And for the chief things of the ancient mountains, and for the precious things of the lasting hills,
lately (1)
	Acts 18.2 And found a certain Jew named Aquila, born in Pontus, lately come from Italy, with his wife Priscilla; (because that Claudius had commanded all Jews to depart from Rome:) and came unto them.
laud (1)
	Romans 15.11 And again, Praise the Lord, all ye Gentiles; and laud him, all ye people.
laugheth (1)
	Job 41.29 Darts are counted as stubble: he laugheth at the shaking of a spear.
laughing (1)
	Job 8.21 Till he fill thy mouth with laughing, and thy lips with rejoicing.
launch (1)
	Luke 5.4 Now when he had left speaking, he said unto Simon, Launch out into the deep, and let down your nets for a draught.
lavish (1)
	Isaiah 46.6 They lavish gold out of the bag, and weigh silver in the balance, and hire a goldsmith; and he maketh it a god: they fall down, yea, they worship.
lawless (1)
	1 Timothy 1.9 Knowing this, that the law is not made for a righteous man, but for the lawless and disobedient, for the ungodly and for sinners, for unholy and profane, for murderers of fathers and murderers of mothers, for manslayers,
layedst (1)
	Luke 19.21 For I feared thee, because thou art an austere man: thou takest up that thou layedst not down, and reapest that thou didst not sow.
leadest (1)
	Psalms (prose) 80.1 Give ear, O Shepherd of Israel, thou that leadest Joseph like a flock; thou that dwellest between the cherubims, shine forth.
leather (1)
	2 Kings 1.8 And they answered him, He was an hairy man, and girt with a girdle of leather about his loins. And he said, It is Elijah the Tishbite.
leathern (1)
	Matthew 3.4 And the same John had his raiment of camel's hair, and a leathern girdle about his loins; and his meat was locusts and wild honey.
leaved (1)
	Isaiah 45.1 Thus saith the LORD to his anointed, to Cyrus, whose right hand I have holden, to subdue nations before him; and I will loose the loins of kings, to open before him the two leaved gates; and the gates shall not be shut;
lebana (1)
	Nehemiah 7.48 The children of Lebana, the children of Hagaba, the children of Shalmai,
lebanah (1)
	Ezra 2.45 The children of Lebanah, the children of Hagabah, the children of Akkub,
lebaoth (1)
	Joshua 15.32 And Lebaoth, and Shilhim, and Ain, and Rimmon: all the cities are twenty and nine, with their villages:
lebbaeus (1)
	Matthew 10.3 Philip, and Bartholomew; Thomas, and Matthew the publican; James the son of Alphaeus, and Lebbaeus, whose surname was Thaddaeus;
lebonah (1)
	Judges 21.19 Then they said, Behold, there is a feast of the LORD in Shiloh yearly in a place which is on the north side of Bethel, on the east side of the highway that goeth up from Bethel to Shechem, and on the south of Lebonah.
lecah (1)
	1 Chronicles 4.21 The sons of Shelah the son of Judah were, Er the father of Lecah, and Laadah the father of Mareshah, and the families of the house of them that wrought fine linen, of the house of Ashbea,
leeks (1)
	Numbers 11.5 We remember the fish, which we did eat in Egypt freely; the cucumbers, and the melons, and the leeks, and the onions, and the garlick:
leftest (1)
	Nehemiah 9.28 But after they had rest, they did evil again before thee: therefore leftest thou them in the land of their enemies, so that they had the dominion over them: yet when they returned, and cried unto thee, thou heardest them from heaven; and many times didst thou deliver them according to thy mercies;
leg (1)
	Isaiah 47.2 Take the millstones, and grind meal: uncover thy locks, make bare the leg, uncover the thigh, pass over the rivers.
legions (1)
	Matthew 26.53 Thinkest thou that I cannot now pray to my Father, and he shall presently give me more than twelve legions of angels?
leisure (1)
	Mark 6.31 And he said unto them, Come ye yourselves apart into a desert place, and rest a while: for there were many coming and going, and they had no leisure so much as to eat.
lengthened (1)
	Deuteronomy 25.15 But thou shalt have a perfect and just weight, a perfect and just measure shalt thou have: that thy days may be lengthened in the land which the LORD thy God giveth thee.
lengthening (1)
	Daniel 4.27 Wherefore, O king, let my counsel be acceptable unto thee, and break off thy sins by righteousness, and thine iniquities by shewing mercy to the poor; if it may be a lengthening of thy tranquillity.
letting (1)
	Exodus 8.29 And Moses said, Behold, I go out from thee, and I will intreat the LORD that the swarms of flies may depart from Pharaoh, from his servants, and from his people, to morrow: but let not Pharaoh deal deceitfully any more in not letting the people go to sacrifice to the LORD.
letushim (1)
	Genesis 25.3 And Jokshan begat Sheba, and Dedan. And the sons of Dedan were Asshurim, and Letushim, and Leummim.
leummim (1)
	Genesis 25.3 And Jokshan begat Sheba, and Dedan. And the sons of Dedan were Asshurim, and Letushim, and Leummim.
levitical (1)
	Hebrews 7.11 If therefore perfection were by the Levitical priesthood, (for under it the people received the law,) what further need was there that another priest should rise after the order of Melchisedec, and not be called after the order of Aaron?
lewdly (1)
	Ezekiel 22.11 And one hath committed abomination with his neighbour's wife; and another hath lewdly defiled his daughter in law; and another in thee hath humbled his sister, his father's daughter.
libertines (1)
	Acts 6.9 Then there arose certain of the synagogue, which is called the synagogue of the Libertines, and Cyrenians, and Alexandrians, and of them of Cilicia and of Asia, disputing with Stephen.
licketh (1)
	Numbers 22.4 And Moab said unto the elders of Midian, Now shall this company lick up all that are round about us, as the ox licketh up the grass of the field. And Balak the son of Zippor was king of the Moabites at that time.
lid (1)
	2 Kings 12.9 But Jehoiada the priest took a chest, and bored a hole in the lid of it, and set it beside the altar, on the right side as one cometh into the house of the LORD: and the priests that kept the door put therein all the money that was brought into the house of the LORD.
lifter (1)
	Psalms (prose) 3.3 But thou, O LORD, art a shield for me; my glory, and the lifter up of mine head.
lightest (1)
	Numbers 8.2 Speak unto Aaron and say unto him, When thou lightest the lamps, the seven lamps shall give light over against the candlestick.
lign (1)
	Numbers 24.6 As the valleys are they spread forth, as gardens by the river's side, as the trees of lign aloes which the LORD hath planted, and as cedar trees beside the waters.
liked (1)
	1 Chronicles 28.4 Howbeit the LORD God of Israel chose me before all the house of my father to be king over Israel for ever: for he hath chosen Judah to be the ruler; and of the house of Judah, the house of my father; and among the sons of my father he liked me to make me king over all Israel:
likhi (1)
	1 Chronicles 7.19 And the sons of Shemidah were, Ahian, and Shechem, and Likhi, and Aniam.
limit (1)
	Ezekiel 43.12 This is the law of the house; Upon the top of the mountain the whole limit thereof round about shall be most holy. Behold, this is the law of the house.
limited (1)
	Psalms (prose) 78.41 Yea, they turned back and tempted God, and limited the Holy One of Israel.
limiteth (1)
	Hebrews 4.7 Again, he limiteth a certain day, saying in David, To day, after so long a time; as it is said, To day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts.
lineage (1)
	Luke 2.4 And Joseph also went up from Galilee, out of the city of Nazareth, into Judaea, unto the city of David, which is called Bethlehem; (because he was of the house and lineage of David:)
lingereth (1)
	2 Peter 2.3 And through covetousness shall they with feigned words make merchandise of you: whose judgment now of a long time lingereth not, and their damnation slumbereth not.
lintels (1)
	Zephaniah 2.14 And flocks shall lie down in the midst of her, all the beasts of the nations: both the cormorant and the bittern shall lodge in the upper lintels of it; their voice shall sing in the windows; desolation shall be in the thresholds; for he shall uncover the cedar work.
linus (1)
	2 Timothy 4.21 Do thy diligence to come before winter. Eubulus greeteth thee, and Pudens, and Linus, and Claudia, and all the brethren.
lioness (1)
	Ezekiel 19.2 And say, What is thy mother? A lioness: she lay down among lions, she nourished her whelps among young lions.
lionesses (1)
	Nahum 2.12 The lion did tear in pieces enough for his whelps, and strangled for his lionesses, and filled his holes with prey, and his dens with ravin.
liquors (1)
	Exodus 22.29 Thou shalt not delay to offer the first of thy ripe fruits, and of thy liquors: the firstborn of thy sons shalt thou give unto me.
listen (1)
	Isaiah 49.1 Listen, O isles, unto me; and hearken, ye people, from far; The LORD hath called me from the womb; from the bowels of my mother hath he made mention of my name.
litters (1)
	Isaiah 66.20 And they shall bring all your brethren for an offering unto the LORD out of all nations upon horses, and in chariots, and in litters, and upon mules, and upon swift beasts, to my holy mountain Jerusalem, saith the LORD, as the children of Israel bring an offering in a clean vessel into the house of the LORD.
lizard (1)
	Leviticus 11.30 And the ferret, and the chameleon, and the lizard, and the snail, and the mole.
loaden (1)
	Isaiah 46.1 Bel boweth down, Nebo stoopeth, their idols were upon the beasts, and upon the cattle: your carriages were heavy loaden; they are a burden to the weary beast.
loadeth (1)
	Psalms (prose) 68.19 Blessed be the Lord, who daily loadeth us with benefits, even the God of our salvation. Selah.
loammi (1)
	Hosea 1.9 Then said God, Call his name Loammi: for ye are not my people, and I will not be your God.
loan (1)
	1 Samuel 2.20 And Eli blessed Elkanah and his wife, and said, The LORD give thee seed of this woman for the loan which is lent to the LORD. And they went unto their own home.
loathe (1)
	Job 7.16 I loathe it; I would not live alway: let me alone; for my days are vanity.
lodgest (1)
	Ruth 1.16 And Ruth said, Intreat me not to leave thee, or to return from following after thee: for whither thou goest, I will go; and where thou lodgest, I will lodge: thy people shall be my people, and thy God my God:
lodgeth (1)
	Acts 10.6 He lodgeth with one Simon a tanner, whose house is by the sea side: he shall tell thee what thou oughtest to do.
lodgings (1)
	2 Kings 19.23 By thy messengers thou hast reproached the LORD, and hast said, With the multitude of my chariots I am come up to the height of the mountains, to the sides of Lebanon, and will cut down the tall cedar trees thereof, and the choice fir trees thereof: and I will enter into the lodgings of his borders, and into the forest of his Carmel.
loftily (1)
	Psalms (prose) 73.8 They are corrupt, and speak wickedly concerning oppression: they speak loftily.
lois (1)
	2 Timothy 1.5 When I call to remembrance the unfeigned faith that is in thee, which dwelt first in thy grandmother Lois, and thy mother Eunice; and I am persuaded that in thee also.
longedst (1)
	Genesis 31.30 And now, though thou wouldest needs be gone, because thou sore longedst after thy father's house, yet wherefore hast thou stolen my gods?
longwinged (1)
	Ezekiel 17.3 And say, Thus saith the Lord GOD; A great eagle with great wings, longwinged, full of feathers, which had divers colours, came unto Lebanon, and took the highest branch of the cedar:
lookingglasses (1)
	Exodus 38.8 And he made the laver of brass, and the foot of it of brass, of the lookingglasses of the women assembling, which assembled at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.
lop (1)
	Isaiah 10.33 Behold, the Lord, the LORD of hosts, shall lop the bough with terror: and the high ones of stature shall be hewn down, and the haughty shall be humbled.
lordly (1)
	Judges 5.25 He asked water, and she gave him milk; she brought forth butter in a lordly dish.
loseth (1)
	Matthew 10.39 He that findeth his life shall lose it: and he that loseth his life for my sake shall find it.
lotheth (1)
	Ezekiel 16.45 Thou art thy mother's daughter, that lotheth her husband and her children; and thou art the sister of thy sisters, which lothed their husbands and their children: your mother was an Hittite, and your father an Amorite.
lothing (1)
	Ezekiel 16.5 None eye pitied thee, to do any of these unto thee, to have compassion upon thee; but thou wast cast out in the open field, to the lothing of thy person, in the day that thou wast born.
lowering (1)
	Matthew 16.3 And in the morning, It will be foul weather to day: for the sky is red and lowering. O ye hypocrites, ye can discern the face of the sky; but can ye not discern the signs of the times?
loweth (1)
	Job 6.5 Doth the wild ass bray when he hath grass? or loweth the ox over his fodder?
lubim (1)
	Nahum 3.9 Ethiopia and Egypt were her strength, and it was infinite; Put and Lubim were thy helpers.
lucas (1)
	Philemon 1.24 Marcus, Aristarchus, Demas, Lucas, my fellowlabourers.
lucifer (1)
	Isaiah 14.12 How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer, son of the morning! how art thou cut down to the ground, which didst weaken the nations!
lucres (1)
	Titus 1.11 Whose mouths must be stopped, who subvert whole houses, teaching things which they ought not, for filthy lucre's sake.
lukewarm (1)
	Revelation 3.16 So then because thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot, I will spue thee out of my mouth.
lusting (1)
	Numbers 11.4 And the mixt multitude that was among them fell a lusting: and the children of Israel also wept again, and said, Who shall give us flesh to eat?
lusty (1)
	Judges 3.29 And they slew of Moab at that time about ten thousand men, all lusty, and all men of valour; and there escaped not a man.
lycia (1)
	Acts 27.5 And when we had sailed over the sea of Cilicia and Pamphylia, we came to Myra, a city of Lycia.
lydians (1)
	Jeremiah 46.9 Come up, ye horses; and rage, ye chariots; and let the mighty men come forth; the Ethiopians and the Libyans, that handle the shield; and the Lydians, that handle and bend the bow.
lysanias (1)
	Luke 3.1 Now in the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius Caesar, Pontius Pilate being governor of Judaea, and Herod being tetrarch of Galilee, and his brother Philip tetrarch of Ituraea and of the region of Trachonitis, and Lysanias the tetrarch of Abilene,
maachathi (1)
	Deuteronomy 3.14 Jair the son of Manasseh took all the country of Argob unto the coasts of Geshuri and Maachathi; and called them after his own name, Bashanhavothjair, unto this day.
maadai (1)
	Ezra 10.34 Of the sons of Bani; Maadai, Amram, and Uel,
maadiah (1)
	Nehemiah 12.5 Miamin, Maadiah, Bilgah,
maai (1)
	Nehemiah 12.36 And his brethren, Shemaiah, and Azarael, Milalai, Gilalai, Maai, Nethaneel, and Judah, Hanani, with the musical instruments of David the man of God, and Ezra the scribe before them.
maalehacrabbim (1)
	Joshua 15.3 And it went out to the south side to Maalehacrabbim, and passed along to Zin, and ascended up on the south side unto Kadeshbarnea, and passed along to Hezron, and went up to Adar, and fetched a compass to Karkaa:
maarath (1)
	Joshua 15.59 And Maarath, and Bethanoth, and Eltekon; six cities with their villages:
maasiai (1)
	1 Chronicles 9.12 And Adaiah the son of Jeroham, the son of Pashur, the son of Malchijah, and Maasiai the son of Adiel, the son of Jahzerah, the son of Meshullam, the son of Meshillemith, the son of Immer;
maath (1)
	Luke 3.26 Which was the son of Maath, which was the son of Mattathias, which was the son of Semei, which was the son of Joseph, which was the son of Juda,
maaz (1)
	1 Chronicles 2.27 And the sons of Ram the firstborn of Jerahmeel were, Maaz, and Jamin, and Eker.
macedonian (1)
	Acts 27.2 And entering into a ship of Adramyttium, we launched, meaning to sail by the coasts of Asia; one Aristarchus, a Macedonian of Thessalonica, being with us.
machbanai (1)
	1 Chronicles 12.13 Jeremiah the tenth, Machbanai the eleventh.
machbenah (1)
	1 Chronicles 2.49 She bare also Shaaph the father of Madmannah, Sheva the father of Machbenah, and the father of Gibea: and the daughter of Caleb was Achsa.
machi (1)
	Numbers 13.15 Of the tribe of Gad, Geuel the son of Machi.
machirites (1)
	Numbers 26.29 Of the sons of Manasseh: of Machir, the family of the Machirites: and Machir begat Gilead: of Gilead come the family of the Gileadites.
machnadebai (1)
	Ezra 10.40 Machnadebai, Shashai, Sharai,
madian (1)
	Acts 7.29 Then fled Moses at this saying, and was a stranger in the land of Madian, where he begat two sons.
madmen (1)
	Jeremiah 48.2 There shall be no more praise of Moab: in Heshbon they have devised evil against it; come, and let us cut it off from being a nation. Also thou shalt be cut down, O Madmen; the sword shall pursue thee.
madmenah (1)
	Isaiah 10.31 Madmenah is removed; the inhabitants of Gebim gather themselves to flee.
magbish (1)
	Ezra 2.30 The children of Magbish, an hundred fifty and six.
magdala (1)
	Matthew 15.39 And he sent away the multitude, and took ship, and came into the coasts of Magdala.
magician (1)
	Daniel 2.10 The Chaldeans answered before the king, and said, There is not a man upon the earth that can shew the king's matter: therefore there is no king, lord, nor ruler, that asked such things at any magician, or astrologer, or Chaldean.
magnifical (1)
	1 Chronicles 22.5 And David said, Solomon my son is young and tender, and the house that is to be builded for the LORD must be exceeding magnifical, of fame and of glory throughout all countries: I will therefore now make preparation for it. So David prepared abundantly before his death.
magnificence (1)
	Acts 19.27 So that not only this our craft is in danger to be set at nought; but also that the temple of the great goddess Diana should be despised, and her magnificence should be destroyed, whom all Asia and the world worshippeth.
magormissabib (1)
	Jeremiah 20.3 And it came to pass on the morrow, that Pashur brought forth Jeremiah out of the stocks. Then said Jeremiah unto him, The LORD hath not called thy name Pashur, but Magormissabib.
magpiash (1)
	Nehemiah 10.20 Magpiash, Meshullam, Hezir,
mahalah (1)
	1 Chronicles 7.18 And his sister Hammoleketh bare Ishod, and Abiezer, and Mahalah.
mahali (1)
	Exodus 6.19 And the sons of Merari; Mahali and Mushi: these are the families of Levi according to their generations.
mahanehdan (1)
	Judges 18.12 And they went up, and pitched in Kirjathjearim, in Judah: wherefore they called that place Mahanehdan unto this day: behold, it is behind Kirjathjearim.
mahavite (1)
	1 Chronicles 11.46 Eliel the Mahavite, and Jeribai, and Joshaviah, the sons of Elnaam, and Ithmah the Moabite,
mahlons (1)
	Ruth 4.9 And Boaz said unto the elders, and unto all the people, Ye are witnesses this day, that I have bought all that was Elimelech's, and all that was Chilion's and Mahlon's, of the hand of Naomi.
mahol (1)
	1 Kings 4.31 For he was wiser than all men; than Ethan the Ezrahite, and Heman, and Chalcol, and Darda, the sons of Mahol: and his fame was in all nations round about.
mainsail (1)
	Acts 27.40 And when they had taken up the anchors, they committed themselves unto the sea, and loosed the rudder bands, and hoised up the mainsail to the wind, and made toward shore.
maintained (1)
	Psalms (prose) 9.4 For thou hast maintained my right and my cause; thou satest in the throne judging right.
maintainest (1)
	Psalms (prose) 16.5 The LORD is the portion of mine inheritance and of my cup: thou maintainest my lot.
makaz (1)
	1 Kings 4.9 The son of Dekar, in Makaz, and in Shaalbim, and Bethshemesh, and Elonbethhanan:
makers (1)
	Isaiah 45.16 They shall be ashamed, and also confounded, all of them: they shall go to confusion together that are makers of idols.
maktesh (1)
	Zephaniah 1.11 Howl, ye inhabitants of Maktesh, for all the merchant people are cut down; all they that bear silver are cut off.
malachi (1)
	Malachi 1.1 The burden of the word of the LORD to Israel by Malachi.
malchielites (1)
	Numbers 26.45 Of the sons of Beriah: of Heber, the family of the Heberites: of Malchiel, the family of the Malchielites.
malchiram (1)
	1 Chronicles 3.18 Malchiram also, and Pedaiah, and Shenazar, Jecamiah, Hoshama, and Nedabiah.
malchus (1)
	John 18.10 Then Simon Peter having a sword drew it, and smote the high priest's servant, and cut off his right ear. The servant's name was Malchus.
malefactor (1)
	John 18.30 They answered and said unto him, If he were not a malefactor, we would not have delivered him up unto thee.
maleleel (1)
	Luke 3.37 Which was the son of Mathusala, which was the son of Enoch, which was the son of Jared, which was the son of Maleleel, which was the son of Cainan,
malicious (1)
	3 John 1.10 Wherefore, if I come, I will remember his deeds which he doeth, prating against us with malicious words: and not content therewith, neither doth he himself receive the brethren, and forbiddeth them that would, and casteth them out of the church.
malignity (1)
	Romans 1.29 Being filled with all unrighteousness, fornication, wickedness, covetousness, maliciousness; full of envy, murder, debate, deceit, malignity; whisperers,
mallows (1)
	Job 30.4 Who cut up mallows by the bushes, and juniper roots for their meat.
manaen (1)
	Acts 13.1 Now there were in the church that was at Antioch certain prophets and teachers; as Barnabas, and Simeon that was called Niger, and Lucius of Cyrene, and Manaen, which had been brought up with Herod the tetrarch, and Saul.
maneh (1)
	Ezekiel 45.12 And the shekel shall be twenty gerahs: twenty shekels, five and twenty shekels, fifteen shekels, shall be your maneh.
manifestly (1)
	2 Corinthians 3.3 Forasmuch as ye are manifestly declared to be the epistle of Christ ministered by us, written not with ink, but with the Spirit of the living God; not in tables of stone, but in fleshy tables of the heart.
mansions (1)
	John 14.2 In my Father's house are many mansions: if it were not so, I would have told you. I go to prepare a place for you.
manslayers (1)
	1 Timothy 1.9 Knowing this, that the law is not made for a righteous man, but for the lawless and disobedient, for the ungodly and for sinners, for unholy and profane, for murderers of fathers and murderers of mothers, for manslayers,
mantles (1)
	Isaiah 3.22 The changeable suits of apparel, and the mantles, and the wimples, and the crisping pins,
maoch (1)
	1 Samuel 27.2 And David arose, and he passed over with the six hundred men that were with him unto Achish, the son of Maoch, king of Gath.
maonites (1)
	Judges 10.12 The Zidonians also, and the Amalekites, and the Maonites, did oppress you; and ye cried to me, and I delivered you out of their hand.
mara (1)
	Ruth 1.20 And she said unto them, Call me not Naomi, call me Mara: for the Almighty hath dealt very bitterly with me.
maralah (1)
	Joshua 19.11 And their border went up toward the sea, and Maralah, and reached to Dabbasheth, and reached to the river that is before Jokneam;
maranatha (1)
	1 Corinthians 16.22 If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema Maranatha.
marched (1)
	Exodus 14.10 And when Pharaoh drew nigh, the children of Israel lifted up their eyes, and, behold, the Egyptians marched after them; and they were sore afraid: and the children of Israel cried out unto the LORD.
marchedst (1)
	Judges 5.4 LORD, when thou wentest out of Seir, when thou marchedst out of the field of Edom, the earth trembled, and the heavens dropped, the clouds also dropped water.
marishes (1)
	Ezekiel 47.11 But the miry places thereof and the marishes thereof shall not be healed; they shall be given to salt.
markest (1)
	Job 10.14 If I sin, then thou markest me, and thou wilt not acquit me from mine iniquity.
marketplaces (1)
	Mark 12.38 And he said unto them in his doctrine, Beware of the scribes, which love to go in long clothing, and love salutations in the marketplaces,
maroth (1)
	Micah 1.12 For the inhabitant of Maroth waited carefully for good: but evil came down from the LORD unto the gate of Jerusalem.
mars (1)
	Acts 17.22 Then Paul stood in the midst of Mars' hill, and said, Ye men of Athens, I perceive that in all things ye are too superstitious.
marsena (1)
	Esther 1.14 And the next unto him was Carshena, Shethar, Admatha, Tarshish, Meres, Marsena, and Memucan, the seven princes of Persia and Media, which saw the king's face, and which sat the first in the kingdom;)
mart (1)
	Isaiah 23.3 And by great waters the seed of Sihor, the harvest of the river, is her revenue; and she is a mart of nations.
martyrs (1)
	Revelation 17.6 And I saw the woman drunken with the blood of the saints, and with the blood of the martyrs of Jesus: and when I saw her, I wondered with great admiration.
marvelously (1)
	Habakkuk 1.5 Behold ye among the heathen, and regard, and wonder marvelously: for I will work a work in your days which ye will not believe, though it be told you.
marvels (1)
	Exodus 34.10 And he said, Behold, I make a covenant: before all thy people I will do marvels, such as have not been done in all the earth, nor in any nation: and all the people among which thou art shall see the work of the LORD: for it is a terrible thing that I will do with thee.
mash (1)
	Genesis 10.23 And the children of Aram; Uz, and Hul, and Gether, and Mash.
mashal (1)
	1 Chronicles 6.74 And out of the tribe of Asher; Mashal with her suburbs, and Abdon with her suburbs,
masterbuilder (1)
	1 Corinthians 3.10 According to the grace of God which is given unto me, as a wise masterbuilder, I have laid the foundation, and another buildeth thereon. But let every man take heed how he buildeth thereupon.
masteries (1)
	2 Timothy 2.5 And if a man also strive for masteries, yet is he not crowned, except he strive lawfully.
masts (1)
	Ezekiel 27.5 They have made all thy ship boards of fir trees of Senir: they have taken cedars from Lebanon to make masts for thee.
mathusala (1)
	Luke 3.37 Which was the son of Mathusala, which was the son of Enoch, which was the son of Jared, which was the son of Maleleel, which was the son of Cainan,
matri (1)
	1 Samuel 10.21 When he had caused the tribe of Benjamin to come near by their families, the family of Matri was taken, and Saul the son of Kish was taken: and when they sought him, he could not be found.
mattatha (1)
	Luke 3.31 Which was the son of Melea, which was the son of Menan, which was the son of Mattatha, which was the son of Nathan, which was the son of David,
mattathah (1)
	Ezra 10.33 Of the sons of Hashum; Mattenai, Mattathah, Zabad, Eliphelet, Jeremai, Manasseh, and Shimei.
maul (1)
	Proverbs 25.18 A man that beareth false witness against his neighbour is a maul, and a sword, and a sharp arrow.
maw (1)
	Deuteronomy 18.3 And this shall be the priest's due from the people, from them that offer a sacrifice, whether it be ox or sheep; and they shall give unto the priest the shoulder, and the two cheeks, and the maw.
mazzaroth (1)
	Job 38.32 Canst thou bring forth Mazzaroth in his season? or canst thou guide Arcturus with his sons?
meadows (1)
	Judges 20.33 And all the men of Israel rose up out of their place, and put themselves in array at Baaltamar: and the liers in wait of Israel came forth out of their places, even out of the meadows of Gibeah.
mealtime (1)
	Ruth 2.14 And Boaz said unto her, At mealtime come thou hither, and eat of the bread, and dip thy morsel in the vinegar. And she sat beside the reapers: and he reached her parched corn, and she did eat, and was sufficed, and left.
mearah (1)
	Joshua 13.4 From the south, all the land of the Canaanites, and Mearah that is beside the Sidonians unto Aphek, to the borders of the Amorites:
mebunnai (1)
	2 Samuel 23.27 Abiezer the Anethothite, Mebunnai the Hushathite,
mecherathite (1)
	1 Chronicles 11.36 Hepher the Mecherathite, Ahijah the Pelonite,
meddled (1)
	Proverbs 17.14 The beginning of strife is as when one letteth out water: therefore leave off contention, before it be meddled with.
meddleth (1)
	Proverbs 26.17 He that passeth by, and meddleth with strife belonging not to him, is like one that taketh a dog by the ears.
mede (1)
	Daniel 11.1 Also I in the first year of Darius the Mede, even I, stood to confirm and to strengthen him.
median (1)
	Daniel 5.31 And Darius the Median took the kingdom, being about threescore and two years old.
megiddon (1)
	Zechariah 12.11 In that day shall there be a great mourning in Jerusalem, as the mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valley of Megiddon.
mehetabeel (1)
	Nehemiah 6.10 Afterward I came unto the house of Shemaiah the son of Delaiah the son of Mehetabeel, who was shut up; and he said, Let us meet together in the house of God, within the temple, and let us shut the doors of the temple: for they will come to slay thee; yea, in the night will they come to slay thee.
mehir (1)
	1 Chronicles 4.11 And Chelub the brother of Shuah begat Mehir, which was the father of Eshton.
mehuman (1)
	Esther 1.10 On the seventh day, when the heart of the king was merry with wine, he commanded Mehuman, Biztha, Harbona, Bigtha, and Abagtha, Zethar, and Carcas, the seven chamberlains that served in the presence of Ahasuerus the king,
mehunim (1)
	Ezra 2.50 The children of Asnah, the children of Mehunim, the children of Nephusim,
mehunims (1)
	2 Chronicles 26.7 And God helped him against the Philistines, and against the Arabians that dwelt in Gurbaal, and the Mehunims.
mejarkon (1)
	Joshua 19.46 And Mejarkon, and Rakkon, with the border before Japho.
mekonah (1)
	Nehemiah 11.28 And at Ziklag, and at Mekonah, and in the villages thereof,
melatiah (1)
	Nehemiah 3.7 And next unto them repaired Melatiah the Gibeonite, and Jadon the Meronothite, the men of Gibeon, and of Mizpah, unto the throne of the governor on this side the river.
melchiah (1)
	Jeremiah 21.1 The word which came unto Jeremiah from the LORD, when king Zedekiah sent unto him Pashur the son of Melchiah, and Zephaniah the son of Maaseiah the priest, saying,
melea (1)
	Luke 3.31 Which was the son of Melea, which was the son of Menan, which was the son of Mattatha, which was the son of Nathan, which was the son of David,
melicu (1)
	Nehemiah 12.14 Of Melicu, Jonathan; of Shebaniah, Joseph;
melita (1)
	Acts 28.1 And when they were escaped, then they knew that the island was called Melita.
melons (1)
	Numbers 11.5 We remember the fish, which we did eat in Egypt freely; the cucumbers, and the melons, and the leeks, and the onions, and the garlick:
melting (1)
	Isaiah 64.2 As when the melting fire burneth, the fire causeth the waters to boil, to make thy name known to thine adversaries, that the nations may tremble at thy presence!
memphis (1)
	Hosea 9.6 For, lo, they are gone because of destruction: Egypt shall gather them up, Memphis shall bury them: the pleasant places for their silver, nettles shall possess them: thorns shall be in their tabernacles.
menan (1)
	Luke 3.31 Which was the son of Melea, which was the son of Menan, which was the son of Mattatha, which was the son of Nathan, which was the son of David,
menchildren (1)
	Exodus 34.23 Thrice in the year shall all your menchildren appear before the LORD God, the God of Israel.
mend (1)
	2 Chronicles 24.12 And the king and Jehoiada gave it to such as did the work of the service of the house of the LORD, and hired masons and carpenters to repair the house of the LORD, and also such as wrought iron and brass to mend the house of the LORD.
menstealers (1)
	1 Timothy 1.10 For whoremongers, for them that defile themselves with mankind, for menstealers, for liars, for perjured persons, and if there be any other thing that is contrary to sound doctrine;
meonenim (1)
	Judges 9.37 And Gaal spake again, and said, See there come people down by the middle of the land, and another company come along by the plain of Meonenim.
meonothai (1)
	1 Chronicles 4.14 And Meonothai begat Ophrah: and Seraiah begat Joab, the father of the valley of Charashim; for they were craftsmen.
meraiah (1)
	Nehemiah 12.12 And in the days of Joiakim were priests, the chief of the fathers: of Seraiah, Meraiah; of Jeremiah, Hananiah;
merarites (1)
	Numbers 26.57 And these are they that were numbered of the Levites after their families: of Gershon, the family of the Gershonites: of Kohath, the family of the Kohathites: of Merari, the family of the Merarites.
merathaim (1)
	Jeremiah 50.21 Go up against the land of Merathaim, even against it, and against the inhabitants of Pekod: waste and utterly destroy after them, saith the LORD, and do according to all that I have commanded thee.
mercurius (1)
	Acts 14.12 And they called Barnabas, Jupiter; and Paul, Mercurius, because he was the chief speaker.
mercyseat (1)
	Hebrews 9.5 And over it the cherubims of glory shadowing the mercyseat; of which we cannot now speak particularly.
meres (1)
	Esther 1.14 And the next unto him was Carshena, Shethar, Admatha, Tarshish, Meres, Marsena, and Memucan, the seven princes of Persia and Media, which saw the king's face, and which sat the first in the kingdom;)
meribahkadesh (1)
	Deuteronomy 32.51 Because ye trespassed against me among the children of Israel at the waters of MeribahKadesh, in the wilderness of Zin; because ye sanctified me not in the midst of the children of Israel.
merodach (1)
	Jeremiah 50.2 Declare ye among the nations, and publish, and set up a standard; publish, and conceal not: say, Babylon is taken, Bel is confounded, Merodach is broken in pieces; her idols are confounded, her images are broken in pieces.
merodachbaladan (1)
	Isaiah 39.1 At that time Merodachbaladan, the son of Baladan, king of Babylon, sent letters and a present to Hezekiah: for he had heard that he had been sick, and was recovered.
meroz (1)
	Judges 5.23 Curse ye Meroz, said the angel of the LORD, curse ye bitterly the inhabitants thereof; because they came not to the help of the LORD, to the help of the LORD against the mighty.
merrily (1)
	Esther 5.14 Then said Zeresh his wife and all his friends unto him, Let a gallows be made of fifty cubits high, and to morrow speak thou unto the king that Mordecai may be hanged thereon: then go thou in merrily with the king unto the banquet. And the thing pleased Haman; and he caused the gallows to be made.
merryhearted (1)
	Isaiah 24.7 The new wine mourneth, the vine languisheth, all the merryhearted do sigh.
mesech (1)
	Psalms (prose) 120.5 Woe is me, that I sojourn in Mesech, that I dwell in the tents of Kedar!
meshillemith (1)
	1 Chronicles 9.12 And Adaiah the son of Jeroham, the son of Pashur, the son of Malchijah, and Maasiai the son of Adiel, the son of Jahzerah, the son of Meshullam, the son of Meshillemith, the son of Immer;
meshobab (1)
	1 Chronicles 4.34 And Meshobab, and Jamlech, and Joshah, the son of Amaziah,
meshullemeth (1)
	2 Kings 21.19 Amon was twenty and two years old when he began to reign, and he reigned two years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Meshullemeth, the daughter of Haruz of Jotbah.
mesobaite (1)
	1 Chronicles 11.47 Eliel, and Obed, and Jasiel the Mesobaite.
messes (1)
	Genesis 43.34 And he took and sent messes unto them from before him: but Benjamin's mess was five times so much as any of their's. And they drank, and were merry with him.
meteyard (1)
	Leviticus 19.35 Ye shall do no unrighteousness in judgment, in meteyard, in weight, or in measure.
methegammah (1)
	2 Samuel 8.1 And after this it came to pass that David smote the Philistines, and subdued them: and David took Methegammah out of the hand of the Philistines.
meunim (1)
	Nehemiah 7.52 The children of Besai, the children of Meunim, the children of Nephishesim,
mibhar (1)
	1 Chronicles 11.38 Joel the brother of Nathan, Mibhar the son of Haggeri,
michri (1)
	1 Chronicles 9.8 And Ibneiah the son of Jeroham, and Elah the son of Uzzi, the son of Michri, and Meshullam the son of Shephathiah, the son of Reuel, the son of Ibnijah;
middin (1)
	Joshua 15.61 In the wilderness, Betharabah, Middin, and Secacah,
midianite (1)
	Numbers 10.29 And Moses said unto Hobab, the son of Raguel the Midianite, Moses' father in law, We are journeying unto the place of which the LORD said, I will give it you: come thou with us, and we will do thee good: for the LORD hath spoken good concerning Israel.
migdalel (1)
	Joshua 19.38 And Iron, and Migdalel, Horem, and Bethanath, and Bethshemesh; nineteen cities with their villages.
migdalgad (1)
	Joshua 15.37 Zenan, and Hadashah, and Migdalgad,
mightiest (1)
	1 Chronicles 11.19 And said, My God forbid it me, that I should do this thing: shall I drink the blood of these men that have put their lives in jeopardy? for with the jeopardy of their lives they brought it. Therefore he would not drink it. These things did these three mightiest.
milalai (1)
	Nehemiah 12.36 And his brethren, Shemaiah, and Azarael, Milalai, Gilalai, Maai, Nethaneel, and Judah, Hanani, with the musical instruments of David the man of God, and Ezra the scribe before them.
mile (1)
	Matthew 5.41 And whosoever shall compel thee to go a mile, go with him twain.
miletum (1)
	2 Timothy 4.20 Erastus abode at Corinth: but Trophimus have I left at Miletum sick.
millet (1)
	Ezekiel 4.9 Take thou also unto thee wheat, and barley, and beans, and lentiles, and millet, and fitches, and put them in one vessel, and make thee bread thereof, according to the number of the days that thou shalt lie upon thy side, three hundred and ninety days shalt thou eat thereof.
millions (1)
	Genesis 24.60 And they blessed Rebekah, and said unto her, Thou art our sister, be thou the mother of thousands of millions, and let thy seed possess the gate of those which hate them.
mills (1)
	Numbers 11.8 And the people went about, and gathered it, and ground it in mills, or beat it in a mortar, and baked it in pans, and made cakes of it: and the taste of it was as the taste of fresh oil.
mincing (1)
	Isaiah 3.16 Moreover the LORD saith, Because the daughters of Zion are haughty, and walk with stretched forth necks and wanton eyes, walking and mincing as they go, and making a tinkling with their feet:
minding (1)
	Acts 20.13 And we went before to ship, and sailed unto Assos, there intending to take in Paul: for so had he appointed, minding himself to go afoot.
minish (1)
	Exodus 5.19 And the officers of the children of Israel did see that they were in evil case, after it was said, Ye shall not minish ought from your bricks of your daily task.
minished (1)
	Psalms (prose) 107.39 Again, they are minished and brought low through oppression, affliction, and sorrow.
minni (1)
	Jeremiah 51.27 Set ye up a standard in the land, blow the trumpet among the nations, prepare the nations against her, call together against her the kingdoms of Ararat, Minni, and Ashchenaz; appoint a captain against her; cause the horses to come up as the rough caterpillers.
minstrels (1)
	Matthew 9.23 And when Jesus came into the ruler's house, and saw the minstrels and the people making a noise,
miphkad (1)
	Nehemiah 3.31 After him repaired Malchiah the goldsmith's son unto the place of the Nethinims, and of the merchants, over against the gate Miphkad, and to the going up of the corner.
mirma (1)
	1 Chronicles 8.10 And Jeuz, and Shachia, and Mirma. These were his sons, heads of the fathers.
miscarrying (1)
	Hosea 9.14 Give them, O LORD: what wilt thou give? give them a miscarrying womb and dry breasts.
miserably (1)
	Matthew 21.41 They say unto him, He will miserably destroy those wicked men, and will let out his vineyard unto other husbandmen, which shall render him the fruits in their seasons.
misgab (1)
	Jeremiah 48.1 Against Moab thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel; Woe unto Nebo! for it is spoiled: Kiriathaim is confounded and taken: Misgab is confounded and dismayed.
mishal (1)
	Joshua 21.30 And out of the tribe of Asher, Mishal with her suburbs, Abdon with her suburbs,
misham (1)
	1 Chronicles 8.12 The sons of Elpaal; Eber, and Misham, and Shamed, who built Ono, and Lod, with the towns thereof:
misheal (1)
	Joshua 19.26 And Alammelech, and Amad, and Misheal; and reacheth to Carmel westward, and to Shihorlibnath;
mishmannah (1)
	1 Chronicles 12.10 Mishmannah the fourth, Jeremiah the fifth,
mishraites (1)
	1 Chronicles 2.53 And the families of Kirjathjearim; the Ithrites, and the Puhites, and the Shumathites, and the Mishraites; of them came the Zareathites, and the Eshtaulites,
mispereth (1)
	Nehemiah 7.7 Who came with Zerubbabel, Jeshua, Nehemiah, Azariah, Raamiah, Nahamani, Mordecai, Bilshan, Mispereth, Bigvai, Nehum, Baanah. The number, I say, of the men of the people of Israel was this;
misused (1)
	2 Chronicles 36.16 But they mocked the messengers of God, and despised his words, and misused his prophets, until the wrath of the LORD arose against his people, till there was no remedy.
mite (1)
	Luke 12.59 I tell thee, thou shalt not depart thence, till thou hast paid the very last mite.
mithnite (1)
	1 Chronicles 11.43 Hanan the son of Maachah, and Joshaphat the Mithnite,
mitylene (1)
	Acts 20.14 And when he met with us at Assos, we took him in, and came to Mitylene.
mixt (1)
	Numbers 11.4 And the mixt multitude that was among them fell a lusting: and the children of Israel also wept again, and said, Who shall give us flesh to eat?
mizar (1)
	Psalms (prose) 42.6 O my God, my soul is cast down within me: therefore will I remember thee from the land of Jordan, and of the Hermonites, from the hill Mizar.
mizpar (1)
	Ezra 2.2 Which came with Zerubbabel: Jeshua, Nehemiah, Seraiah, Reelaiah, Mordecai, Bilshan, Mizpar, Bigvai, Rehum, Baanah. The number of the men of the people of Israel:
mnason (1)
	Acts 21.16 There went with us also certain of the disciples of Caesarea, and brought with them one Mnason of Cyprus, an old disciple, with whom we should lodge.
moabitish (1)
	Ruth 2.6 And the servant that was set over the reapers answered and said, It is the Moabitish damsel that came back with Naomi out of the country of Moab:
moadiah (1)
	Nehemiah 12.17 Of Abijah, Zichri; of Miniamin, of Moadiah, Piltai:
mocker (1)
	Proverbs 20.1 Wine is a mocker, strong drink is raging: and whosoever is deceived thereby is not wise.
mockest (1)
	Job 11.3 Should thy lies make men hold their peace? and when thou mockest, shall no man make thee ashamed?
mockings (1)
	Hebrews 11.36 And others had trial of cruel mockings and scourgings, yea, moreover of bonds and imprisonment:
moderately (1)
	Joel 2.23 Be glad then, ye children of Zion, and rejoice in the LORD your God: for he hath given you the former rain moderately, and he will cause to come down for you the rain, the former rain, and the latter rain in the first month.
moderation (1)
	Philippians 4.5 Let your moderation be known unto all men. The Lord is at hand.
modest (1)
	1 Timothy 2.9 In like manner also, that women adorn themselves in modest apparel, with shamefacedness and sobriety; not with broided hair, or gold, or pearls, or costly array;
moist (1)
	Numbers 6.3 He shall separate himself from wine and strong drink, and shall drink no vinegar of wine, or vinegar of strong drink, neither shall he drink any liquor of grapes, nor eat moist grapes, or dried.
moistened (1)
	Job 21.24 His breasts are full of milk, and his bones are moistened with marrow.
mole (1)
	Leviticus 11.30 And the ferret, and the chameleon, and the lizard, and the snail, and the mole.
moles (1)
	Isaiah 2.20 In that day a man shall cast his idols of silver, and his idols of gold, which they made each one for himself to worship, to the moles and to the bats;
molid (1)
	1 Chronicles 2.29 And the name of the wife of Abishur was Abihail, and she bare him Ahban, and Molid.
mollified (1)
	Isaiah 1.6 From the sole of the foot even unto the head there is no soundness in it; but wounds, and bruises, and putrifying sores: they have not been closed, neither bound up, neither mollified with ointment.
monsters (1)
	Lamentations 4.3 Even the sea monsters draw out the breast, they give suck to their young ones: the daughter of my people is become cruel, like the ostriches in the wilderness.
monthly (1)
	Isaiah 47.13 Thou art wearied in the multitude of thy counsels. Let now the astrologers, the stargazers, the monthly prognosticators, stand up, and save thee from these things that shall come upon thee.
monuments (1)
	Isaiah 65.4 Which remain among the graves, and lodge in the monuments, which eat swine's flesh, and broth of abominable things is in their vessels;
moreshethgath (1)
	Micah 1.14 Therefore shalt thou give presents to Moreshethgath: the houses of Achzib shall be a lie to the kings of Israel.
morsels (1)
	Psalms (prose) 147.17 He casteth forth his ice like morsels: who can stand before his cold?
mortality (1)
	2 Corinthians 5.4 For we that are in this tabernacle do groan, being burdened: not for that we would be unclothed, but clothed upon, that mortality might be swallowed up of life.
mortally (1)
	Deuteronomy 19.11 But if any man hate his neighbour, and lie in wait for him, and rise up against him, and smite him mortally that he die, and fleeth into one of these cities:
mortgaged (1)
	Nehemiah 5.3 Some also there were that said, We have mortgaged our lands, vineyards, and houses, that we might buy corn, because of the dearth.
mosera (1)
	Deuteronomy 10.6 And the children of Israel took their journey from Beeroth of the children of Jaakan to Mosera: there Aaron died, and there he was buried; and Eleazar his son ministered in the priest's office in his stead.
motheaten (1)
	James 5.2 Your riches are corrupted, and your garments are motheaten.
motions (1)
	Romans 7.5 For when we were in the flesh, the motions of sins, which were by the law, did work in our members to bring forth fruit unto death.
mounted (1)
	Ezekiel 10.19 And the cherubims lifted up their wings, and mounted up from the earth in my sight: when they went out, the wheels also were beside them, and every one stood at the door of the east gate of the LORD's house; and the glory of the God of Israel was over them above.
mounting (1)
	Isaiah 15.5 My heart shall cry out for Moab; his fugitives shall flee unto Zoar, an heifer of three years old: for by the mounting up of Luhith with weeping shall they go it up; for in the way of Horonaim they shall raise up a cry of destruction.
mourner (1)
	2 Samuel 14.2 And Joab sent to Tekoah, and fetched thence a wise woman, and said unto her, I pray thee, feign thyself to be a mourner, and put on now mourning apparel, and anoint not thyself with oil, but be as a woman that had a long time mourned for the dead:
mournfully (1)
	Malachi 3.14 Ye have said, It is vain to serve God: and what profit is it that we have kept his ordinance, and that we have walked mournfully before the LORD of hosts?
moveable (1)
	Proverbs 5.6 Lest thou shouldest ponder the path of life, her ways are moveable, that thou canst not know them.
movedst (1)
	Job 2.3 And the LORD said unto Satan, Hast thou considered my servant Job, that there is none like him in the earth, a perfect and an upright man, one that feareth God, and escheweth evil? and still he holdeth fast his integrity, although thou movedst me against him, to destroy him without cause.
mover (1)
	Acts 24.5 For we have found this man a pestilent fellow, and a mover of sedition among all the Jews throughout the world, and a ringleader of the sect of the Nazarenes:
mower (1)
	Psalms (prose) 129.7 Wherewith the mower filleth not his hand; nor he that bindeth sheaves his bosom.
mowings (1)
	Amos 7.1 Thus hath the Lord GOD shewed unto me; and, behold, he formed grasshoppers in the beginning of the shooting up of the latter growth; and, lo, it was the latter growth after the king's mowings.
mown (1)
	Psalms (prose) 72.6 He shall come down like rain upon the mown grass: as showers that water the earth.
mozah (1)
	Joshua 18.26 And Mizpeh, and Chephirah, and Mozah,
mufflers (1)
	Isaiah 3.19 The chains, and the bracelets, and the mufflers,
multipliedst (1)
	Nehemiah 9.23 Their children also multipliedst thou as the stars of heaven, and broughtest them into the land, concerning which thou hadst promised to their fathers, that they should go in to possess it.
munitions (1)
	Isaiah 33.16 He shall dwell on high: his place of defence shall be the munitions of rocks: bread shall be given him; his waters shall be sure.
muppim (1)
	Genesis 46.21 And the sons of Benjamin were Belah, and Becher, and Ashbel, Gera, and Naaman, Ehi, and Rosh, Muppim, and Huppim, and Ard.
murmurers (1)
	Jude 1.16 These are murmurers, complainers, walking after their own lusts; and their mouth speaketh great swelling words, having men's persons in admiration because of advantage.
murrain (1)
	Exodus 9.3 Behold, the hand of the LORD is upon thy cattle which is in the field, upon the horses, upon the asses, upon the camels, upon the oxen, and upon the sheep: there shall be a very grievous murrain.
muse (1)
	Psalms (prose) 143.5 I remember the days of old; I meditate on all thy works; I muse on the work of thy hands.
mused (1)
	Luke 3.15 And as the people were in expectation, and all men mused in their hearts of John, whether he were the Christ, or not;
musicians (1)
	Revelation 18.22 And the voice of harpers, and musicians, and of pipers, and trumpeters, shall be heard no more at all in thee; and no craftsman, of whatsoever craft he be, shall be found any more in thee; and the sound of a millstone shall be heard no more at all in thee;
musing (1)
	Psalms (prose) 39.3 My heart was hot within me, while I was musing the fire burned: then spake I with my tongue,
mustereth (1)
	Isaiah 13.4 The noise of a multitude in the mountains, like as of a great people; a tumultuous noise of the kingdoms of nations gathered together: the LORD of hosts mustereth the host of the battle.
mutter (1)
	Isaiah 8.19 And when they shall say unto you, Seek unto them that have familiar spirits, and unto wizards that peep, and that mutter: should not a people seek unto their God? for the living to the dead?
muttered (1)
	Isaiah 59.3 For your hands are defiled with blood, and your fingers with iniquity; your lips have spoken lies, your tongue hath muttered perverseness.
mutual (1)
	Romans 1.12 That is, that I may be comforted together with you by the mutual faith both of you and me.
myra (1)
	Acts 27.5 And when we had sailed over the sea of Cilicia and Pamphylia, we came to Myra, a city of Lycia.
naam (1)
	1 Chronicles 4.15 And the sons of Caleb the son of Jephunneh; Iru, Elah, and Naam: and the sons of Elah, even Kenaz.
naamans (1)
	2 Kings 5.2 And the Syrians had gone out by companies, and had brought away captive out of the land of Israel a little maid; and she waited on Naaman's wife.
naamites (1)
	Numbers 26.40 And the sons of Bela were Ard and Naaman: of Ard, the family of the Ardites: and of Naaman, the family of the Naamites.
naarai (1)
	1 Chronicles 11.37 Hezro the Carmelite, Naarai the son of Ezbai,
naaran (1)
	1 Chronicles 7.28 And their possessions and habitations were, Bethel and the towns thereof, and eastward Naaran, and westward Gezer, with the towns thereof; Shechem also and the towns thereof, unto Gaza and the towns thereof:
naarath (1)
	Joshua 16.7 And it went down from Janohah to Ataroth, and to Naarath, and came to Jericho, and went out at Jordan.
naashon (1)
	Exodus 6.23 And Aaron took him Elisheba, daughter of Amminadab, sister of Naashon, to wife; and she bare him Nadab, and Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar.
nachons (1)
	2 Samuel 6.6 And when they came to Nachon's threshingfloor, Uzzah put forth his hand to the ark of God, and took hold of it; for the oxen shook it.
nagge (1)
	Luke 3.25 Which was the son of Mattathias, which was the son of Amos, which was the son of Naum, which was the son of Esli, which was the son of Nagge,
nahalal (1)
	Joshua 21.35 Dimnah with her suburbs, Nahalal with her suburbs; four cities.
nahallal (1)
	Joshua 19.15 And Kattath, and Nahallal, and Shimron, and Idalah, and Bethlehem: twelve cities with their villages.
nahalol (1)
	Judges 1.30 Neither did Zebulun drive out the inhabitants of Kitron, nor the inhabitants of Nahalol; but the Canaanites dwelt among them, and became tributaries.
naham (1)
	1 Chronicles 4.19 And the sons of his wife Hodiah the sister of Naham, the father of Keilah the Garmite, and Eshtemoa the Maachathite.
nahamani (1)
	Nehemiah 7.7 Who came with Zerubbabel, Jeshua, Nehemiah, Azariah, Raamiah, Nahamani, Mordecai, Bilshan, Mispereth, Bigvai, Nehum, Baanah. The number, I say, of the men of the people of Israel was this;
naharai (1)
	1 Chronicles 11.39 Zelek the Ammonite, Naharai the Berothite, the armourbearer of Joab the son of Zeruiah,
nahari (1)
	2 Samuel 23.37 Zelek the Ammonite, Nahari the Beerothite, armourbearer to Joab the son of Zeruiah,
nahbi (1)
	Numbers 13.14 Of the tribe of Naphtali, Nahbi the son of Vophsi.
nahum (1)
	Nahum 1.1 The burden of Nineveh. The book of the vision of Nahum the Elkoshite.
nailing (1)
	Colossians 2.14  Blotting out the handwriting of ordinances that was against us, which was contrary to us, and took it out of the way, nailing it to his cross;
nain (1)
	Luke 7.11 And it came to pass the day after, that he went into a city called Nain; and many of his disciples went with him, and much people.
nameth (1)
	2 Timothy 2.19 Nevertheless the foundation of God standeth sure, having this seal, The Lord knoweth them that are his. And, Let every one that nameth the name of Christ depart from iniquity.
naomis (1)
	Ruth 1.3 And Elimelech Naomi's husband died; and she was left, and her two sons.
narcissus (1)
	Romans 16.11 Salute Herodion my kinsman. Greet them that be of the household of Narcissus, which are in the Lord.
narrowed (1)
	1 Kings 6.6 The nethermost chamber was five cubits broad, and the middle was six cubits broad, and the third was seven cubits broad: for without in the wall of the house he made narrowed rests round about, that the beams should not be fastened in the walls of the house.
narrower (1)
	Isaiah 28.20 For the bed is shorter than that a man can stretch himself on it: and the covering narrower than that he can wrap himself in it.
nathanmelech (1)
	2 Kings 23.11 And he took away the horses that the kings of Judah had given to the sun, at the entering in of the house of the LORD, by the chamber of Nathanmelech the chamberlain, which was in the suburbs, and burned the chariots of the sun with fire.
native (1)
	Jeremiah 22.10 Weep ye not for the dead, neither bemoan him: but weep sore for him that goeth away: for he shall return no more, nor see his native country.
naum (1)
	Luke 3.25 Which was the son of Mattathias, which was the son of Amos, which was the son of Naum, which was the son of Esli, which was the son of Nagge,
naves (1)
	1 Kings 7.33 And the work of the wheels was like the work of a chariot wheel: their axletrees, and their naves, and their felloes, and their spokes, were all molten.
nazarene (1)
	Matthew 2.23 And he came and dwelt in a city called Nazareth: that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophets, He shall be called a Nazarene.
nazarenes (1)
	Acts 24.5 For we have found this man a pestilent fellow, and a mover of sedition among all the Jews throughout the world, and a ringleader of the sect of the Nazarenes:
neah (1)
	Joshua 19.13 And from thence passeth on along on the east to Gittahhepher, to Ittahkazin, and goeth out to Remmonmethoar to Neah;
neapolis (1)
	Acts 16.11 Therefore loosing from Troas, we came with a straight course to Samothracia, and the next day to Neapolis;
nebai (1)
	Nehemiah 10.19 Hariph, Anathoth, Nebai,
neballat (1)
	Nehemiah 11.34 Hadid, Zeboim, Neballat,
nebushasban (1)
	Jeremiah 39.13 So Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard sent, and Nebushasban, Rabsaris, and Nergalsharezer, Rabmag, and all the king of Babylon's princes;
necromancer (1)
	Deuteronomy 18.11 Or a charmer, or a consulter with familiar spirits, or a wizard, or a necromancer.
nedabiah (1)
	1 Chronicles 3.18 Malchiram also, and Pedaiah, and Shenazar, Jecamiah, Hoshama, and Nedabiah.
needest (1)
	John 16.30 Now are we sure that thou knowest all things, and needest not that any man should ask thee: by this we believe that thou camest forth from God.
needles (1)
	Luke 18.25 For it is easier for a camel to go through a needle's eye, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God.
neesings (1)
	Job 41.18 By his neesings a light doth shine, and his eyes are like the eyelids of the morning.
neglected (1)
	Acts 6.1 And in those days, when the number of the disciples was multiplied, there arose a murmuring of the Grecians against the Hebrews, because their widows were neglected in the daily ministration.
neglecting (1)
	Colossians 2.23  Which things have indeed a shew of wisdom in will worship, and humility, and neglecting of the body: not in any honour to the satisfying of the flesh.
nehum (1)
	Nehemiah 7.7 Who came with Zerubbabel, Jeshua, Nehemiah, Azariah, Raamiah, Nahamani, Mordecai, Bilshan, Mispereth, Bigvai, Nehum, Baanah. The number, I say, of the men of the people of Israel was this;
nehushta (1)
	2 Kings 24.8 Jehoiachin was eighteen years old when he began to reign, and he reigned in Jerusalem three months. And his mother's name was Nehushta, the daughter of Elnathan of Jerusalem.
nehushtan (1)
	2 Kings 18.4 He removed the high places, and brake the images, and cut down the groves, and brake in pieces the brasen serpent that Moses had made: for unto those days the children of Israel did burn incense to it: and he called it Nehushtan.
neiel (1)
	Joshua 19.27 And turneth toward the sunrising to Bethdagon, and reacheth to Zebulun, and to the valley of Jiphthahel toward the north side of Bethemek, and Neiel, and goeth out to Cabul on the left hand,
neighed (1)
	Jeremiah 5.8 They were as fed horses in the morning: every one neighed after his neighbour's wife.
neighing (1)
	Jeremiah 8.16 The snorting of his horses was heard from Dan: the whole land trembled at the sound of the neighing of his strong ones; for they are come, and have devoured the land, and all that is in it; the city, and those that dwell therein.
neighings (1)
	Jeremiah 13.27 I have seen thine adulteries, and thy neighings, the lewdness of thy whoredom, and thine abominations on the hills in the fields. Woe unto thee, O Jerusalem! wilt thou not be made clean? when shall it once be?
nekeb (1)
	Joshua 19.33 And their coast was from Heleph, from Allon to Zaanannim, and Adami, Nekeb, and Jabneel, unto Lakum; and the outgoings thereof were at Jordan:
nemuelites (1)
	Numbers 26.12 The sons of Simeon after their families: of Nemuel, the family of the Nemuelites: of Jamin, the family of the Jaminites: of Jachin, the family of the Jachinites:
nephish (1)
	1 Chronicles 5.19 And they made war with the Hagarites, with Jetur, and Nephish, and Nodab.
nephishesim (1)
	Nehemiah 7.52 The children of Besai, the children of Meunim, the children of Nephishesim,
nephusim (1)
	Ezra 2.50 The children of Asnah, the children of Mehunim, the children of Nephusim,
nereus (1)
	Romans 16.15 Salute Philologus, and Julia, Nereus, and his sister, and Olympas, and all the saints which are with them.
nergal (1)
	2 Kings 17.30 And the men of Babylon made Succothbenoth, and the men of Cuth made Nergal, and the men of Hamath made Ashima,
neri (1)
	Luke 3.27 Which was the son of Joanna, which was the son of Rhesa, which was the son of Zorobabel, which was the son of Salathiel, which was the son of Neri,
nethermost (1)
	1 Kings 6.6 The nethermost chamber was five cubits broad, and the middle was six cubits broad, and the third was seven cubits broad: for without in the wall of the house he made narrowed rests round about, that the beams should not be fastened in the walls of the house.
netophathi (1)
	Nehemiah 12.28 And the sons of the singers gathered themselves together, both out of the plain country round about Jerusalem, and from the villages of Netophathi;
neverthless (1)
	Galatians 2.20 I am crucified with Christ: neverthless I live; yet not I, but Christ liveth in me: and the life which I now live in the flesh I live by the faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me.
newborn (1)
	1 Peter 2.2 As newborn babes, desire the sincere milk of the word, that ye may grow thereby:
news (1)
	Proverbs 25.25 As cold waters to a thirsty soul, so is good news from a far country.
nezib (1)
	Joshua 15.43 And Jiphtah, and Ashnah, and Nezib,
nibhaz (1)
	2 Kings 17.31 And the Avites made Nibhaz and Tartak, and the Sepharvites burnt their children in fire to Adrammelech and Anammelech, the gods of Sepharvaim.
nibshan (1)
	Joshua 15.62 And Nibshan, and the city of Salt, and Engedi; six cities with their villages.
nicanor (1)
	Acts 6.5 And the saying pleased the whole multitude: and they chose Stephen, a man full of faith and of the Holy Ghost, and Philip, and Prochorus, and Nicanor, and Timon, and Parmenas, and Nicolas a proselyte of Antioch:
nicolas (1)
	Acts 6.5 And the saying pleased the whole multitude: and they chose Stephen, a man full of faith and of the Holy Ghost, and Philip, and Prochorus, and Nicanor, and Timon, and Parmenas, and Nicolas a proselyte of Antioch:
nicopolis (1)
	Titus 3.12 When I shall send Artemas unto thee, or Tychicus, be diligent to come unto me to Nicopolis: for I have determined there to winter.
niger (1)
	Acts 13.1 Now there were in the church that was at Antioch certain prophets and teachers; as Barnabas, and Simeon that was called Niger, and Lucius of Cyrene, and Manaen, which had been brought up with Herod the tetrarch, and Saul.
nimrah (1)
	Numbers 32.3 Ataroth, and Dibon, and Jazer, and Nimrah, and Heshbon, and Elealeh, and Shebam, and Nebo, and Beon,
nineve (1)
	Luke 11.32 The men of Nineve shall rise up in the judgment with this generation, and shall condemn it: for they repented at the preaching of Jonas; and, behold, a greater than Jonas is here.
ninevites (1)
	Luke 11.30 For as Jonas was a sign unto the Ninevites, so shall also the Son of man be to this generation.
nod (1)
	Genesis 4.16 And Cain went out from the presence of the LORD, and dwelt in the land of Nod, on the east of Eden.
nodab (1)
	1 Chronicles 5.19 And they made war with the Hagarites, with Jetur, and Nephish, and Nodab.
nohah (1)
	1 Chronicles 8.2 Nohah the fourth, and Rapha the fifth.
non (1)
	1 Chronicles 7.27 Non his son, Jehoshuah his son.
noontide (1)
	Jeremiah 20.16 And let that man be as the cities which the LORD overthrew, and repented not: and let him hear the cry in the morning, and the shouting at noontide;
nophah (1)
	Numbers 21.30 We have shot at them; Heshbon is perished even unto Dibon, and we have laid them waste even unto Nophah, which reacheth unto Medeba.
noted (1)
	Daniel 10.21 But I will shew thee that which is noted in the scripture of truth: and there is none that holdeth with me in these things, but Michael your prince.
nourisher (1)
	Ruth 4.15 And he shall be unto thee a restorer of thy life, and a nourisher of thine old age: for thy daughter in law, which loveth thee, which is better to thee than seven sons, hath born him.
nourisheth (1)
	Ephesians 5.29 For no man ever yet hated his own flesh; but nourisheth and cherisheth it, even as the Lord the church:
nourishing (1)
	Daniel 1.5 And the king appointed them a daily provision of the king's meat, and of the wine which he drank: so nourishing them three years, that at the end thereof they might stand before the king.
nourishment (1)
	Colossians 2.19  And not holding the Head, from which all the body by joints and bands having nourishment ministered, and knit together, increaseth with the increase of God.
novice (1)
	1 Timothy 3.6 Not a novice, lest being lifted up with pride he fall into the condemnation of the devil.
nurture (1)
	Ephesians 6.4 And, ye fathers, provoke not your children to wrath: but bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord.
nymphas (1)
	Colossians 4.15  Salute the brethren which are in Laodicea, and Nymphas, and the church which is in his house.
oar (1)
	Ezekiel 27.29 And all that handle the oar, the mariners, and all the pilots of the sea, shall come down from their ships, they shall stand upon the land;
obal (1)
	Genesis 10.28 And Obal, and Abimael, and Sheba,
obil (1)
	1 Chronicles 27.30 Over the camels also was Obil the Ishmaelite: and over the asses was Jehdeiah the Meronothite:
object (1)
	Acts 24.19 Who ought to have been here before thee, and object, if they had ought against me.
obscure (1)
	Proverbs 20.20 Whoso curseth his father or his mother, his lamp shall be put out in obscure darkness.
observation (1)
	Luke 17.20 And when he was demanded of the Pharisees, when the kingdom of God should come, he answered them and said, The kingdom of God cometh not with observation:
observer (1)
	Deuteronomy 18.10 There shall not be found among you any one that maketh his son or his daughter to pass through the fire, or that useth divination, or an observer of times, or an enchanter, or a witch.
observers (1)
	Deuteronomy 18.14 For these nations, which thou shalt possess, hearkened unto observers of times, and unto diviners: but as for thee, the LORD thy God hath not suffered thee so to do.
observest (1)
	Isaiah 42.20 Seeing many things, but thou observest not; opening the ears, but he heareth not.
observeth (1)
	Ecclesiastes 11.4 He that observeth the wind shall not sow; and he that regardeth the clouds shall not reap.
obtaining (1)
	2 Thessalonians 2.14 Whereunto he called you by our gospel, to the obtaining of the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ.
occasioned (1)
	1 Samuel 22.22 And David said unto Abiathar, I knew it that day, when Doeg the Edomite was there, that he would surely tell Saul: I have occasioned the death of all the persons of thy father's house.
occupiers (1)
	Ezekiel 27.27 Thy riches, and thy fairs, thy merchandise, thy mariners, and thy pilots, thy calkers, and the occupiers of thy merchandise, and all thy men of war, that are in thee, and in all thy company which is in the midst of thee, shall fall into the midst of the seas in the day of thy ruin.
occupieth (1)
	1 Corinthians 14.16 Else when thou shalt bless with the spirit, how shall he that occupieth the room of the unlearned say Amen at thy giving of thanks, seeing he understandeth not what thou sayest?
occurrent (1)
	1 Kings 5.4 But now the LORD my God hath given me rest on every side, so that there is neither adversary nor evil occurrent.
odd (1)
	Numbers 3.48 And thou shalt give the money, wherewith the odd number of them is to be redeemed, unto Aaron and to his sons.
offenders (1)
	1 Kings 1.21 Otherwise it shall come to pass, when my lord the king shall sleep with his fathers, that I and my son Solomon shall be counted offenders.
oftener (1)
	Acts 24.26 He hoped also that money should have been given him of Paul, that he might loose him: wherefore he sent for him the oftener, and communed with him.
ohel (1)
	1 Chronicles 3.20 And Hashubah, and Ohel, and Berechiah, and Hasadiah, Jushabhesed, five.
oldness (1)
	Romans 7.6 But now we are delivered from the law, that being dead wherein we were held; that we should serve in newness of spirit, and not in the oldness of the letter.
oliveyard (1)
	Exodus 23.11 But the seventh year thou shalt let it rest and lie still; that the poor of thy people may eat: and what they leave the beasts of the field shall eat. In like manner thou shalt deal with thy vineyard, and with thy oliveyard.
olympas (1)
	Romans 16.15 Salute Philologus, and Julia, Nereus, and his sister, and Olympas, and all the saints which are with them.
omers (1)
	Exodus 16.22 And it came to pass, that on the sixth day they gathered twice as much bread, two omers for one man: and all the rulers of the congregation came and told Moses.
omitted (1)
	Matthew 23.23 Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye pay tithe of mint and anise and cummin, and have omitted the weightier matters of the law, judgment, mercy, and faith: these ought ye to have done, and not to leave the other undone.
omnipotent (1)
	Revelation 19.6 And I heard as it were the voice of a great multitude, and as the voice of many waters, and as the voice of mighty thunderings, saying, Alleluia: for the Lord God omnipotent reigneth.
onions (1)
	Numbers 11.5 We remember the fish, which we did eat in Egypt freely; the cucumbers, and the melons, and the leeks, and the onions, and the garlick:
onward (1)
	Exodus 40.36 And when the cloud was taken up from over the tabernacle, the children of Israel went onward in all their journeys:
onycha (1)
	Exodus 30.34 And the LORD said unto Moses, Take unto thee sweet spices, stacte, and onycha, and galbanum; these sweet spices with pure frankincense: of each shall there be a like weight:
openings (1)
	Proverbs 1.21 She crieth in the chief place of concourse, in the openings of the gates: in the city she uttereth her words, saying,
operations (1)
	1 Corinthians 12.6 And there are diversities of operations, but it is the same God which worketh all in all.
ophni (1)
	Joshua 18.24 And Chepharhaammonai, and Ophni, and Gaba; twelve cities with their villages:
opinions (1)
	1 Kings 18.21 And Elijah came unto all the people, and said, How long halt ye between two opinions? if the LORD be God, follow him: but if Baal, then follow him. And the people answered him not a word.
oppose (1)
	2 Timothy 2.25 In meekness instructing those that oppose themselves; if God peradventure will give them repentance to the acknowledging of the truth;
opposed (1)
	Acts 18.6 And when they opposed themselves, and blasphemed, he shook his raiment, and said unto them, Your blood be upon your own heads; I am clean; from henceforth I will go unto the Gentiles.
opposest (1)
	Job 30.21 Thou art become cruel to me: with thy strong hand thou opposest thyself against me.
opposeth (1)
	2 Thessalonians 2.4 Who opposeth and exalteth himself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped; so that he as God sitteth in the temple of God, shewing himself that he is God.
oppositions (1)
	1 Timothy 6.20 O Timothy, keep that which is committed to thy trust, avoiding profane and vain babblings, and oppositions of science falsely so called:
oration (1)
	Acts 12.21 And upon a set day Herod, arrayed in royal apparel, sat upon his throne, and made an oration unto them.
orchard (1)
	Song of Songs 4.13 Thy plants are an orchard of pomegranates, with pleasant fruits; camphire, with spikenard,
orchards (1)
	Ecclesiastes 2.5 I made me gardens and orchards, and I planted trees in them of all kind of fruits:
ordaineth (1)
	Psalms (prose) 7.13 He hath also prepared for him the instruments of death; he ordaineth his arrows against the persecutors.
ordereth (1)
	Psalms (prose) 50.23 Whoso offereth praise glorifieth me: and to him that ordereth his conversation aright will I shew the salvation of God.
orderings (1)
	1 Chronicles 24.19 These were the orderings of them in their service to come into the house of the LORD, according to their manner, under Aaron their father, as the LORD God of Israel had commanded him.
orderly (1)
	Acts 21.24 Them take, and purify thyself with them, and be at charges with them, that they may shave their heads: and all may know that those things, whereof they were informed concerning thee, are nothing; but that thou thyself also walkest orderly, and keepest the law.
ordinary (1)
	Ezekiel 16.27 Behold, therefore I have stretched out my hand over thee, and have diminished thine ordinary food, and delivered thee unto the will of them that hate thee, the daughters of the Philistines, which are ashamed of thy lewd way.
oren (1)
	1 Chronicles 2.25 And the sons of Jerahmeel the firstborn of Hezron were, Ram the firstborn, and Bunah, and Oren, and Ozem, and Ahijah.
organs (1)
	Psalms (prose) 150.4 Praise him with the timbrel and dance: praise him with stringed instruments and organs.
orphans (1)
	Lamentations 5.3 We are orphans and fatherless, our mothers are as widows.
osee (1)
	Romans 9.25 As he saith also in Osee, I will call them my people, which were not my people; and her beloved, which was not beloved.
ostrich (1)
	Job 39.13 Gavest thou the goodly wings unto the peacocks? or wings and feathers unto the ostrich?
ostriches (1)
	Lamentations 4.3 Even the sea monsters draw out the breast, they give suck to their young ones: the daughter of my people is become cruel, like the ostriches in the wilderness.
othni (1)
	1 Chronicles 26.7 The sons of Shemaiah; Othni, and Rephael, and Obed, Elzabad, whose brethren were strong men, Elihu, and Semachiah.
outcast (1)
	Jeremiah 30.17 For I will restore health unto thee, and I will heal thee of thy wounds, saith the LORD; because they called thee an Outcast, saying, This is Zion, whom no man seeketh after.
outlandish (1)
	Nehemiah 13.26 Did not Solomon king of Israel sin by these things? yet among many nations was there no king like him, who was beloved of his God, and God made him king over all Israel: nevertheless even him did outlandish women cause to sin.
outlived (1)
	Judges 2.7 And the people served the LORD all the days of Joshua, and all the days of the elders that outlived Joshua, who had seen all the great works of the LORD, that he did for Israel.
outrageous (1)
	Proverbs 27.4 Wrath is cruel, and anger is outrageous; but who is able to stand before envy?
outrun (1)
	John 20.4 So they ran both together: and the other disciple did outrun Peter, and came first to the sepulchre.
outwent (1)
	Mark 6.33 And the people saw them departing, and many knew him, and ran afoot thither out of all cities, and outwent them, and came together unto him.
ovens (1)
	Exodus 8.3 And the river shall bring forth frogs abundantly, which shall go up and come into thine house, and into thy bedchamber, and upon thy bed, and into the house of thy servants, and upon thy people, and into thine ovens, and into thy kneadingtroughs:
overcharge (1)
	2 Corinthians 2.5 But if any have caused grief, he hath not grieved me, but in part: that I may not overcharge you all.
overcharged (1)
	Luke 21.34 And take heed to yourselves, lest at any time your hearts be overcharged with surfeiting, and drunkenness, and cares of this life, and so that day come upon you unawares.
overdrive (1)
	Genesis 33.13 And he said unto him, My lord knoweth that the children are tender, and the flocks and herds with young are with me: and if men should overdrive them one day, all the flock will die.
overfloweth (1)
	Joshua 3.15 And as they that bare the ark were come unto Jordan, and the feet of the priests that bare the ark were dipped in the brim of the water, (for Jordan overfloweth all his banks all the time of harvest,)
overlived (1)
	Joshua 24.31 And Israel served the LORD all the days of Joshua, and all the days of the elders that overlived Joshua, and which had known all the works of the LORD, that he had done for Israel.
overmuch (1)
	2 Corinthians 2.7 So that contrariwise ye ought rather to forgive him, and comfort him, lest perhaps such a one should be swallowed up with overmuch sorrow.
overpass (1)
	Jeremiah 5.28 They are waxen fat, they shine: yea, they overpass the deeds of the wicked: they judge not the cause, the cause of the fatherless, yet they prosper; and the right of the needy do they not judge.
overplus (1)
	Leviticus 25.27 Then let him count the years of the sale thereof, and restore the overplus unto the man to whom he sold it; that he may return unto his possession.
overran (1)
	2 Samuel 18.23 But howsoever, said he, let me run. And he said unto him, Run. Then Ahimaaz ran by the way of the plain, and overran Cushi.
overrunning (1)
	Nahum 1.8 But with an overrunning flood he will make an utter end of the place thereof, and darkness shall pursue his enemies.
overspread (1)
	Genesis 9.19 These are the three sons of Noah: and of them was the whole earth overspread.
overspreading (1)
	Daniel 9.27 And he shall confirm the covenant with many for one week: and in the midst of the week he shall cause the sacrifice and the oblation to cease, and for the overspreading of abominations he shall make it desolate, even until the consummation, and that determined shall be poured upon the desolate.
overtaketh (1)
	1 Chronicles 21.12 Either three years' famine; or three months to be destroyed before thy foes, while that the sword of thine enemies overtaketh thee; or else three days the sword of the LORD, even the pestilence, in the land, and the angel of the LORD destroying throughout all the coasts of Israel. Now therefore advise thyself what word I shall bring again to him that sent me.
overturned (1)
	Judges 7.13 And when Gideon was come, behold, there was a man that told a dream unto his fellow, and said, Behold, I dreamed a dream, and, lo, a cake of barley bread tumbled into the host of Midian, and came unto a tent, and smote it that it fell, and overturned it, that the tent lay along.
overwhelm (1)
	Job 6.27 Yea, ye overwhelm the fatherless, and ye dig a pit for your friend.
owe (1)
	Romans 13.8 Owe no man any thing, but to love one another: for he that loveth another hath fulfilled the law.
oweth (1)
	Philemon 1.18 If he hath wronged thee, or oweth thee ought, put that on mine account;
ozni (1)
	Numbers 26.16 Of Ozni, the family of the Oznites: of Eri, the family of the Erites:
oznites (1)
	Numbers 26.16 Of Ozni, the family of the Oznites: of Eri, the family of the Erites:
paarai (1)
	2 Samuel 23.35 Hezrai the Carmelite, Paarai the Arbite,
paces (1)
	2 Samuel 6.13 And it was so, that when they that bare the ark of the LORD had gone six paces, he sacrificed oxen and fatlings.
pacify (1)
	Proverbs 16.14 The wrath of a king is as messengers of death: but a wise man will pacify it.
padan (1)
	Genesis 48.7 And as for me, when I came from Padan, Rachel died by me in the land of Canaan in the way, when yet there was but a little way to come unto Ephrath: and I buried her there in the way of Ephrath; the same is Bethlehem.
paddle (1)
	Deuteronomy 23.13 And thou shalt have a paddle upon thy weapon; and it shall be, when thou wilt ease thyself abroad, thou shalt dig therewith, and shalt turn back and cover that which cometh from thee:
pai (1)
	1 Chronicles 1.50 And when Baalhanan was dead, Hadad reigned in his stead: and the name of his city was Pai; and his wife's name was Mehetabel, the daughter of Matred, the daughter of Mezahab.
painful (1)
	Psalms (prose) 73.16 When I thought to know this, it was too painful for me;
painfulness (1)
	2 Corinthians 11.27 In weariness and painfulness, in watchings often, in hunger and thirst, in fastings often, in cold and nakedness.
paintedst (1)
	Ezekiel 23.40 And furthermore, that ye have sent for men to come from far, unto whom a messenger was sent; and, lo, they came: for whom thou didst wash thyself, paintedst thy eyes, and deckedst thyself with ornaments,
painting (1)
	Jeremiah 4.30 And when thou art spoiled, what wilt thou do? Though thou clothest thyself with crimson, though thou deckest thee with ornaments of gold, though thou rentest thy face with painting, in vain shalt thou make thyself fair; thy lovers will despise thee, they will seek thy life.
palal (1)
	Nehemiah 3.25 Palal the son of Uzai, over against the turning of the wall, and the tower which lieth out from the king's high house, that was by the court of the prison. After him Pedaiah the son of Parosh.
paleness (1)
	Jeremiah 30.6 Ask ye now, and see whether a man doth travail with child? wherefore do I see every man with his hands on his loins, as a woman in travail, and all faces are turned into paleness?
palestine (1)
	Joel 3.4 Yea, and what have ye to do with me, O Tyre, and Zidon, and all the coasts of Palestine? will ye render me a recompence? and if ye recompense me, swiftly and speedily will I return your recompence upon your own head;
palluites (1)
	Numbers 26.5 Reuben, the eldest son of Israel: the children of Reuben; Hanoch, of whom cometh the family of the Hanochites: of Pallu, the family of the Palluites:
palsies (1)
	Acts 8.7 For unclean spirits, crying with loud voice, came out of many that were possessed with them: and many taken with palsies, and that were lame, were healed.
palti (1)
	Numbers 13.9 Of the tribe of Benjamin, Palti the son of Raphu.
paltiel (1)
	Numbers 34.26 And the prince of the tribe of the children of Issachar, Paltiel the son of Azzan.
paltite (1)
	2 Samuel 23.26 Helez the Paltite, Ira the son of Ikkesh the Tekoite,
pannag (1)
	Ezekiel 27.17 Judah, and the land of Israel, they were thy merchants: they traded in thy market wheat of Minnith, and Pannag, and honey, and oil, and balm.
pant (1)
	Amos 2.7 That pant after the dust of the earth on the head of the poor, and turn aside the way of the meek: and a man and his father will go in unto the same maid, to profane my holy name:
paramours (1)
	Ezekiel 23.20 For she doted upon their paramours, whose flesh is as the flesh of asses, and whose issue is like the issue of horses.
parchments (1)
	2 Timothy 4.13 The cloke that I left at Troas with Carpus, when thou comest, bring with thee, and the books, but especially the parchments.
pardoneth (1)
	Micah 7.18 Who is a God like unto thee, that pardoneth iniquity, and passeth by the transgression of the remnant of his heritage? he retaineth not his anger for ever, because he delighteth in mercy.
pare (1)
	Deuteronomy 21.12 Then thou shalt bring her home to thine house, and she shall shave her head, and pare her nails;
parlours (1)
	1 Chronicles 28.11 Then David gave to Solomon his son the pattern of the porch, and of the houses thereof, and of the treasuries thereof, and of the upper chambers thereof, and of the inner parlours thereof, and of the place of the mercy seat,
parmashta (1)
	Esther 9.9 And Parmashta, and Arisai, and Aridai, and Vajezatha,
parmenas (1)
	Acts 6.5 And the saying pleased the whole multitude: and they chose Stephen, a man full of faith and of the Holy Ghost, and Philip, and Prochorus, and Nicanor, and Timon, and Parmenas, and Nicolas a proselyte of Antioch:
parnach (1)
	Numbers 34.25 And the prince of the tribe of the children of Zebulun, Elizaphan the son of Parnach.
parshandatha (1)
	Esther 9.7 And Parshandatha, and Dalphon, and Aspatha,
partakest (1)
	Romans 11.17 And if some of the branches be broken off, and thou, being a wild olive tree, wert graffed in among them, and with them partakest of the root and fatness of the olive tree;
parthians (1)
	Acts 2.9 Parthians, and Medes, and Elamites, and the dwellers in Mesopotamia, and in Judaea, and Cappadocia, in Pontus, and Asia,
parties (1)
	Exodus 22.9 For all manner of trespass, whether it be for ox, for ass, for sheep, for raiment, or for any manner of lost thing which another challengeth to be his, the cause of both parties shall come before the judges; and whom the judges shall condemn, he shall pay double unto his neighbour.
parting (1)
	Ezekiel 21.21 For the king of Babylon stood at the parting of the way, at the head of the two ways, to use divination: he made his arrows bright, he consulted with images, he looked in the liver.
paruah (1)
	1 Kings 4.17 Jehoshaphat the son of Paruah, in Issachar:
parvaim (1)
	2 Chronicles 3.6 And he garnished the house with precious stones for beauty: and the gold was gold of Parvaim.
pasach (1)
	1 Chronicles 7.33 And the sons of Japhlet; Pasach, and Bimhal, and Ashvath. These are the children of Japhlet.
pasdammim (1)
	1 Chronicles 11.13 He was with David at Pasdammim, and there the Philistines were gathered together to battle, where was a parcel of ground full of barley; and the people fled from before the Philistines.
passedst (1)
	Judges 12.1 And the men of Ephraim gathered themselves together, and went northward, and said unto Jephthah, Wherefore passedst thou over to fight against the children of Ammon, and didst not call us to go with thee? we will burn thine house upon thee with fire.
passion (1)
	Acts 1.3 To whom also he shewed himself alive after his passion by many infallible proofs, being seen of them forty days, and speaking of the things pertaining to the kingdom of God:
passovers (1)
	2 Chronicles 30.17 For there were many in the congregation that were not sanctified: therefore the Levites had the charge of the killing of the passovers for every one that was not clean, to sanctify them unto the LORD.
pastor (1)
	Jeremiah 17.16 As for me, I have not hastened from being a pastor to follow thee: neither have I desired the woeful day; thou knowest: that which came out of my lips was right before thee.
patara (1)
	Acts 21.1 And it came to pass, that after we were gotten from them, and had launched, we came with a straight course unto Coos, and the day following unto Rhodes, and from thence unto Patara:
pate (1)
	Psalms (prose) 7.16 His mischief shall return upon his own head, and his violent dealing shall come down upon his own pate.
pathway (1)
	Proverbs 12.28 In the way of righteousness is life: and in the pathway thereof there is no death.
patmos (1)
	Revelation 1.9 I John, who also am your brother, and companion in tribulation, and in the kingdom and patience of Jesus Christ, was in the isle that is called Patmos, for the word of God, and for the testimony of Jesus Christ.
patrimony (1)
	Deuteronomy 18.8 They shall have like portions to eat, beside that which cometh of the sale of his patrimony.
patrobas (1)
	Romans 16.14 Salute Asyncritus, Phlegon, Hermas, Patrobas, Hermes, and the brethren which are with them.
patterns (1)
	Hebrews 9.23 It was therefore necessary that the patterns of things in the heavens should be purified with these; but the heavenly things themselves with better sacrifices than these.
pau (1)
	Genesis 36.39 And Baalhanan the son of Achbor died, and Hadar reigned in his stead: and the name of his city was Pau; and his wife's name was Mehetabel, the daughter of Matred, the daughter of Mezahab.
paulus (1)
	Acts 13.7 Which was with the deputy of the country, Sergius Paulus, a prudent man; who called for Barnabas and Saul, and desired to hear the word of God.
paweth (1)
	Job 39.21 He paweth in the valley, and rejoiceth in his strength: he goeth on to meet the armed men.
paws (1)
	Leviticus 11.27 And whatsoever goeth upon his paws, among all manner of beasts that go on all four, those are unclean unto you: whoso toucheth their carcase shall be unclean until the even.
payeth (1)
	Psalms (prose) 37.21 The wicked borroweth, and payeth not again: but the righteous sheweth mercy, and giveth.
payment (1)
	Matthew 18.25 But forasmuch as he had not to pay, his lord commanded him to be sold, and his wife, and children, and all that he had, and payment to be made.
peacemakers (1)
	Matthew 5.9 Blessed are the peacemakers: for they shall be called the children of God.
pedahel (1)
	Numbers 34.28 And the prince of the tribe of the children of Naphtali, Pedahel the son of Ammihud.
pedigrees (1)
	Numbers 1.18 And they assembled all the congregation together on the first day of the second month, and they declared their pedigrees after their families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, by their polls.
peep (1)
	Isaiah 8.19 And when they shall say unto you, Seek unto them that have familiar spirits, and unto wizards that peep, and that mutter: should not a people seek unto their God? for the living to the dead?
peeped (1)
	Isaiah 10.14 And my hand hath found as a nest the riches of the people: and as one gathereth eggs that are left, have I gathered all the earth; and there was none that moved the wing, or opened the mouth, or peeped.
pelaliah (1)
	Nehemiah 11.12 And their brethren that did the work of the house were eight hundred twenty and two: and Adaiah the son of Jeroham, the son of Pelaliah, the son of Amzi, the son of Zechariah, the son of Pashur, the son of Malchiah.
peniel (1)
	Genesis 32.30 And Jacob called the name of the place Peniel: for I have seen God face to face, and my life is preserved.
penknife (1)
	Jeremiah 36.23 And it came to pass, that when Jehudi had read three or four leaves, he cut it with the penknife, and cast it into the fire that was on the hearth, until all the roll was consumed in the fire that was on the hearth.
peors (1)
	Numbers 25.18 For they vex you with their wiles, wherewith they have beguiled you in the matter of Peor, and in the matter of Cozbi, the daughter of a prince of Midian, their sister, which was slain in the day of the plague for Peor's sake.
perazim (1)
	Isaiah 28.21 For the LORD shall rise up as in mount Perazim, he shall be wroth as in the valley of Gibeon, that he may do his work, his strange work; and bring to pass his act, his strange act.
peres (1)
	Daniel 5.28 PERES; Thy kingdom is divided, and given to the Medes and Persians.
peresh (1)
	1 Chronicles 7.16 And Maachah the wife of Machir bare a son, and she called his name Peresh; and the name of his brother was Sheresh; and his sons were Ulam and Rakem.
perezuzza (1)
	1 Chronicles 13.11 And David was displeased, because the LORD had made a breach upon Uzza: wherefore that place is called Perezuzza to this day.
perezuzzah (1)
	2 Samuel 6.8 And David was displeased, because the LORD had made a breach upon Uzzah: and he called the name of the place Perezuzzah to this day.
perfectness (1)
	Colossians 3.14  And above all these things put on charity, which is the bond of perfectness.
perfumes (1)
	Isaiah 57.9 And thou wentest to the king with ointment, and didst increase thy perfumes, and didst send thy messengers far off, and didst debase thyself even unto hell.
perida (1)
	Nehemiah 7.57 The children of Solomon's servants: the children of Sotai, the children of Sophereth, the children of Perida,
perilous (1)
	2 Timothy 3.1 This know also, that in the last days perilous times shall come.
perishing (1)
	Job 33.18 He keepeth back his soul from the pit, and his life from perishing by the sword.
perjured (1)
	1 Timothy 1.10 For whoremongers, for them that defile themselves with mankind, for menstealers, for liars, for perjured persons, and if there be any other thing that is contrary to sound doctrine;
permission (1)
	1 Corinthians 7.6 But I speak this by permission, and not of commandment.
pernicious (1)
	2 Peter 2.2 And many shall follow their pernicious ways; by reason of whom the way of truth shall be evil spoken of.
persecuting (1)
	Philippians 3.6 Concerning zeal, persecuting the church; touching the righteousness which is in the law, blameless.
persecutor (1)
	1 Timothy 1.13 Who was before a blasphemer, and a persecutor, and injurious: but I obtained mercy, because I did it ignorantly in unbelief.
perseverance (1)
	Ephesians 6.18 Praying always with all prayer and supplication in the Spirit, and watching thereunto with all perseverance and supplication for all saints;
persis (1)
	Romans 16.12 Salute Tryphena and Tryphosa, who labour in the Lord. Salute the beloved Persis, which laboured much in the Lord.
persuadest (1)
	Acts 26.28 Then Agrippa said unto Paul, Almost thou persuadest me to be a Christian.
persuasion (1)
	Galatians 5.8 This persuasion cometh not of him that calleth you.
persude (1)
	1 Kings 22.22 And the LORD said unto him, Wherewith? And he said, I will go forth, and I will be a lying spirit in the mouth of all his prophets. And he said, Thou shalt persude him, and prevail also: go forth, and do so.
peruda (1)
	Ezra 2.55 The children of Solomon's servants: the children of Sotai, the children of Sophereth, the children of Peruda,
pestilent (1)
	Acts 24.5 For we have found this man a pestilent fellow, and a mover of sedition among all the Jews throughout the world, and a ringleader of the sect of the Nazarenes:
pestle (1)
	Proverbs 27.22 Though thou shouldest bray a fool in a mortar among wheat with a pestle, yet will not his foolishness depart from him.
pethuel (1)
	Joel 1.1 The word of the LORD that came to Joel the son of Pethuel.
peulthai (1)
	1 Chronicles 26.5 Ammiel the sixth, Issachar the seventh, Peulthai the eighth: for God blessed him.
phalec (1)
	Luke 3.35 Which was the son of Saruch, which was the son of Ragau, which was the son of Phalec, which was the son of Heber, which was the son of Sala,
phallu (1)
	Genesis 46.9 And the sons of Reuben; Hanoch, and Phallu, and Hezron, and Carmi.
phalti (1)
	1 Samuel 25.44 But Saul had given Michal his daughter, David's wife, to Phalti the son of Laish, which was of Gallim.
phaltiel (1)
	2 Samuel 3.15 And Ishbosheth sent, and took her from her husband, even from Phaltiel the son of Laish.
phanuel (1)
	Luke 2.36 And there was one Anna, a prophetess, the daughter of Phanuel, of the tribe of Aser: she was of a great age, and had lived with an husband seven years from her virginity;
pharah (1)
	Joshua 18.23 And Avim, and Pharah, and Ophrah,
pharaohhophra (1)
	Jeremiah 44.30 Thus saith the LORD; Behold, I will give Pharaohhophra king of Egypt into the hand of his enemies, and into the hand of them that seek his life; as I gave Zedekiah king of Judah into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, his enemy, and that sought his life.
pharaohnecho (1)
	Jeremiah 46.2 Against Egypt, against the army of Pharaohnecho king of Egypt, which was by the river Euphrates in Carchemish, which Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon smote in the fourth year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah.
pharosh (1)
	Ezra 8.3 Of the sons of Shechaniah, of the sons of Pharosh; Zechariah: and with him were reckoned by genealogy of the males an hundred and fifty.
pharpar (1)
	2 Kings 5.12 Are not Abana and Pharpar, rivers of Damascus, better than all the waters of Israel? may I not wash in them, and be clean? So he turned and went away in a rage.
pharzites (1)
	Numbers 26.20 And the sons of Judah after their families were; of Shelah, the family of the Shelanites: of Pharez, the family of the Pharzites: of Zerah, the family of the Zarhites.
phaseah (1)
	Nehemiah 7.51 The children of Gazzam, the children of Uzza, the children of Phaseah,
phebe (1)
	Romans 16.1 I commend unto you Phebe our sister, which is a servant of the church which is at Cenchrea:
phenicia (1)
	Acts 21.2 And finding a ship sailing over unto Phenicia, we went aboard, and set forth.
philemon (1)
	Philemon 1.1 Paul, a prisoner of Jesus Christ, and Timothy our brother, unto Philemon our dearly beloved, and fellowlabourer,
philetus (1)
	2 Timothy 2.17 And their word will eat as doth a canker: of whom is Hymenaeus and Philetus;
philippians (1)
	Philippians 4.15 Now ye Philippians know also, that in the beginning of the gospel, when I departed from Macedonia, no church communicated with me as concerning giving and receiving, but ye only.
philistim (1)
	Genesis 10.14 And Pathrusim, and Casluhim, (out of whom came Philistim,) and Caphtorim.
philologus (1)
	Romans 16.15 Salute Philologus, and Julia, Nereus, and his sister, and Olympas, and all the saints which are with them.
philosophers (1)
	Acts 17.18 Then certain philosophers of the Epicureans, and of the Stoicks, encountered him. And some said, What will this babbler say? other some, He seemeth to be a setter forth of strange gods: because he preached unto them Jesus, and the resurrection.
philosophy (1)
	Colossians 2.8  Beware lest any man spoil you through philosophy and vain deceit, after the tradition of men, after the rudiments of the world, and not after Christ.
phlegon (1)
	Romans 16.14 Salute Asyncritus, Phlegon, Hermas, Patrobas, Hermes, and the brethren which are with them.
phuvah (1)
	Genesis 46.13 And the sons of Issachar; Tola, and Phuvah, and Job, and Shimron.
phygellus (1)
	2 Timothy 1.15 This thou knowest, that all they which are in Asia be turned away from me; of whom are Phygellus and Hermogenes.
phylacteries (1)
	Matthew 23.5 But all their works they do for to be seen of men: they make broad their phylacteries, and enlarge the borders of their garments,
pibeseth (1)
	Ezekiel 30.17 The young men of Aven and of Pibeseth shall fall by the sword: and these cities shall go into captivity.
pick (1)
	Proverbs 30.17 The eye that mocketh at his father, and despiseth to obey his mother, the ravens of the valley shall pick it out, and the young eagles shall eat it.
pierceth (1)
	Job 40.24 He taketh it with his eyes: his nose pierceth through snares.
piercings (1)
	Proverbs 12.18 There is that speaketh like the piercings of a sword: but the tongue of the wise is health.
piety (1)
	1 Timothy 5.4 But if any widow have children or nephews, let them learn first to shew piety at home, and to requite their parents: for that is good and acceptable before God.
pildash (1)
	Genesis 22.22 And Chesed, and Hazo, and Pildash, and Jidlaph, and Bethuel.
pileha (1)
	Nehemiah 10.24 Hallohesh, Pileha, Shobek,
piltai (1)
	Nehemiah 12.17 Of Abijah, Zichri; of Miniamin, of Moadiah, Piltai:
pineth (1)
	Mark 9.18 And wheresoever he taketh him, he teareth him: and he foameth, and gnasheth with his teeth, and pineth away: and I spake to thy disciples that they should cast him out; and they could not.
pining (1)
	Isaiah 38.12 Mine age is departed, and is removed from me as a shepherd's tent: I have cut off like a weaver my life: he will cut me off with pining sickness: from day even to night wilt thou make an end of me.
pipers (1)
	Revelation 18.22 And the voice of harpers, and musicians, and of pipers, and trumpeters, shall be heard no more at all in thee; and no craftsman, of whatsoever craft he be, shall be found any more in thee; and the sound of a millstone shall be heard no more at all in thee;
piram (1)
	Joshua 10.3 Wherefore Adonizedec king of Jerusalem, sent unto Hoham king of Hebron, and unto Piram king of Jarmuth, and unto Japhia king of Lachish, and unto Debir king of Eglon, saying,
pirathon (1)
	Judges 12.15 And Abdon the son of Hillel the Pirathonite died, and was buried in Pirathon in the land of Ephraim, in the mount of the Amalekites.
pison (1)
	Genesis 2.11 The name of the first is Pison: that is it which compasseth the whole land of Havilah, where there is gold;
pispah (1)
	1 Chronicles 7.38 And the sons of Jether; Jephunneh, and Pispah, and Ara.
pithom (1)
	Exodus 1.11 Therefore they did set over them taskmasters to afflict them with their burdens. And they built for Pharaoh treasure cities, Pithom and Raamses.
plainness (1)
	2 Corinthians 3.12 Seeing then that we have such hope, we use great plainness of speech:
plaiting (1)
	1 Peter 3.3 Whose adorning let it not be that outward adorning of plaiting the hair, and of wearing of gold, or of putting on of apparel;
planes (1)
	Isaiah 44.13 The carpenter stretcheth out his rule; he marketh it out with a line; he fitteth it with planes, and he marketh it out with the compass, and maketh it after the figure of a man, according to the beauty of a man; that it may remain in the house.
planets (1)
	2 Kings 23.5 And he put down the idolatrous priests, whom the kings of Judah had ordained to burn incense in the high places in the cities of Judah, and in the places round about Jerusalem; them also that burned incense unto Baal, to the sun, and to the moon, and to the planets, and to all the host of heaven.
plantation (1)
	Ezekiel 17.7 There was also another great eagle with great wings and many feathers: and, behold, this vine did bend her roots toward him, and shot forth her branches toward him, that he might water it by the furrows of her plantation.
planters (1)
	Jeremiah 31.5 Thou shalt yet plant vines upon the mountains of Samaria: the planters shall plant, and shall eat them as common things.
plantings (1)
	Micah 1.6 Therefore I will make Samaria as an heap of the field, and as plantings of a vineyard: and I will pour down the stones thereof into the valley, and I will discover the foundations thereof.
player (1)
	1 Samuel 16.16 Let our lord now command thy servants, which are before thee, to seek out a man, who is a cunning player on an harp: and it shall come to pass, when the evil spirit from God is upon thee, that he shall play with his hand, and thou shalt be well.
playeth (1)
	Ezekiel 23.44 Yet they went in unto her, as they go in unto a woman that playeth the harlot: so went they in unto Aholah and unto Aholibah, the lewd women.
pleadings (1)
	Job 13.6 Hear now my reasoning, and hearken to the pleadings of my lips.
pleasantness (1)
	Proverbs 3.17 Her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace.
plotteth (1)
	Psalms (prose) 37.12 The wicked plotteth against the just, and gnasheth upon him with his teeth.
plough (1)
	Luke 9.62 And Jesus said unto him, No man, having put his hand to the plough, and looking back, is fit for the kingdom of God.
plowers (1)
	Psalms (prose) 129.3 The plowers plowed upon my back: they made long their furrows.
ploweth (1)
	1 Corinthians 9.10 Or saith he it altogether for our sakes? For our sakes, no doubt, this is written: that he that ploweth should plow in hope; and that he that thresheth in hope should be partaker of his hope.
plucketh (1)
	Proverbs 14.1 Every wise woman buildeth her house: but the foolish plucketh it down with her hands.
pluckt (1)
	Genesis 8.11 And the dove came in to him in the evening; and, lo, in her mouth was an olive leaf pluckt off: so Noah knew that the waters were abated from off the earth.
plunge (1)
	Job 9.31 Yet shalt thou plunge me in the ditch, and mine own clothes shall abhor me.
poets (1)
	Acts 17.28 For in him we live, and move, and have our being; as certain also of your own poets have said, For we are also his offspring.
pointed (1)
	Job 41.30 Sharp stones are under him: he spreadeth sharp pointed things upon the mire.
policy (1)
	Daniel 8.25 And through his policy also he shall cause craft to prosper in his hand; and he shall magnify himself in his heart, and by peace shall destroy many: he shall also stand up against the Prince of princes; but he shall be broken without hand.
polishing (1)
	Lamentations 4.7 Her Nazarites were purer than snow, they were whiter than milk, they were more ruddy in body than rubies, their polishing was of sapphire:
pollution (1)
	Ezekiel 22.10 In thee have they discovered their fathers' nakedness: in thee have they humbled her that was set apart for pollution.
pollux (1)
	Acts 28.11 And after three months we departed in a ship of Alexandria, which had wintered in the isle, whose sign was Castor and Pollux.
pondered (1)
	Luke 2.19 But Mary kept all these things, and pondered them in her heart.
poorer (1)
	Leviticus 27.8 But if he be poorer than thy estimation, then he shall present himself before the priest, and the priest shall value him; according to his ability that vowed shall the priest value him.
poorest (1)
	2 Kings 24.14 And he carried away all Jerusalem, and all the princes, and all the mighty men of valour, even ten thousand captives, and all the craftsmen and smiths: none remained, save the poorest sort of the people of the land.
poplar (1)
	Genesis 30.37 And Jacob took him rods of green poplar, and of the hazel and chestnut tree; and pilled white strakes in them, and made the white appear which was in the rods.
poplars (1)
	Hosea 4.13 They sacrifice upon the tops of the mountains, and burn incense upon the hills, under oaks and poplars and elms, because the shadow thereof is good: therefore your daughters shall commit whoredom, and your spouses shall commit adultery.
poratha (1)
	Esther 9.8 And Poratha, and Adalia, and Aridatha,
porcius (1)
	Acts 24.27 But after two years Porcius Festus came into Felix' room: and Felix, willing to shew the Jews a pleasure, left Paul bound.
port (1)
	Nehemiah 2.13 And I went out by night by the gate of the valley, even before the dragon well, and to the dung port, and viewed the walls of Jerusalem, which were broken down, and the gates thereof were consumed with fire.
possessest (1)
	Deuteronomy 26.1 And it shall be, when thou art come in unto the land which the LORD thy God giveth thee for an inheritance, and possessest it, and dwellest therein;
possessing (1)
	2 Corinthians 6.10 As sorrowful, yet alway rejoicing; as poor, yet making many rich; as having nothing, and yet possessing all things.
potentate (1)
	1 Timothy 6.15 Which in his times he shall shew, who is the blessed and only Potentate, the King of kings, and Lord of lords;
potsherds (1)
	Isaiah 45.9 Woe unto him that striveth with his Maker! Let the potsherd strive with the potsherds of the earth. Shall the clay say to him that fashioneth it, What makest thou? or thy work, He hath no hands?
pouredst (1)
	Ezekiel 16.15 But thou didst trust in thine own beauty, and playedst the harlot because of thy renown, and pouredst out thy fornications on every one that passed by; his it was.
pourtray (1)
	Ezekiel 4.1 Thou also, son of man, take thee a tile, and lay it before thee, and pourtray upon it the city, even Jerusalem:
powders (1)
	Song of Songs 3.6 Who is this that cometh out of the wilderness like pillars of smoke, perfumed with myrrh and frankincense, with all powders of the merchant?
practices (1)
	2 Peter 2.14 Having eyes full of adultery, and that cannot cease from sin; beguiling unstable souls: an heart they have exercised with covetous practices; cursed children:
praetorium (1)
	Mark 15.16 And the soldiers led him away into the hall, called Praetorium; and they call together the whole band.
praiseth (1)
	Proverbs 31.28 Her children arise up, and call her blessed; her husband also, and he praiseth her.
pransing (1)
	Nahum 3.2 The noise of a whip, and the noise of the rattling of the wheels, and of the pransing horses, and of the jumping chariots.
preachest (1)
	Romans 2.21 Thou therefore which teachest another, teachest thou not thyself? thou that preachest a man should not steal, dost thou steal?
prefer (1)
	Psalms (prose) 137.6 If I do not remember thee, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth; if I prefer not Jerusalem above my chief joy.
premeditate (1)
	Mark 13.11 But when they shall lead you, and deliver you up, take no thought beforehand what ye shall speak, neither do ye premeditate: but whatsoever shall be given you in that hour, that speak ye: for it is not ye that speak, but the Holy Ghost.
preparations (1)
	Proverbs 16.1 The preparations of the heart in man, and the answer of the tongue, is from the LORD.
preparedst (1)
	Psalms (prose) 80.9 Thou preparedst room before it, and didst cause it to take deep root, and it filled the land.
presbytery (1)
	1 Timothy 4.14 Neglect not the gift that is in thee, which was given thee by prophecy, with the laying on of the hands of the presbytery.
prescribed (1)
	Isaiah 10.1 Woe unto them that decree unrighteous decrees, and that write grievousness which they have prescribed;
prescribing (1)
	Ezra 7.22 Unto an hundred talents of silver, and to an hundred measures of wheat, and to an hundred baths of wine, and to an hundred baths of oil, and salt without prescribing how much.
presenting (1)
	Daniel 9.20 And whiles I was speaking, and praying, and confessing my sin and the sin of my people Israel, and presenting my supplication before the LORD my God for the holy mountain of my God;
preserver (1)
	Job 7.20 I have sinned; what shall I do unto thee, O thou preserver of men?  why hast thou set me as a mark against thee, so that I am a burden to myself?
pressfat (1)
	Haggai 2.16 Since those days were, when one came to an heap of twenty measures, there were but ten: when one came to the pressfat for to draw out fifty vessels out of the press, there were but twenty.
presumed (1)
	Numbers 14.44 But they presumed to go up unto the hill top: nevertheless the ark of the covenant of the LORD, and Moses, departed not out of the camp.
prevailest (1)
	Job 14.20 Thou prevailest for ever against him, and he passeth: thou changest his countenance, and sendest him away.
prevaileth (1)
	Lamentations 1.13 From above hath he sent fire into my bones, and it prevaileth against them: he hath spread a net for my feet, he hath turned me back: he hath made me desolate and faint all the day.
preventest (1)
	Psalms (prose) 21.3 For thou preventest him with the blessings of goodness: thou settest a crown of pure gold on his head.
prices (1)
	Acts 4.34 Neither was there any among them that lacked: for as many as were possessors of lands or houses sold them, and brought the prices of the things that were sold,
pricking (1)
	Ezekiel 28.24 And there shall be no more a pricking brier unto the house of Israel, nor any grieving thorn of all that are round about them, that despised them; and they shall know that I am the Lord GOD.
princess (1)
	Lamentations 1.1 How doth the city sit solitary, that was full of people! how is she become as a widow! she that was great among the nations, and princess among the provinces, how is she become tributary!
princesses (1)
	1 Kings 11.3 And he had seven hundred wives, princesses, and three hundred concubines: and his wives turned away his heart.
printed (1)
	Job 19.23 Oh that my words were now written! oh that they were printed in a book!
prisca (1)
	2 Timothy 4.19 Salute Prisca and Aquila, and the household of Onesiphorus.
prised (1)
	Zechariah 11.13 And the LORD said unto me, Cast it unto the potter: a goodly price that I was prised at of them. And I took the thirty pieces of silver, and cast them to the potter in the house of the LORD.
private (1)
	2 Peter 1.20 Knowing this first, that no prophecy of the scripture is of any private interpretation.
proceeding (1)
	Revelation 22.1 And he shewed me a pure river of water of life, clear as crystal, proceeding out of the throne of God and of the Lamb.
prochorus (1)
	Acts 6.5 And the saying pleased the whole multitude: and they chose Stephen, a man full of faith and of the Holy Ghost, and Philip, and Prochorus, and Nicanor, and Timon, and Parmenas, and Nicolas a proselyte of Antioch:
proclaimeth (1)
	Proverbs 12.23 A prudent man concealeth knowledge: but the heart of fools proclaimeth foolishness.
procureth (1)
	Proverbs 11.27 He that diligently seeketh good procureth favour: but he that seeketh mischief, it shall come unto him.
produce (1)
	Isaiah 41.21 Produce your cause, saith the LORD; bring forth your strong reasons, saith the King of Jacob.
profaneness (1)
	Jeremiah 23.15 Therefore thus saith the LORD of hosts concerning the prophets; Behold, I will feed them with wormwood, and make them drink the water of gall: for from the prophets of Jerusalem is profaneness gone forth into all the land.
profaneth (1)
	Leviticus 21.9 And the daughter of any priest, if she profane herself by playing the whore, she profaneth her father: she shall be burnt with fire.
profiting (1)
	1 Timothy 4.15 Meditate upon these things; give thyself wholly to them; that thy profiting may appear to all.
profound (1)
	Hosea 5.2 And the revolters are profound to make slaughter, though I have been a rebuker of them all.
progenitors (1)
	Genesis 49.26 The blessings of thy father have prevailed above the blessings of my progenitors unto the utmost bound of the everlasting hills: they shall be on the head of Joseph, and on the crown of the head of him that was separate from his brethren.
prognosticators (1)
	Isaiah 47.13 Thou art wearied in the multitude of thy counsels. Let now the astrologers, the stargazers, the monthly prognosticators, stand up, and save thee from these things that shall come upon thee.
promising (1)
	Ezekiel 13.22 Because with lies ye have made the heart of the righteous sad, whom I have not made sad; and strengthened the hands of the wicked, that he should not return from his wicked way, by promising him life:
pronouncing (1)
	Leviticus 5.4 Or if a soul swear, pronouncing with his lips to do evil, or to do good, whatsoever it be that a man shall pronounce with an oath, and it be hid from him; when he knoweth of it, then he shall be guilty in one of these.
proofs (1)
	Acts 1.3 To whom also he shewed himself alive after his passion by many infallible proofs, being seen of them forty days, and speaking of the things pertaining to the kingdom of God:
prophesyings (1)
	1 Thessalonians 5.20 Despise not prophesyings.
prostitute (1)
	Leviticus 19.29 Do not prostitute thy daughter, to cause her to be a whore; lest the land fall to whoredom, and the land become full of wickedness.
protection (1)
	Deuteronomy 32.38 Which did eat the fat of their sacrifices, and drank the wine of their drink offerings? let them rise up and help you, and be your protection.
protesting (1)
	Jeremiah 11.7 For I earnestly protested unto your fathers in the day that I brought them up out of the land of Egypt, even unto this day, rising early and protesting, saying, Obey my voice.
proveth (1)
	Deuteronomy 13.3 Thou shalt not hearken unto the words of that prophet, or that dreamer of dreams: for the LORD your God proveth you, to know whether ye love the LORD your God with all your heart and with all your soul.
providence (1)
	Acts 24.2 And when he was called forth, Tertullus began to accuse him, saying, Seeing that by thee we enjoy great quietness, and that very worthy deeds are done unto this nation by thy providence,
providing (1)
	2 Corinthians 8.21 Providing for honest things, not only in the sight of the Lord, but also in the sight of men.
provokedst (1)
	Deuteronomy 9.7 Remember, and forget not, how thou provokedst the LORD thy God to wrath in the wilderness: from the day that thou didst depart out of the land of Egypt, until ye came unto this place, ye have been rebellious against the LORD.
prudently (1)
	Isaiah 52.13 Behold, my servant shall deal prudently, he shall be exalted and extolled, and be very high.
pruned (1)
	Isaiah 5.6 And I will lay it waste: it shall not be pruned, nor digged; but there shall come up briers and thorns: I will also command the clouds that they rain no rain upon it.
pruning (1)
	Isaiah 18.5 For afore the harvest, when the bud is perfect, and the sour grape is ripening in the flower, he shall both cut off the sprigs with pruning hooks, and take away and cut down the branches.
psalmist (1)
	2 Samuel 23.1 Now these be the last words of David. David the son of Jesse said, and the man who was raised up on high, the anointed of the God of Jacob, and the sweet psalmist of Israel, said,
ptolemais (1)
	Acts 21.7 And when we had finished our course from Tyre, we came to Ptolemais, and saluted the brethren, and abode with them one day.
pua (1)
	Numbers 26.23 Of the sons of Issachar after their families: of Tola, the family of the Tolaites: of Pua, the family of the Punites:
publick (1)
	Matthew 1.19 Then Joseph her husband, being a just man, and not willing to make her a publick example, was minded to put her away privily.
pudens (1)
	2 Timothy 4.21 Do thy diligence to come before winter. Eubulus greeteth thee, and Pudens, and Linus, and Claudia, and all the brethren.
puhites (1)
	1 Chronicles 2.53 And the families of Kirjathjearim; the Ithrites, and the Puhites, and the Shumathites, and the Mishraites; of them came the Zareathites, and the Eshtaulites,
pulpit (1)
	Nehemiah 8.4 And Ezra the scribe stood upon a pulpit of wood, which they had made for the purpose; and beside him stood Mattithiah, and Shema, and Anaiah, and Urijah, and Hilkiah, and Maaseiah, on his right hand; and on his left hand, Pedaiah, and Mishael, and Malchiah, and Hashum, and Hashbadana, Zechariah, and Meshullam.
punites (1)
	Numbers 26.23 Of the sons of Issachar after their families: of Tola, the family of the Tolaites: of Pua, the family of the Punites:
purely (1)
	Isaiah 1.25 And I will turn my hand upon thee, and purely purge away thy dross, and take away all thy tin:
purgeth (1)
	John 15.2 Every branch in me that beareth not fruit he taketh away: and every branch that beareth fruit, he purgeth it, that it may bring forth more fruit.
purging (1)
	Mark 7.19 Because it entereth not into his heart, but into the belly, and goeth out into the draught, purging all meats?
purifications (1)
	Esther 2.12 Now when every maid's turn was come to go in to king Ahasuerus, after that she had been twelve months, according to the manner of the women, (for so were the days of their purifications accomplished, to wit, six months with oil of myrrh, and six months with sweet odours, and with other things for the purifying of the women;)
purifier (1)
	Malachi 3.3 And he shall sit as a refiner and purifier of silver: and he shall purify the sons of Levi, and purge them as gold and silver, that they may offer unto the LORD an offering in righteousness.
purloining (1)
	Titus 2.10 Not purloining, but shewing all good fidelity; that they may adorn the doctrine of God our Saviour in all things.
purposeth (1)
	2 Corinthians 9.7 Every man according as he purposeth in his heart, so let him give; not grudgingly, or of necessity: for God loveth a cheerful giver.
purposing (1)
	Genesis 27.42 And these words of Esau her elder son were told to Rebekah: and she sent and called Jacob her younger son, and said unto him, Behold, thy brother Esau, as touching thee, doth comfort himself, purposing to kill thee.
purses (1)
	Matthew 10.9 Provide neither gold, nor silver, nor brass in your purses,
pursuer (1)
	Lamentations 1.6 And from the daughter of Zion all her beauty is departed: her princes are become like harts that find no pasture, and they are gone without strength before the pursuer.
purtenance (1)
	Exodus 12.9 Eat not of it raw, nor sodden at all with water, but roast with fire; his head with his legs, and with the purtenance thereof.
pushed (1)
	Ezekiel 34.21 Because ye have thrust with side and with shoulder, and pushed all the diseased with your horns, till ye have scattered them abroad;
pushing (1)
	Daniel 8.4 I saw the ram pushing westward, and northward, and southward; so that no beasts might stand before him, neither was there any that could deliver out of his hand; but he did according to his will, and became great.
puteoli (1)
	Acts 28.13 And from thence we fetched a compass, and came to Rhegium: and after one day the south wind blew, and we came the next day to Puteoli:
putiel (1)
	Exodus 6.25 And Eleazar Aaron's son took him one of the daughters of Putiel to wife; and she bare him Phinehas: these are the heads of the fathers of the Levites according to their families.
putrifying (1)
	Isaiah 1.6 From the sole of the foot even unto the head there is no soundness in it; but wounds, and bruises, and putrifying sores: they have not been closed, neither bound up, neither mollified with ointment.
pygarg (1)
	Deuteronomy 14.5 The hart, and the roebuck, and the fallow deer, and the wild goat, and the pygarg, and the wild ox, and the chamois.
quantity (1)
	Isaiah 22.24 And they shall hang upon him all the glory of his father's house, the offspring and the issue, all vessels of small quantity, from the vessels of cups, even to all the vessels of flagons.
quartus (1)
	Romans 16.23 Gaius mine host, and of the whole church, saluteth you. Erastus the chamberlain of the city saluteth you, and Quartus a brother.
quaternions (1)
	Acts 12.4 And when he had apprehended him, he put him in prison, and delivered him to four quaternions of soldiers to keep him; intending after Easter to bring him forth to the people.
quickening (1)
	1 Corinthians 15.45 And so it is written, The first man Adam was made a living soul; the last Adam was made a quickening spirit.
quicksands (1)
	Acts 27.17 Which when they had taken up, they used helps, undergirding the ship; and, fearing lest they should fall into the quicksands, strake sail, and so were driven.
quieteth (1)
	Job 37.17 How thy garments are warm, when he quieteth the earth by the south wind?
quivered (1)
	Habakkuk 3.16 When I heard, my belly trembled; my lips quivered at the voice: rottenness entered into my bones, and I trembled in myself, that I might rest in the day of trouble: when he cometh up unto the people, he will invade them with his troops.
raamiah (1)
	Nehemiah 7.7 Who came with Zerubbabel, Jeshua, Nehemiah, Azariah, Raamiah, Nahamani, Mordecai, Bilshan, Mispereth, Bigvai, Nehum, Baanah. The number, I say, of the men of the people of Israel was this;
raamses (1)
	Exodus 1.11 Therefore they did set over them taskmasters to afflict them with their burdens. And they built for Pharaoh treasure cities, Pithom and Raamses.
rabbith (1)
	Joshua 19.20 And Rabbith, and Kishion, and Abez,
rabboni (1)
	John 20.16 Jesus saith unto her, Mary. She turned herself, and saith unto him, Rabboni; which is to say, Master.
raca (1)
	Matthew 5.22 But I say unto you, That whosoever is angry with his brother without a cause shall be in danger of the judgment: and whosoever shall say to his brother, Raca, shall be in danger of the council: but whosoever shall say, Thou fool, shall be in danger of hell fire.
rachab (1)
	Matthew 1.5 And Salmon begat Booz of Rachab; and Booz begat Obed of Ruth; and Obed begat Jesse;
rachal (1)
	1 Samuel 30.29 And to them which were in Rachal, and to them which were in the cities of the Jerahmeelites, and to them which were in the cities of the Kenites,
raddai (1)
	1 Chronicles 2.14 Nethaneel the fourth, Raddai the fifth,
rafters (1)
	Song of Songs 1.17 The beams of our house are cedar, and our rafters of fir.
ragau (1)
	Luke 3.35 Which was the son of Saruch, which was the son of Ragau, which was the son of Phalec, which was the son of Heber, which was the son of Sala,
raged (1)
	Psalms (prose) 46.6 The heathen raged, the kingdoms were moved: he uttered his voice, the earth melted.
rageth (1)
	Proverbs 14.16 A wise man feareth, and departeth from evil: but the fool rageth, and is confident.
ragged (1)
	Isaiah 2.21 To go into the clefts of the rocks, and into the tops of the ragged rocks, for fear of the LORD, and for the glory of his majesty, when he ariseth to shake terribly the earth.
raguel (1)
	Numbers 10.29 And Moses said unto Hobab, the son of Raguel the Midianite, Moses' father in law, We are journeying unto the place of which the LORD said, I will give it you: come thou with us, and we will do thee good: for the LORD hath spoken good concerning Israel.
raham (1)
	1 Chronicles 2.44 And Shema begat Raham, the father of Jorkoam: and Rekem begat Shammai.
rahel (1)
	Jeremiah 31.15 Thus saith the LORD; A voice was heard in Ramah, lamentation, and bitter weeping; Rahel weeping for her children refused to be comforted for her children, because they were not.
rail (1)
	2 Chronicles 32.17 He wrote also letters to rail on the LORD God of Israel, and to speak against him, saying, As the gods of the nations of other lands have not delivered their people out of mine hand, so shall not the God of Hezekiah deliver his people out of mine hand.
railer (1)
	1 Corinthians 5.11 But now I have written unto you not to keep company, if any man that is called a brother be a fornicator, or covetous, or an idolater, or a railer, or a drunkard, or an extortioner; with such an one no not to eat.
railings (1)
	1 Timothy 6.4 He is proud, knowing nothing, but doting about questions and strifes of words, whereof cometh envy, strife, railings, evil surmisings,
rainy (1)
	Proverbs 27.15 A continual dropping in a very rainy day and a contentious woman are alike.
raiser (1)
	Daniel 11.20 Then shall stand up in his estate a raiser of taxes in the glory of the kingdom: but within few days he shall be destroyed, neither in anger, nor in battle.
rakem (1)
	1 Chronicles 7.16 And Maachah the wife of Machir bare a son, and she called his name Peresh; and the name of his brother was Sheresh; and his sons were Ulam and Rakem.
rakkath (1)
	Joshua 19.35 And the fenced cities are Ziddim, Zer, and Hammath, Rakkath, and Chinnereth,
rakkon (1)
	Joshua 19.46 And Mejarkon, and Rakkon, with the border before Japho.
rama (1)
	Matthew 2.18 In Rama was there a voice heard, lamentation, and weeping, and great mourning, Rachel weeping for her children, and would not be comforted, because they are not.
ramath (1)
	Joshua 19.8 And all the villages that were round about these cities to Baalathbeer, Ramath of the south. This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Simeon according to their families.
ramathaimzophim (1)
	1 Samuel 1.1 Now there was a certain man of Ramathaimzophim, of mount Ephraim, and his name was Elkanah, the son of Jeroham, the son of Elihu, the son of Tohu, the son of Zuph, an Ephrathite:
ramathite (1)
	1 Chronicles 27.27 And over the vineyards was Shimei the Ramathite: over the increase of the vineyards for the wine cellars was Zabdi the Shiphmite:
ramathlehi (1)
	Judges 15.17 And it came to pass, when he had made an end of speaking, that he cast away the jawbone out of his hand, and called that place Ramathlehi.
ramathmizpeh (1)
	Joshua 13.26 And from Heshbon unto Ramathmizpeh, and Betonim; and from Mahanaim unto the border of Debir;
ramiah (1)
	Ezra 10.25 Moreover of Israel: of the sons of Parosh; Ramiah, and Jeziah, and Malchiah, and Miamin, and Eleazar, and Malchijah, and Benaiah.
range (1)
	Job 39.8 The range of the mountains is his pasture, and he searcheth after every green thing.
ranging (1)
	Proverbs 28.15 As a roaring lion, and a ranging bear; so is a wicked ruler over the poor people.
raphu (1)
	Numbers 13.9 Of the tribe of Benjamin, Palti the son of Raphu.
rare (1)
	Daniel 2.11 And it is a rare thing that the king requireth, and there is none other that can shew it before the king, except the gods, whose dwelling is not with flesh.
rashly (1)
	Acts 19.36 Seeing then that these things cannot be spoken against, ye ought to be quiet, and to do nothing rashly.
rattleth (1)
	Job 39.23 The quiver rattleth against him, the glittering spear and the shield.
rattling (1)
	Nahum 3.2 The noise of a whip, and the noise of the rattling of the wheels, and of the pransing horses, and of the jumping chariots.
reaia (1)
	1 Chronicles 5.5 Micah his son, Reaia his son, Baal his son,
reaper (1)
	Amos 9.13 Behold, the days come, saith the LORD, that the plowman shall overtake the reaper, and the treader of grapes him that soweth seed; and the mountains shall drop sweet wine, and all the hills shall melt.
reasonable (1)
	Romans 12.1 I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable service.
rebecca (1)
	Romans 9.10 And not only this; but when Rebecca also had conceived by one, even by our father Isaac;
rebuker (1)
	Hosea 5.2 And the revolters are profound to make slaughter, though I have been a rebuker of them all.
recall (1)
	Lamentations 3.21 This I recall to my mind, therefore have I hope.
receivedst (1)
	Luke 16.25 But Abraham said, Son, remember that thou in thy lifetime receivedst thy good things, and likewise Lazarus evil things: but now he is comforted, and thou art tormented.
receiver (1)
	Isaiah 33.18 Thine heart shall meditate terror. Where is the scribe? where is the receiver? where is he that counted the towers?
rechah (1)
	1 Chronicles 4.12 And Eshton begat Bethrapha, and Paseah, and Tehinnah the father of Irnahash. These are the men of Rechah.
reckoneth (1)
	Matthew 25.19 After a long time the lord of those servants cometh, and reckoneth with them.
recompensest (1)
	Jeremiah 32.18 Thou shewest lovingkindness unto thousands, and recompensest the iniquity of the fathers into the bosom of their children after them: the Great, the Mighty God, the LORD of hosts, is his name,
recompensing (1)
	2 Chronicles 6.23 Then hear thou from heaven, and do, and judge thy servants, by requiting the wicked, by recompensing his way upon his own head; and by justifying the righteous, by giving him according to his righteousness.
recorded (1)
	Nehemiah 12.22 The Levites in the days of Eliashib, Joiada, and Johanan, and Jaddua, were recorded chief of the fathers: also the priests, to the reign of Darius the Persian.
recount (1)
	Nahum 2.5 He shall recount his worthies: they shall stumble in their walk; they shall make haste to the wall thereof, and the defence shall be prepared.
recovering (1)
	Luke 4.18 The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he hath anointed me to preach the gospel to the poor; he hath sent me to heal the brokenhearted, to preach deliverance to the captives, and recovering of sight to the blind, to set at liberty them that are bruised,
redeemedst (1)
	2 Samuel 7.23 And what one nation in the earth is like thy people, even like Israel, whom God went to redeem for a people to himself, and to make him a name, and to do for you great things and terrible, for thy land, before thy people, which thou redeemedst to thee from Egypt, from the nations and their gods?
redness (1)
	Proverbs 23.29 Who hath woe? who hath sorrow? who hath contentions? who hath babbling? who hath wounds without cause? who hath redness of eyes?
redound (1)
	2 Corinthians 4.15 For all things are for your sakes, that the abundant grace might through the thanksgiving of many redound to the glory of God.
reelaiah (1)
	Ezra 2.2 Which came with Zerubbabel: Jeshua, Nehemiah, Seraiah, Reelaiah, Mordecai, Bilshan, Mizpar, Bigvai, Rehum, Baanah. The number of the men of the people of Israel:
refine (1)
	Zechariah 13.9 And I will bring the third part through the fire, and will refine them as silver is refined, and will try them as gold is tried: they shall call on my name, and I will hear them: I will say, It is my people: and they shall say, The LORD is my God.
refiner (1)
	Malachi 3.3 And he shall sit as a refiner and purifier of silver: and he shall purify the sons of Levi, and purge them as gold and silver, that they may offer unto the LORD an offering in righteousness.
refiners (1)
	Malachi 3.2 But who may abide the day of his coming? and who shall stand when he appeareth? for he is like a refiner's fire, and like fullers' soap:
reformation (1)
	Hebrews 9.10 Which stood only in meats and drinks, and divers washings, and carnal ordinances, imposed on them until the time of reformation.
reformed (1)
	Leviticus 26.23 And if ye will not be reformed by me by these things, but will walk contrary unto me;
refraineth (1)
	Proverbs 10.19 In the multitude of words there wanteth not sin: but he that refraineth his lips is wise.
refresheth (1)
	Proverbs 25.13 As the cold of snow in the time of harvest, so is a faithful messenger to them that send him: for he refresheth the soul of his masters.
refusedst (1)
	Jeremiah 3.3 Therefore the showers have been withholden, and there hath been no latter rain; and thou hadst a whore's forehead, thou refusedst to be ashamed.
regem (1)
	1 Chronicles 2.47 And the sons of Jahdai; Regem, and Jotham, and Gesham, and Pelet, and Ephah, and Shaaph.
regemmelech (1)
	Zechariah 7.2 When they had sent unto the house of God Sherezer and Regemmelech, and their men, to pray before the LORD,
rei (1)
	1 Kings 1.8 But Zadok the priest, and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and Nathan the prophet, and Shimei, and Rei, and the mighty men which belonged to David, were not with Adonijah.
reignest (1)
	1 Chronicles 29.12 Both riches and honour come of thee, and thou reignest over all; and in thine hand is power and might; and in thine hand it is to make great, and to give strength unto all.
reigning (1)
	1 Samuel 16.1 And the LORD said unto Samuel, How long wilt thou mourn for Saul, seeing I have rejected him from reigning over Israel? fill thine horn with oil, and go, I will send thee to Jesse the Bethlehemite: for I have provided me a king among his sons.
rejecteth (1)
	John 12.48 He that rejecteth me, and receiveth not my words, hath one that judgeth him: the word that I have spoken, the same shall judge him in the last day.
rejoicest (1)
	Jeremiah 11.15 What hath my beloved to do in mine house, seeing she hath wrought lewdness with many, and the holy flesh is passed from thee? when thou doest evil, then thou rejoicest.
relief (1)
	Acts 11.29 Then the disciples, every man according to his ability, determined to send relief unto the brethren which dwelt in Judaea:
relieved (1)
	1 Timothy 5.10 Well reported of for good works; if she have brought up children, if she have lodged strangers, if she have washed the saints' feet, if she have relieved the afflicted, if she have diligently followed every good work.
relieveth (1)
	Psalms (prose) 146.9 The LORD preserveth the strangers; he relieveth the fatherless and widow: but the way of the wicked he turneth upside down.
rely (1)
	2 Chronicles 16.8 Were not the Ethiopians and the Lubims a huge host, with very many chariots and horsemen? yet, because thou didst rely on the LORD, he delivered them into thine hand.
remembrances (1)
	Job 13.12 Your remembrances are like unto ashes, your bodies to bodies of clay.
remeth (1)
	Joshua 19.21 And Remeth, and Engannim, and Enhaddah, and Bethpazzez;
remit (1)
	John 20.23 Whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them; and whose soever sins ye retain, they are retained.
remitted (1)
	John 20.23 Whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them; and whose soever sins ye retain, they are retained.
remmon (1)
	Joshua 19.7 Ain, Remmon, and Ether, and Ashan; four cities and their villages:
remmonmethoar (1)
	Joshua 19.13 And from thence passeth on along on the east to Gittahhepher, to Ittahkazin, and goeth out to Remmonmethoar to Neah;
remphan (1)
	Acts 7.43 Yea, ye took up the tabernacle of Moloch, and the star of your god Remphan, figures which ye made to worship them: and I will carry you away beyond Babylon.
renderest (1)
	Psalms (prose) 62.12 Also unto thee, O Lord, belongeth mercy: for thou renderest to every man according to his work.
rendereth (1)
	Isaiah 66.6 A voice of noise from the city, a voice from the temple, a voice of the LORD that rendereth recompence to his enemies.
rendering (1)
	1 Peter 3.9 Not rendering evil for evil, or railing for railing: but contrariwise blessing; knowing that ye are thereunto called, that ye should inherit a blessing.
rending (1)
	Psalms (prose) 7.2 Lest he tear my soul like a lion, rending it in pieces, while there is none to deliver.
renounced (1)
	2 Corinthians 4.2 But have renounced the hidden things of dishonesty, not walking in craftiness, nor handling the word of God deceitfully; but by manifestation of the truth commending ourselves to every man's conscience in the sight of God.
rentest (1)
	Jeremiah 4.30 And when thou art spoiled, what wilt thou do? Though thou clothest thyself with crimson, though thou deckest thee with ornaments of gold, though thou rentest thy face with painting, in vain shalt thou make thyself fair; thy lovers will despise thee, they will seek thy life.
repairer (1)
	Isaiah 58.12 And they that shall be of thee shall build the old waste places: thou shalt raise up the foundations of many generations; and thou shalt be called, The repairer of the breach, The restorer of paths to dwell in.
repairing (1)
	2 Chronicles 24.27 Now concerning his sons, and the greatness of the burdens laid upon him, and the repairing of the house of God, behold, they are written in the story of the book of the kings. And Amaziah his son reigned in his stead.
repayed (1)
	Proverbs 13.21 Evil pursueth sinners: but to the righteous good shall be repayed.
repayeth (1)
	Deuteronomy 7.10 And repayeth them that hate him to their face, to destroy them: he will not be slack to him that hateth him, he will repay him to his face.
repeateth (1)
	Proverbs 17.9 He that covereth a transgression seeketh love; but he that repeateth a matter separateth very friends.
repentest (1)
	Jonah 4.2 And he prayed unto the LORD, and said, I pray thee, O LORD, was not this my saying, when I was yet in my country? Therefore I fled before unto Tarshish: for I knew that thou art a gracious God, and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness, and repentest thee of the evil.
repenting (1)
	Jeremiah 15.6 Thou hast forsaken me, saith the LORD, thou art gone backward: therefore will I stretch out my hand against thee, and destroy thee; I am weary with repenting.
repentings (1)
	Hosea 11.8 How shall I give thee up, Ephraim? how shall I deliver thee, Israel?  how shall I make thee as Admah? how shall I set thee as Zeboim? mine heart is turned within me, my repentings are kindled together.
repetitions (1)
	Matthew 6.7 But when ye pray, use not vain repetitions, as the heathen do: for they think that they shall be heard for their much speaking.
rephael (1)
	1 Chronicles 26.7 The sons of Shemaiah; Othni, and Rephael, and Obed, Elzabad, whose brethren were strong men, Elihu, and Semachiah.
rephah (1)
	1 Chronicles 7.25 And Rephah was his son, also Resheph, and Telah his son, and Tahan his son.
repliest (1)
	Romans 9.20 Nay but, O man, who art thou that repliest against God? Shall the thing formed say to him that formed it, Why hast thou made me thus?
reproachest (1)
	Luke 11.45 Then answered one of the lawyers, and said unto him, Master, thus saying thou reproachest us also.
requests (1)
	Philippians 4.6 Be careful for nothing; but in every thing by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving let your requests be made known unto God.
requirest (1)
	Ruth 3.11 And now, my daughter, fear not; I will do to thee all that thou requirest: for all the city of my people doth know that thou art a virtuous woman.
requiring (1)
	Luke 23.23 And they were instant with loud voices, requiring that he might be crucified. And the voices of them and of the chief priests prevailed.
requiting (1)
	2 Chronicles 6.23 Then hear thou from heaven, and do, and judge thy servants, by requiting the wicked, by recompensing his way upon his own head; and by justifying the righteous, by giving him according to his righteousness.
rescueth (1)
	Daniel 6.27 He delivereth and rescueth, and he worketh signs and wonders in heaven and in earth, who hath delivered Daniel from the power of the lions.
resemblance (1)
	Zechariah 5.6 And I said, What is it? And he said, This is an ephah that goeth forth. He said moreover, This is their resemblance through all the earth.
resemble (1)
	Luke 13.18 Then said he, Unto what is the kingdom of God like? and whereunto shall I resemble it?
resembled (1)
	Judges 8.18 Then said he unto Zebah and Zalmunna, What manner of men were they whom ye slew at Tabor? And they answered, As thou art, so were they; each one resembled the children of a king.
resen (1)
	Genesis 10.12 And Resen between Nineveh and Calah: the same is a great city.
resheph (1)
	1 Chronicles 7.25 And Rephah was his son, also Resheph, and Telah his son, and Tahan his son.
resolved (1)
	Luke 16.4 I am resolved what to do, that, when I am put out of the stewardship, they may receive me into their houses.
respected (1)
	Lamentations 4.16 The anger of the LORD hath divided them; he will no more regard them: they respected not the persons of the priests, they favoured not the elders.
respecter (1)
	Acts 10.34 Then Peter opened his mouth, and said, Of a truth I perceive that God is no respecter of persons:
restest (1)
	Romans 2.17 Behold, thou art called a Jew, and restest in the law, and makest thy boast of God,
restingplace (1)
	Jeremiah 50.6 My people hath been lost sheep: their shepherds have caused them to go astray, they have turned them away on the mountains: they have gone from mountain to hill, they have forgotten their restingplace.
restrainest (1)
	Job 15.4 Yea, thou castest off fear, and restrainest prayer before God.
restraint (1)
	1 Samuel 14.6 And Jonathan said to the young man that bare his armour, Come, and let us go over unto the garrison of these uncircumcised: it may be that the LORD will work for us: for there is no restraint to the LORD to save by many or by few.
rests (1)
	1 Kings 6.6 The nethermost chamber was five cubits broad, and the middle was six cubits broad, and the third was seven cubits broad: for without in the wall of the house he made narrowed rests round about, that the beams should not be fastened in the walls of the house.
reubenite (1)
	1 Chronicles 11.42 Adina the son of Shiza the Reubenite, a captain of the Reubenites, and thirty with him,
reumah (1)
	Genesis 22.24 And his concubine, whose name was Reumah, she bare also Tebah, and Gaham, and Thahash, and Maachah.
revealer (1)
	Daniel 2.47 The king answered unto Daniel, and said, Of a truth it is, that your God is a God of gods, and a Lord of kings, and a revealer of secrets, seeing thou couldest reveal this secret.
revenged (1)
	Ezekiel 25.12 Thus saith the Lord GOD; Because that Edom hath dealt against the house of Judah by taking vengeance, and hath greatly offended, and revenged himself upon them;
revengers (1)
	2 Samuel 14.11 Then said she, I pray thee, let the king remember the LORD thy God, that thou wouldest not suffer the revengers of blood to destroy any more, lest they destroy my son. And he said, As the LORD liveth, there shall not one hair of thy son fall to the earth.
revenges (1)
	Deuteronomy 32.42 I will make mine arrows drunk with blood, and my sword shall devour flesh; and that with the blood of the slain and of the captives, from the beginning of revenges upon the enemy.
revenging (1)
	Psalms (prose) 79.10 Wherefore should the heathen say, Where is their God? let him be known among the heathen in our sight by the revenging of the blood of thy servants which is shed.
reverenced (1)
	Esther 3.2 And all the king's servants, that were in the king's gate, bowed, and reverenced Haman: for the king had so commanded concerning him. But Mordecai bowed not, nor did him reverence.
reverend (1)
	Psalms (prose) 111.9 He sent redemption unto his people: he hath commanded his covenant for ever: holy and reverend is his name.
revilers (1)
	1 Corinthians 6.10 Nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners, shall inherit the kingdom of God.
revilest (1)
	Acts 23.4 And they that stood by said, Revilest thou God's high priest?
revolting (1)
	Jeremiah 5.23 But this people hath a revolting and a rebellious heart; they are revolted and gone.
rewarder (1)
	Hebrews 11.6 But without faith it is impossible to please him: for he that cometh to God must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him.
rezia (1)
	1 Chronicles 7.39 And the sons of Ulla; Arah, and Haniel, and Rezia.
rezon (1)
	1 Kings 11.23 And God stirred him up another adversary, Rezon the son of Eliadah, which fled from his lord Hadadezer king of Zobah:
rhegium (1)
	Acts 28.13 And from thence we fetched a compass, and came to Rhegium: and after one day the south wind blew, and we came the next day to Puteoli:
rhesa (1)
	Luke 3.27 Which was the son of Joanna, which was the son of Rhesa, which was the son of Zorobabel, which was the son of Salathiel, which was the son of Neri,
rhoda (1)
	Acts 12.13 And as Peter knocked at the door of the gate, a damsel came to hearken, named Rhoda.
rhodes (1)
	Acts 21.1 And it came to pass, that after we were gotten from them, and had launched, we came with a straight course unto Coos, and the day following unto Rhodes, and from thence unto Patara:
ribband (1)
	Numbers 15.38 Speak unto the children of Israel, and bid them that they make them fringes in the borders of their garments throughout their generations, and that they put upon the fringe of the borders a ribband of blue:
richer (1)
	Daniel 11.2 And now will I shew thee the truth. Behold, there shall stand up yet three kings in Persia; and the fourth shall be far richer than they all: and by his strength through his riches he shall stir up all against the realm of Grecia.
ridden (1)
	Numbers 22.30 And the ass said unto Balaam, Am not I thine ass, upon which thou hast ridden ever since I was thine unto this day? was I ever wont to do so unto thee? And he said, Nay.
ridges (1)
	Psalms (prose) 65.10 Thou waterest the ridges thereof abundantly: thou settlest the furrows thereof: thou makest it soft with showers: thou blessest the springing thereof.
rifled (1)
	Zechariah 14.2 For I will gather all nations against Jerusalem to battle; and the city shall be taken, and the houses rifled, and the women ravished; and half of the city shall go forth into captivity, and the residue of the people shall not be cut off from the city.
ringleader (1)
	Acts 24.5 For we have found this man a pestilent fellow, and a mover of sedition among all the Jews throughout the world, and a ringleader of the sect of the Nazarenes:
rinnah (1)
	1 Chronicles 4.20 And the sons of Shimon were, Amnon, and Rinnah, Benhanan, and Tilon. And the sons of Ishi were, Zoheth, and Benzoheth.
rioting (1)
	Romans 13.13 Let us walk honestly, as in the day; not in rioting and drunkenness, not in chambering and wantonness, not in strife and envying.
rip (1)
	2 Kings 8.12 And Hazael said, Why weepeth my lord? And he answered, Because I know the evil that thou wilt do unto the children of Israel: their strong holds wilt thou set on fire, and their young men wilt thou slay with the sword, and wilt dash their children, and rip up their women with child.
ripening (1)
	Isaiah 18.5 For afore the harvest, when the bud is perfect, and the sour grape is ripening in the flower, he shall both cut off the sprigs with pruning hooks, and take away and cut down the branches.
rites (1)
	Numbers 9.3 In the fourteenth day of this month, at even, ye shall keep it in his appointed season: according to all the rites of it, and according to all the ceremonies thereof, shall ye keep it.
road (1)
	1 Samuel 27.10 And Achish said, Whither have ye made a road to day? And David said, Against the south of Judah, and against the south of the Jerahmeelites, and against the south of the Kenites.
roarings (1)
	Job 3.24 For my sighing cometh before I eat, and my roarings are poured out like the waters.
robbeth (1)
	Proverbs 28.24 Whoso robbeth his father or his mother, and saith, It is no transgression; the same is the companion of a destroyer.
roebucks (1)
	1 Kings 4.23 Ten fat oxen, and twenty oxen out of the pastures, and an hundred sheep, beside harts, and roebucks, and fallowdeer, and fatted fowl.
rohgah (1)
	1 Chronicles 7.34 And the sons of Shamer; Ahi, and Rohgah, Jehubbah, and Aram.
roller (1)
	Ezekiel 30.21 Son of man, I have broken the arm of Pharaoh king of Egypt; and, lo, it shall not be bound up to be healed, to put a roller to bind it, to make it strong to hold the sword.
rolleth (1)
	Proverbs 26.27 Whoso diggeth a pit shall fall therein: and he that rolleth a stone, it will return upon him.
rolling (1)
	Isaiah 17.13 The nations shall rush like the rushing of many waters: but God shall rebuke them, and they shall flee far off, and shall be chased as the chaff of the mountains before the wind, and like a rolling thing before the whirlwind.
rolls (1)
	Ezra 6.1 Then Darius the king made a decree, and search was made in the house of the rolls, where the treasures were laid up in Babylon.
rope (1)
	Isaiah 5.18 Woe unto them that draw iniquity with cords of vanity, and sin as it were with a cart rope:
rosh (1)
	Genesis 46.21 And the sons of Benjamin were Belah, and Becher, and Ashbel, Gera, and Naaman, Ehi, and Rosh, Muppim, and Huppim, and Ard.
rouse (1)
	Genesis 49.9 Judah is a lion's whelp: from the prey, my son, thou art gone up: he stooped down, he couched as a lion, and as an old lion; who shall rouse him up?
rovers (1)
	1 Chronicles 12.21 And they helped David against the band of the rovers: for they were all mighty men of valour, and were captains in the host.
rowers (1)
	Ezekiel 27.26 Thy rowers have brought thee into great waters: the east wind hath broken thee in the midst of the seas.
rowing (1)
	Mark 6.48 And he saw them toiling in rowing; for the wind was contrary unto them: and about the fourth watch of the night he cometh unto them, walking upon the sea, and would have passed by them.
rubbing (1)
	Luke 6.1 And it came to pass on the second sabbath after the first, that he went through the corn fields; and his disciples plucked the ears of corn, and did eat, rubbing them in their hands.
rudder (1)
	Acts 27.40 And when they had taken up the anchors, they committed themselves unto the sea, and loosed the rudder bands, and hoised up the mainsail to the wind, and made toward shore.
rude (1)
	2 Corinthians 11.6 But though I be rude in speech, yet not in knowledge; but we have been throughly made manifest among you in all things.
rue (1)
	Luke 11.42 But woe unto you, Pharisees! for ye tithe mint and rue and all manner of herbs, and pass over judgment and the love of God: these ought ye to have done, and not to leave the other undone.
ruhamah (1)
	Hosea 2.1 Say ye unto your brethren, Ammi; and to your sisters, Ruhamah.
rumah (1)
	2 Kings 23.36 Jehoiakim was twenty and five years old when he began to reign; and he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Zebudah, the daughter of Pedaiah of Rumah.
rumbling (1)
	Jeremiah 47.3 At the noise of the stamping of the hoofs of his strong horses, at the rushing of his chariots, and at the rumbling of his wheels, the fathers shall not look back to their children for feebleness of hands;
runnest (1)
	Proverbs 4.12 When thou goest, thy steps shall not be straitened; and when thou runnest, thou shalt not stumble.
rushes (1)
	Isaiah 35.7 And the parched ground shall become a pool, and the thirsty land springs of water: in the habitation of dragons, where each lay, shall be grass with reeds and rushes.
rusheth (1)
	Jeremiah 8.6 I hearkened and heard, but they spake not aright: no man repented him of his wickedness, saying, What have I done? every one turned to his course, as the horse rusheth into the battle.
sabta (1)
	1 Chronicles 1.9 And the sons of Cush; Seba, and Havilah, and Sabta, and Raamah, and Sabtecha. And the sons of Raamah; Sheba, and Dedan.
sabtah (1)
	Genesis 10.7 And the sons of Cush; Seba, and Havilah, and Sabtah, and Raamah, and Sabtechah: and the sons of Raamah; Sheba, and Dedan.
sabtecha (1)
	1 Chronicles 1.9 And the sons of Cush; Seba, and Havilah, and Sabta, and Raamah, and Sabtecha. And the sons of Raamah; Sheba, and Dedan.
sabtechah (1)
	Genesis 10.7 And the sons of Cush; Seba, and Havilah, and Sabtah, and Raamah, and Sabtechah: and the sons of Raamah; Sheba, and Dedan.
sackclothes (1)
	Nehemiah 9.1 Now in the twenty and fourth day of this month the children of Israel were assembled with fasting, and with sackclothes, and earth upon them.
sacrificedst (1)
	Deuteronomy 16.4 And there shall be no leavened bread seen with thee in all thy coast seven days; neither shall there any thing of the flesh, which thou sacrificedst the first day at even, remain all night until the morning.
sacrilege (1)
	Romans 2.22 Thou that sayest a man should not commit adultery, dost thou commit adultery? thou that abhorrest idols, dost thou commit sacrilege?
sadly (1)
	Genesis 40.7 And he asked Pharaoh's officers that were with him in the ward of his lord's house, saying, Wherefore look ye so sadly to day?
sadness (1)
	Ecclesiastes 7.3 Sorrow is better than laughter: for by the sadness of the countenance the heart is made better.
safeguard (1)
	1 Samuel 22.23 Abide thou with me, fear not: for he that seeketh my life seeketh thy life: but with me thou shalt be in safeguard.
saffron (1)
	Song of Songs 4.14 Spikenard and saffron; calamus and cinnamon, with all trees of frankincense; myrrh and aloes, with all the chief spices:
sailors (1)
	Revelation 18.17 For in one hour so great riches is come to nought. And every shipmaster, and all the company in ships, and sailors, and as many as trade by sea, stood afar off,
sala (1)
	Luke 3.35 Which was the son of Saruch, which was the son of Ragau, which was the son of Phalec, which was the son of Heber, which was the son of Sala,
salamis (1)
	Acts 13.5 And when they were at Salamis, they preached the word of God in the synagogues of the Jews: and they had also John to their minister.
salchah (1)
	Deuteronomy 3.10 All the cities of the plain, and all Gilead, and all Bashan, unto Salchah and Edrei, cities of the kingdom of Og in Bashan.
salim (1)
	John 3.23 And John also was baptizing in Aenon near to Salim, because there was much water there: and they came, and were baptized.
salmone (1)
	Acts 27.7 And when we had sailed slowly many days, and scarce were come over against Cnidus, the wind not suffering us, we sailed under Crete, over against Salmone;
saltness (1)
	Mark 9.50 Salt is good: but if the salt have lost his saltness, wherewith will ye season it? Have salt in yourselves, and have peace one with another.
saltpits (1)
	Zephaniah 2.9 Therefore as I live, saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel, Surely Moab shall be as Sodom, and the children of Ammon as Gomorrah, even the breeding of nettles, and saltpits, and a perpetual desolation: the residue of my people shall spoil them, and the remnant of my people shall possess them.
salu (1)
	Numbers 25.14 Now the name of the Israelite that was slain, even that was slain with the Midianitish woman, was Zimri, the son of Salu, a prince of a chief house among the Simeonites.
salutations (1)
	Mark 12.38 And he said unto them in his doctrine, Beware of the scribes, which love to go in long clothing, and love salutations in the marketplaces,
samgarnebo (1)
	Jeremiah 39.3 And all the princes of the king of Babylon came in, and sat in the middle gate, even Nergalsharezer, Samgarnebo, Sarsechim, Rabsaris, Nergalsharezer, Rabmag, with all the residue of the princes of the king of Babylon.
samos (1)
	Acts 20.15 And we sailed thence, and came the next day over against Chios; and the next day we arrived at Samos, and tarried at Trogyllium; and the next day we came to Miletus.
samothracia (1)
	Acts 16.11 Therefore loosing from Troas, we came with a straight course to Samothracia, and the next day to Neapolis;
sansannah (1)
	Joshua 15.31 And Ziklag, and Madmannah, and Sansannah,
sap (1)
	Psalms (prose) 104.16 The trees of the LORD are full of sap; the cedars of Lebanon, which he hath planted;
saph (1)
	2 Samuel 21.18 And it came to pass after this, that there was again a battle with the Philistines at Gob: then Sibbechai the Hushathite slew Saph, which was of the sons of the giant.
saphir (1)
	Micah 1.11 Pass ye away, thou inhabitant of Saphir, having thy shame naked: the inhabitant of Zaanan came not forth in the mourning of Bethezel; he shall receive of you his standing.
sapphira (1)
	Acts 5.1 But a certain man named Ananias, with Sapphira his wife, sold a possession,
sarais (1)
	Genesis 16.8 And he said, Hagar, Sarai's maid, whence camest thou? and whither wilt thou go? And she said, I flee from the face of my mistress Sarai.
saraph (1)
	1 Chronicles 4.22 And Jokim, and the men of Chozeba, and Joash, and Saraph, who had the dominion in Moab, and Jashubilehem. And these are ancient things.
sardine (1)
	Revelation 4.3 And he that sat was to look upon like a jasper and a sardine stone: and there was a rainbow round about the throne, in sight like unto an emerald.
sardites (1)
	Numbers 26.26 Of the sons of Zebulun after their families: of Sered, the family of the Sardites: of Elon, the family of the Elonites: of Jahleel, the family of the Jahleelites.
sardonyx (1)
	Revelation 21.20 The fifth, sardonyx; the sixth, sardius; the seventh, chrysolyte; the eighth, beryl; the ninth, a topaz; the tenth, a chrysoprasus; the eleventh, a jacinth; the twelfth, an amethyst.
sarepta (1)
	Luke 4.26 But unto none of them was Elias sent, save unto Sarepta, a city of Sidon, unto a woman that was a widow.
sargon (1)
	Isaiah 20.1 In the year that Tartan came unto Ashdod, (when Sargon the king of Assyria sent him,) and fought against Ashdod, and took it;
saron (1)
	Acts 9.35 And all that dwelt at Lydda and Saron saw him, and turned to the Lord.
sarsechim (1)
	Jeremiah 39.3 And all the princes of the king of Babylon came in, and sat in the middle gate, even Nergalsharezer, Samgarnebo, Sarsechim, Rabsaris, Nergalsharezer, Rabmag, with all the residue of the princes of the king of Babylon.
saruch (1)
	Luke 3.35 Which was the son of Saruch, which was the son of Ragau, which was the son of Phalec, which was the son of Heber, which was the son of Sala,
satans (1)
	Revelation 2.13 I know thy works, and where thou dwellest, even where Satan's seat is: and thou holdest fast my name, and hast not denied my faith, even in those days wherein Antipas was my faithful martyr, who was slain among you, where Satan dwelleth.
satiated (1)
	Jeremiah 31.25 For I have satiated the weary soul, and I have replenished every sorrowful soul.
satisfiest (1)
	Psalms (prose) 145.16 Thou openest thine hand, and satisfiest the desire of every living thing.
satyr (1)
	Isaiah 34.14 The wild beasts of the desert shall also meet with the wild beasts of the island, and the satyr shall cry to his fellow; the screech owl also shall rest there, and find for herself a place of rest.
satyrs (1)
	Isaiah 13.21 But wild beasts of the desert shall lie there; and their houses shall be full of doleful creatures; and owls shall dwell there, and satyrs shall dance there.
savours (1)
	Ezra 6.10 That they may offer sacrifices of sweet savours unto the God of heaven, and pray for the life of the king, and of his sons.
sawed (1)
	1 Kings 7.9 All these were of costly stones, according to the measures of hewed stones, sawed with saws, within and without, even from the foundation unto the coping, and so on the outside toward the great court.
sawn (1)
	Hebrews 11.37 They were stoned, they were sawn asunder, were tempted, were slain with the sword: they wandered about in sheepskins and goatskins; being destitute, afflicted, tormented;
scabbard (1)
	Jeremiah 47.6 O thou sword of the LORD, how long will it be ere thou be quiet? put up thyself into thy scabbard, rest, and be still.
scaffold (1)
	2 Chronicles 6.13 For Solomon had made a brasen scaffold of five cubits long, and five cubits broad, and three cubits high, and had set it in the midst of the court: and upon it he stood, and kneeled down upon his knees before all the congregation of Israel, and spread forth his hands toward heaven.
scaleth (1)
	Proverbs 21.22 A wise man scaleth the city of the mighty, and casteth down the strength of the confidence thereof.
scalp (1)
	Psalms (prose) 68.21 But God shall wound the head of his enemies, and the hairy scalp of such an one as goeth on still in his trespasses.
scant (1)
	Micah 6.10 Are there yet the treasures of wickedness in the house of the wicked, and the scant measure that is abominable?
scarceness (1)
	Deuteronomy 8.9 A land wherein thou shalt eat bread without scarceness, thou shalt not lack any thing in it; a land whose stones are iron, and out of whose hills thou mayest dig brass.
scarest (1)
	Job 7.14 Then thou scarest me with dreams, and terrifiest me through visions:
scattering (1)
	Isaiah 30.30 And the LORD shall cause his glorious voice to be heard, and shall shew the lighting down of his arm, with the indignation of his anger, and with the flame of a devouring fire, with scattering, and tempest, and hailstones.
sceptres (1)
	Ezekiel 19.11 And she had strong rods for the sceptres of them that bare rule, and her stature was exalted among the thick branches, and she appeared in her height with the multitude of her branches.
sceva (1)
	Acts 19.14 And there were seven sons of one Sceva, a Jew, and chief of the priests, which did so.
schism (1)
	1 Corinthians 12.25 That there should be no schism in the body; but that the members should have the same care one for another.
school (1)
	Acts 19.9 But when divers were hardened, and believed not, but spake evil of that way before the multitude, he departed from them, and separated the disciples, disputing daily in the school of one Tyrannus.
scoff (1)
	Habakkuk 1.10 And they shall scoff at the kings, and the princes shall be a scorn unto them: they shall deride every strong hold; for they shall heap dust, and take it.
scoffers (1)
	2 Peter 3.3 Knowing this first, that there shall come in the last days scoffers, walking after their own lusts,
scorch (1)
	Revelation 16.8 And the fourth angel poured out his vial upon the sun; and power was given unto him to scorch men with fire.
scoured (1)
	Leviticus 6.28 But the earthen vessel wherein it is sodden shall be broken: and if it be sodden in a brasen pot, it shall be both scoured, and rinsed in water.
scourges (1)
	Joshua 23.13 Know for a certainty that the LORD your God will no more drive out any of these nations from before you; but they shall be snares and traps unto you, and scourges in your sides, and thorns in your eyes, until ye perish from off this good land which the LORD your God hath given you.
scourgeth (1)
	Hebrews 12.6 For whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth, and scourgeth every son whom he receiveth.
scourging (1)
	Acts 22.24 The chief captain commanded him to be brought into the castle, and bade that he should be examined by scourging; that he might know wherefore they cried so against him.
scourgings (1)
	Hebrews 11.36 And others had trial of cruel mockings and scourgings, yea, moreover of bonds and imprisonment:
scrabbled (1)
	1 Samuel 21.13 And he changed his behaviour before them, and feigned himself mad in their hands, and scrabbled on the doors of the gate, and let his spittle fall down upon his beard.
screech (1)
	Isaiah 34.14 The wild beasts of the desert shall also meet with the wild beasts of the island, and the satyr shall cry to his fellow; the screech owl also shall rest there, and find for herself a place of rest.
scythian (1)
	Colossians 3.11  Where there is neither Greek nor Jew, circumcision nor uncircumcision, Barbarian, Scythian, bond nor free: but Christ is all, and in all.
seafaring (1)
	Ezekiel 26.17 And they shall take up a lamentation for thee, and say to thee, How art thou destroyed, that wast inhabited of seafaring men, the renowned city, which wast strong in the sea, she and her inhabitants, which cause their terror to be on all that haunt it!
sealest (1)
	Ezekiel 28.12 Son of man, take up a lamentation upon the king of Tyrus, and say unto him, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Thou sealest up the sum, full of wisdom, and perfect in beauty.
sealing (1)
	Matthew 27.66 So they went, and made the sepulchre sure, sealing the stone, and setting a watch.
seam (1)
	John 19.23 Then the soldiers, when they had crucified Jesus, took his garments, and made four parts, to every soldier a part; and also his coat: now the coat was without seam, woven from the top throughout.
searchings (1)
	Judges 5.16 Why abodest thou among the sheepfolds, to hear the bleatings of the flocks? For the divisions of Reuben there were great searchings of heart.
seared (1)
	1 Timothy 4.2 Speaking lies in hypocrisy; having their conscience seared with a hot iron;
seated (1)
	Deuteronomy 33.21 And he provided the first part for himself, because there, in a portion of the lawgiver, was he seated; and he came with the heads of the people, he executed the justice of the LORD, and his judgments with Israel.
seatward (1)
	Exodus 37.9 And the cherubims spread out their wings on high, and covered with their wings over the mercy seat, with their faces one to another; even to the mercy seatward were the faces of the cherubims.
sebat (1)
	Zechariah 1.7 Upon the four and twentieth day of the eleventh month, which is the month Sebat, in the second year of Darius, came the word of the LORD unto Zechariah, the son of Berechiah, the son of Iddo the prophet, saying,
secacah (1)
	Joshua 15.61 In the wilderness, Betharabah, Middin, and Secacah,
sechu (1)
	1 Samuel 19.22 Then went he also to Ramah, and came to a great well that is in Sechu: and he asked and said, Where are Samuel and David? And one said, Behold, they be at Naioth in Ramah.
secondarily (1)
	1 Corinthians 12.28 And God hath set some in the church, first apostles, secondarily prophets, thirdly teachers, after that miracles, then gifts of healings, helps, governments, diversities of tongues.
secundus (1)
	Acts 20.4 And there accompanied him into Asia Sopater of Berea; and of the Thessalonians, Aristarchus and Secundus; and Gaius of Derbe, and Timotheus; and of Asia, Tychicus and Trophimus.
security (1)
	Acts 17.9 And when they had taken security of Jason, and of the other, they let them go.
seditions (1)
	Galatians 5.20 Idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, variance, emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies,
seducers (1)
	2 Timothy 3.13 But evil men and seducers shall wax worse and worse, deceiving, and being deceived.
seduceth (1)
	Proverbs 12.26 The righteous is more excellent than his neighbour: but the way of the wicked seduceth them.
seducing (1)
	1 Timothy 4.1 Now the Spirit speaketh expressly, that in the latter times some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and doctrines of devils;
seedtime (1)
	Genesis 8.22 While the earth remaineth, seedtime and harvest, and cold and heat, and summer and winter, and day and night shall not cease.
seirath (1)
	Judges 3.26 And Ehud escaped while they tarried, and passed beyond the quarries, and escaped unto Seirath.
seized (1)
	Jeremiah 49.24 Damascus is waxed feeble, and turneth herself to flee, and fear hath seized on her: anguish and sorrows have taken her, as a woman in travail.
sela (1)
	Isaiah 16.1 Send ye the lamb to the ruler of the land from Sela to the wilderness, unto the mount of the daughter of Zion.
selahammahlekoth (1)
	1 Samuel 23.28 Wherefore Saul returned from pursuing after David, and went against the Philistines: therefore they called that place Selahammahlekoth.
seleucia (1)
	Acts 13.4 So they, being sent forth by the Holy Ghost, departed unto Seleucia; and from thence they sailed to Cyprus.
selfwill (1)
	Genesis 49.6 O my soul, come not thou into their secret; unto their assembly, mine honour, be not thou united: for in their anger they slew a man, and in their selfwill they digged down a wall.
sellers (1)
	Nehemiah 13.20 So the merchants and sellers of all kind of ware lodged without Jerusalem once or twice.
sellest (1)
	Psalms (prose) 44.12 Thou sellest thy people for nought, and dost not increase thy wealth by their price.
sem (1)
	Luke 3.36 Which was the son of Cainan, which was the son of Arphaxad, which was the son of Sem, which was the son of Noe, which was the son of Lamech,
semachiah (1)
	1 Chronicles 26.7 The sons of Shemaiah; Othni, and Rephael, and Obed, Elzabad, whose brethren were strong men, Elihu, and Semachiah.
semei (1)
	Luke 3.26 Which was the son of Maath, which was the son of Mattathias, which was the son of Semei, which was the son of Joseph, which was the son of Juda,
senate (1)
	Acts 5.21 And when they heard that, they entered into the temple early in the morning, and taught. But the high priest came, and they that were with him, and called the council together, and all the senate of the children of Israel, and sent to the prison to have them brought.
senators (1)
	Psalms (prose) 105.22 To bind his princes at his pleasure; and teach his senators wisdom.
seneh (1)
	1 Samuel 14.4 And between the passages, by which Jonathan sought to go over unto the Philistines' garrison, there was a sharp rock on the one side, and a sharp rock on the other side: and the name of the one was Bozez, and the name of the other Seneh.
sense (1)
	Nehemiah 8.8 So they read in the book in the law of God distinctly, and gave the sense, and caused them to understand the reading.
senses (1)
	Hebrews 5.14 But strong meat belongeth to them that are of full age, even those who by reason of use have their senses exercised to discern both good and evil.
senuah (1)
	Nehemiah 11.9 And Joel the son of Zichri was their overseer: and Judah the son of Senuah was second over the city.
seorim (1)
	1 Chronicles 24.8 The third to Harim, the fourth to Seorim,
separating (1)
	Zechariah 7.3 And to speak unto the priests which were in the house of the LORD of hosts, and to the prophets, saying, Should I weep in the fifth month, separating myself, as I have done these so many years?
sephar (1)
	Genesis 10.30 And their dwelling was from Mesha, as thou goest unto Sephar a mount of the east.
sepharad (1)
	Obadiah 1.20 And the captivity of this host of the children of Israel shall possess that of the Canaanites, even unto Zarephath; and the captivity of Jerusalem, which is in Sepharad, shall possess the cities of the south.
sepharvites (1)
	2 Kings 17.31 And the Avites made Nibhaz and Tartak, and the Sepharvites burnt their children in fire to Adrammelech and Anammelech, the gods of Sepharvaim.
sergius (1)
	Acts 13.7 Which was with the deputy of the country, Sergius Paulus, a prudent man; who called for Barnabas and Saul, and desired to hear the word of God.
servedst (1)
	Deuteronomy 28.47 Because thou servedst not the LORD thy God with joyfulness, and with gladness of heart, for the abundance of all things;
servitor (1)
	2 Kings 4.43 And his servitor said, What, should I set this before an hundred men?  He said again, Give the people, that they may eat: for thus saith the LORD, They shall eat, and shall leave thereof.
sethur (1)
	Numbers 13.13 Of the tribe of Asher, Sethur the son of Michael.
setter (1)
	Acts 17.18 Then certain philosophers of the Epicureans, and of the Stoicks, encountered him. And some said, What will this babbler say? other some, He seemeth to be a setter forth of strange gods: because he preached unto them Jesus, and the resurrection.
settings (1)
	Exodus 28.17 And thou shalt set in it settings of stones, even four rows of stones: the first row shall be a sardius, a topaz, and a carbuncle: this shall be the first row.
settlest (1)
	Psalms (prose) 65.10 Thou waterest the ridges thereof abundantly: thou settlest the furrows thereof: thou makest it soft with showers: thou blessest the springing thereof.
severally (1)
	1 Corinthians 12.11 But all these worketh that one and the selfsame Spirit, dividing to every man severally as he will.
sewest (1)
	Job 14.17 My transgression is sealed up in a bag, and thou sewest up mine iniquity.
seweth (1)
	Mark 2.21 No man also seweth a piece of new cloth on an old garment: else the new piece that filled it up taketh away from the old, and the rent is made worse.
shaalabbin (1)
	Joshua 19.42 And Shaalabbin, and Ajalon, and Jethlah,
shaashgaz (1)
	Esther 2.14 In the evening she went, and on the morrow she returned into the second house of the women, to the custody of Shaashgaz, the king's chamberlain, which kept the concubines: she came in unto the king no more, except the king delighted in her, and that she were called by name.
shachia (1)
	1 Chronicles 8.10 And Jeuz, and Shachia, and Mirma. These were his sons, heads of the fathers.
shade (1)
	Psalms (prose) 121.5 The LORD is thy keeper: the LORD is thy shade upon thy right hand.
shage (1)
	1 Chronicles 11.34 The sons of Hashem the Gizonite, Jonathan the son of Shage the Hararite,
shaharaim (1)
	1 Chronicles 8.8 And Shaharaim begat children in the country of Moab, after he had sent them away; Hushim and Baara were his wives.
shahazimah (1)
	Joshua 19.22 And the coast reacheth to Tabor, and Shahazimah, and Bethshemesh; and the outgoings of their border were at Jordan: sixteen cities with their villages.
shaked (1)
	Psalms (prose) 109.25 I became also a reproach unto them: when they looked upon me they shaked their heads.
shalem (1)
	Genesis 33.18 And Jacob came to Shalem, a city of Shechem, which is in the land of Canaan, when he came from Padanaram; and pitched his tent before the city.
shalim (1)
	1 Samuel 9.4 And he passed through mount Ephraim, and passed through the land of Shalisha, but they found them not: then they passed through the land of Shalim, and there they were not: and he passed through the land of the Benjamites, but they found them not.
shalisha (1)
	1 Samuel 9.4 And he passed through mount Ephraim, and passed through the land of Shalisha, but they found them not: then they passed through the land of Shalim, and there they were not: and he passed through the land of the Benjamites, but they found them not.
shallecheth (1)
	1 Chronicles 26.16 To Shuppim and Hosah the lot came forth westward, with the gate Shallecheth, by the causeway of the going up, ward against ward.
shallun (1)
	Nehemiah 3.15 But the gate of the fountain repaired Shallun the son of Colhozeh, the ruler of part of Mizpah; he built it, and covered it, and set up the doors thereof, the locks thereof, and the bars thereof, and the wall of the pool of Siloah by the king's garden, and unto the stairs that go down from the city of David.
shalman (1)
	Hosea 10.14 Therefore shall a tumult arise among thy people, and all thy fortresses shall be spoiled, as Shalman spoiled Betharbel in the day of battle: the mother was dashed in pieces upon her children.
shama (1)
	1 Chronicles 11.44 Uzzia the Ashterathite, Shama and Jehiel the sons of Hothan the Aroerite,
shamariah (1)
	2 Chronicles 11.19 Which bare him children; Jeush, and Shamariah, and Zaham.
shambles (1)
	1 Corinthians 10.25 Whatsoever is sold in the shambles, that eat, asking no question for conscience sake:
shamefacedness (1)
	1 Timothy 2.9 In like manner also, that women adorn themselves in modest apparel, with shamefacedness and sobriety; not with broided hair, or gold, or pearls, or costly array;
shamelessly (1)
	2 Samuel 6.20 Then David returned to bless his household. And Michal the daughter of Saul came out to meet David, and said, How glorious was the king of Israel to day, who uncovered himself to day in the eyes of the handmaids of his servants, as one of the vain fellows shamelessly uncovereth himself!
shameth (1)
	Proverbs 28.7 Whoso keepeth the law is a wise son: but he that is a companion of riotous men shameth his father.
shamhuth (1)
	1 Chronicles 27.8 The fifth captain for the fifth month was Shamhuth the Izrahite: and in his course were twenty and four thousand.
shamma (1)
	1 Chronicles 7.37 Bezer, and Hod, and Shamma, and Shilshah, and Ithran, and Beera.
shammoth (1)
	1 Chronicles 11.27 Shammoth the Harorite, Helez the Pelonite,
shammuah (1)
	2 Samuel 5.14 And these be the names of those that were born unto him in Jerusalem; Shammuah, and Shobab, and Nathan, and Solomon,
shamsherai (1)
	1 Chronicles 8.26 And Shamsherai, and Shehariah, and Athaliah,
shapen (1)
	Psalms (prose) 51.5 Behold, I was shapen in iniquity; and in sin did my mother conceive me.
shapes (1)
	Revelation 9.7 And the shapes of the locusts were like unto horses prepared unto battle; and on their heads were as it were crowns like gold, and their faces were as the faces of men.
shapham (1)
	1 Chronicles 5.12 Joel the chief, and Shapham the next, and Jaanai, and Shaphat in Bashan.
sharai (1)
	Ezra 10.40 Machnadebai, Shashai, Sharai,
sharaim (1)
	Joshua 15.36 And Sharaim, and Adithaim, and Gederah, and Gederothaim; fourteen cities with their villages:
sharar (1)
	2 Samuel 23.33 Shammah the Hararite, Ahiam the son of Sharar the Hararite,
share (1)
	1 Samuel 13.20 But all the Israelites went down to the Philistines, to sharpen every man his share, and his coulter, and his axe, and his mattock.
sharonite (1)
	1 Chronicles 27.29 And over the herds that fed in Sharon was Shitrai the Sharonite: and over the herds that were in the valleys was Shaphat the son of Adlai:
sharpness (1)
	2 Corinthians 13.10 Therefore I write these things being absent, lest being present I should use sharpness, according to the power which the Lord hath given me to edification, and not to destruction.
sharuhen (1)
	Joshua 19.6 And Bethlebaoth, and Sharuhen; thirteen cities and their villages:
shashai (1)
	Ezra 10.40 Machnadebai, Shashai, Sharai,
shaulites (1)
	Numbers 26.13 Of Zerah, the family of the Zarhites: of Shaul, the family of the Shaulites.
shavsha (1)
	1 Chronicles 18.16 And Zadok the son of Ahitub, and Abimelech the son of Abiathar, were the priests; and Shavsha was scribe;
sheal (1)
	Ezra 10.29 And of the sons of Bani; Meshullam, Malluch, and Adaiah, Jashub, and Sheal, and Ramoth.
shearer (1)
	Acts 8.32 The place of the scripture which he read was this, He was led as a sheep to the slaughter; and like a lamb dumb before his shearer, so opened he not his mouth:
shearjashub (1)
	Isaiah 7.3 Then said the LORD unto Isaiah, Go forth now to meet Ahaz, thou, and Shearjashub thy son, at the end of the conduit of the upper pool in the highway of the fuller's field;
shebah (1)
	Genesis 26.33 And he called it Shebah: therefore the name of the city is Beersheba unto this day.
shebam (1)
	Numbers 32.3 Ataroth, and Dibon, and Jazer, and Nimrah, and Heshbon, and Elealeh, and Shebam, and Nebo, and Beon,
shebarim (1)
	Joshua 7.5 And the men of Ai smote of them about thirty and six men: for they chased them from before the gate even unto Shebarim, and smote them in the going down: wherefore the hearts of the people melted, and became as water.
sheber (1)
	1 Chronicles 2.48 Maachah, Caleb's concubine, bare Sheber, and Tirhanah.
shechemites (1)
	Numbers 26.31 And of Asriel, the family of the Asrielites: and of Shechem, the family of the Shechemites:
shedder (1)
	Ezekiel 18.10 If he beget a son that is a robber, a shedder of blood, and that doeth the like to any one of these things,
shedding (1)
	Hebrews 9.22 And almost all things are by the law purged with blood; and without shedding of blood is no remission.
sheepcotes (1)
	1 Samuel 24.3 And he came to the sheepcotes by the way, where was a cave; and Saul went in to cover his feet: and David and his men remained in the sides of the cave.
sheepfold (1)
	John 10.1 Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that entereth not by the door into the sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, the same is a thief and a robber.
sheepmaster (1)
	2 Kings 3.4 And Mesha king of Moab was a sheepmaster, and rendered unto the king of Israel an hundred thousand lambs, and an hundred thousand rams, with the wool.
sheeps (1)
	Matthew 7.15 Beware of false prophets, which come to you in sheep's clothing, but inwardly they are ravening wolves.
sheepskins (1)
	Hebrews 11.37 They were stoned, they were sawn asunder, were tempted, were slain with the sword: they wandered about in sheepskins and goatskins; being destitute, afflicted, tormented;
shehariah (1)
	1 Chronicles 8.26 And Shamsherai, and Shehariah, and Athaliah,
shelanites (1)
	Numbers 26.20 And the sons of Judah after their families were; of Shelah, the family of the Shelanites: of Pharez, the family of the Pharzites: of Zerah, the family of the Zarhites.
shelesh (1)
	1 Chronicles 7.35 And the sons of his brother Helem; Zophah, and Imna, and Shelesh, and Amal.
shelomi (1)
	Numbers 34.27 And the prince of the tribe of the children of Asher, Ahihud the son of Shelomi.
shemaah (1)
	1 Chronicles 12.3 The chief was Ahiezer, then Joash, the sons of Shemaah the Gibeathite; and Jeziel, and Pelet, the sons of Azmaveth; and Berachah, and Jehu the Antothite.
shemeber (1)
	Genesis 14.2 That these made war with Bera king of Sodom, and with Birsha king of Gomorrah, Shinab king of Admah, and Shemeber king of Zeboiim, and the king of Bela, which is Zoar.
shemidah (1)
	1 Chronicles 7.19 And the sons of Shemidah were, Ahian, and Shechem, and Likhi, and Aniam.
shemidaites (1)
	Numbers 26.32 And of Shemida, the family of the Shemidaites: and of Hepher, the family of the Hepherites.
sheminith (1)
	1 Chronicles 15.21 And Mattithiah, and Elipheleh, and Mikneiah, and Obededom, and Jeiel, and Azaziah, with harps on the Sheminith to excel.
shen (1)
	1 Samuel 7.12 Then Samuel took a stone, and set it between Mizpeh and Shen, and called the name of it Ebenezer, saying, Hitherto hath the LORD helped us.
shenazar (1)
	1 Chronicles 3.18 Malchiram also, and Pedaiah, and Shenazar, Jecamiah, Hoshama, and Nedabiah.
shephathiah (1)
	1 Chronicles 9.8 And Ibneiah the son of Jeroham, and Elah the son of Uzzi, the son of Michri, and Meshullam the son of Shephathiah, the son of Reuel, the son of Ibnijah;
shephi (1)
	1 Chronicles 1.40 The sons of Shobal; Alian, and Manahath, and Ebal, Shephi, and Onam. And the sons of Zibeon; Aiah, and Anah.
shepho (1)
	Genesis 36.23 And the children of Shobal were these; Alvan, and Manahath, and Ebal, Shepho, and Onam.
shephuphan (1)
	1 Chronicles 8.5 And Gera, and Shephuphan, and Huram.
sherah (1)
	1 Chronicles 7.24 (And his daughter was Sherah, who built Bethhoron the nether, and the upper, and Uzzensherah.)
sherd (1)
	Isaiah 30.14 And he shall break it as the breaking of the potters' vessel that is broken in pieces; he shall not spare: so that there shall not be found in the bursting of it a sherd to take fire from the hearth, or to take water withal out of the pit.
sherds (1)
	Ezekiel 23.34 Thou shalt even drink it and suck it out, and thou shalt break the sherds thereof, and pluck off thine own breasts: for I have spoken it, saith the Lord GOD.
sheresh (1)
	1 Chronicles 7.16 And Maachah the wife of Machir bare a son, and she called his name Peresh; and the name of his brother was Sheresh; and his sons were Ulam and Rakem.
sherezer (1)
	Zechariah 7.2 When they had sent unto the house of God Sherezer and Regemmelech, and their men, to pray before the LORD,
shethar (1)
	Esther 1.14 And the next unto him was Carshena, Shethar, Admatha, Tarshish, Meres, Marsena, and Memucan, the seven princes of Persia and Media, which saw the king's face, and which sat the first in the kingdom;)
shibboleth (1)
	Judges 12.6 Then said they unto him, Say now Shibboleth: and he said Sibboleth: for he could not frame to pronounce it right. Then they took him, and slew him at the passages of Jordan: and there fell at that time of the Ephraimites forty and two thousand.
shibmah (1)
	Numbers 32.38 And Nebo, and Baalmeon, (their names being changed,) and Shibmah: and gave other names unto the cities which they builded.
shicron (1)
	Joshua 15.11 And the border went out unto the side of Ekron northward: and the border was drawn to Shicron, and passed along to mount Baalah, and went out unto Jabneel; and the goings out of the border were at the sea.
shigionoth (1)
	Habakkuk 3.1 A prayer of Habakkuk the prophet upon Shigionoth.
shihon (1)
	Joshua 19.19 And Haphraim, and Shihon, and Anaharath,
shihor (1)
	1 Chronicles 13.5 So David gathered all Israel together, from Shihor of Egypt even unto the entering of Hemath, to bring the ark of God from Kirjathjearim.
shihorlibnath (1)
	Joshua 19.26 And Alammelech, and Amad, and Misheal; and reacheth to Carmel westward, and to Shihorlibnath;
shilhim (1)
	Joshua 15.32 And Lebaoth, and Shilhim, and Ain, and Rimmon: all the cities are twenty and nine, with their villages:
shillemites (1)
	Numbers 26.49 Of Jezer, the family of the Jezerites: of Shillem, the family of the Shillemites.
shiloah (1)
	Isaiah 8.6 Forasmuch as this people refuseth the waters of Shiloah that go softly, and rejoice in Rezin and Remaliah's son;
shiloni (1)
	Nehemiah 11.5 And Maaseiah the son of Baruch, the son of Colhozeh, the son of Hazaiah, the son of Adaiah, the son of Joiarib, the son of Zechariah, the son of Shiloni.
shilonites (1)
	1 Chronicles 9.5 And of the Shilonites; Asaiah the firstborn, and his sons.
shilshah (1)
	1 Chronicles 7.37 Bezer, and Hod, and Shamma, and Shilshah, and Ithran, and Beera.
shimeam (1)
	1 Chronicles 9.38 And Mikloth begat Shimeam. And they also dwelt with their brethren at Jerusalem, over against their brethren.
shimeathites (1)
	1 Chronicles 2.55 And the families of the scribes which dwelt at Jabez; the Tirathites, the Shimeathites, and Suchathites. These are the Kenites that came of Hemath, the father of the house of Rechab.
shimeon (1)
	Ezra 10.31 And of the sons of Harim; Eliezer, Ishijah, Malchiah, Shemaiah, Shimeon,
shimhi (1)
	1 Chronicles 8.21 And Adaiah, and Beraiah, and Shimrath, the sons of Shimhi;
shimi (1)
	Exodus 6.17 The sons of Gershon; Libni, and Shimi, according to their families.
shimites (1)
	Numbers 3.21 Of Gershon was the family of the Libnites, and the family of the Shimites: these are the families of the Gershonites.
shimma (1)
	1 Chronicles 2.13 And Jesse begat his firstborn Eliab, and Abinadab the second, and Shimma the third,
shimon (1)
	1 Chronicles 4.20 And the sons of Shimon were, Amnon, and Rinnah, Benhanan, and Tilon. And the sons of Ishi were, Zoheth, and Benzoheth.
shimrath (1)
	1 Chronicles 8.21 And Adaiah, and Beraiah, and Shimrath, the sons of Shimhi;
shimrith (1)
	2 Chronicles 24.26 And these are they that conspired against him; Zabad the son of Shimeath an Ammonitess, and Jehozabad the son of Shimrith a Moabitess.
shimrom (1)
	1 Chronicles 7.1 Now the sons of Issachar were, Tola, and Puah, Jashub, and Shimrom, four.
shimronites (1)
	Numbers 26.24 Of Jashub, the family of the Jashubites: of Shimron, the family of the Shimronites.
shimronmeron (1)
	Joshua 12.20 The king of Shimronmeron, one; the king of Achshaph, one;
shinab (1)
	Genesis 14.2 That these made war with Bera king of Sodom, and with Birsha king of Gomorrah, Shinab king of Admah, and Shemeber king of Zeboiim, and the king of Bela, which is Zoar.
shiphi (1)
	1 Chronicles 4.37 And Ziza the son of Shiphi, the son of Allon, the son of Jedaiah, the son of Shimri, the son of Shemaiah;
shiphmite (1)
	1 Chronicles 27.27 And over the vineyards was Shimei the Ramathite: over the increase of the vineyards for the wine cellars was Zabdi the Shiphmite:
shiphrah (1)
	Exodus 1.15 And the king of Egypt spake to the Hebrew midwives, of which the name of the one was Shiphrah, and the name of the other Puah:
shiphtan (1)
	Numbers 34.24 And the prince of the tribe of the children of Ephraim, Kemuel the son of Shiphtan.
shipping (1)
	John 6.24 When the people therefore saw that Jesus was not there, neither his disciples, they also took shipping, and came to Capernaum, seeking for Jesus.
shisha (1)
	1 Kings 4.3 Elihoreph and Ahiah, the sons of Shisha, scribes; Jehoshaphat the son of Ahilud, the recorder.
shitrai (1)
	1 Chronicles 27.29 And over the herds that fed in Sharon was Shitrai the Sharonite: and over the herds that were in the valleys was Shaphat the son of Adlai:
shittah (1)
	Isaiah 41.19 I will plant in the wilderness the cedar, the shittah tree, and the myrtle, and the oil tree; I will set in the desert the fir tree, and the pine, and the box tree together:
shivers (1)
	Revelation 2.27 And he shall rule them with a rod of iron; as the vessels of a potter shall they be broken to shivers: even as I received of my Father.
shiza (1)
	1 Chronicles 11.42 Adina the son of Shiza the Reubenite, a captain of the Reubenites, and thirty with him,
shoa (1)
	Ezekiel 23.23 The Babylonians, and all the Chaldeans, Pekod, and Shoa, and Koa, and all the Assyrians with them: all of them desirable young men, captains and rulers, great lords and renowned, all of them riding upon horses.
shobek (1)
	Nehemiah 10.24 Hallohesh, Pileha, Shobek,
shobi (1)
	2 Samuel 17.27 And it came to pass, when David was come to Mahanaim, that Shobi the son of Nahash of Rabbah of the children of Ammon, and Machir the son of Ammiel of Lodebar, and Barzillai the Gileadite of Rogelim,
shocho (1)
	2 Chronicles 28.18 The Philistines also had invaded the cities of the low country, and of the south of Judah, and had taken Bethshemesh, and Ajalon, and Gederoth, and Shocho with the villages thereof, and Timnah with the villages thereof, Gimzo also and the villages thereof: and they dwelt there.
shock (1)
	Job 5.26 Thou shalt come to thy grave in a full age, like as a shock of corn cometh in in his season.
shocks (1)
	Judges 15.5 And when he had set the brands on fire, he let them go into the standing corn of the Philistines, and burnt up both the shocks, and also the standing corn, with the vineyards and olives.
shoco (1)
	2 Chronicles 11.7 And Bethzur, and Shoco, and Adullam,
shoelatchet (1)
	Genesis 14.23 That I will not take from a thread even to a shoelatchet, and that I will not take any thing that is thine, lest thou shouldest say, I have made Abram rich:
shoham (1)
	1 Chronicles 24.27 The sons of Merari by Jaaziah; Beno, and Shoham, and Zaccur, and Ibri.
shooters (1)
	2 Samuel 11.24 And the shooters shot from off the wall upon thy servants; and some of the king's servants be dead, and thy servant Uriah the Hittite is dead also.
shophan (1)
	Numbers 32.35 And Atroth, Shophan, and Jaazer, and Jogbehah,
shouteth (1)
	Psalms (prose) 78.65 Then the LORD awaked as one out of sleep, and like a mighty man that shouteth by reason of wine.
shoutings (1)
	Zechariah 4.7 Who art thou, O great mountain? before Zerubbabel thou shalt become a plain: and he shall bring forth the headstone thereof with shoutings, crying, Grace, grace unto it.
shovel (1)
	Isaiah 30.24 The oxen likewise and the young asses that ear the ground shall eat clean provender, which hath been winnowed with the shovel and with the fan.
shred (1)
	2 Kings 4.39 And one went out into the field to gather herbs, and found a wild vine, and gathered thereof wild gourds his lap full, and came and shred them into the pot of pottage: for they knew them not.
shrines (1)
	Acts 19.24 For a certain man named Demetrius, a silversmith, which made silver shrines for Diana, brought no small gain unto the craftsmen;
shroud (1)
	Ezekiel 31.3 Behold, the Assyrian was a cedar in Lebanon with fair branches, and with a shadowing shroud, and of an high stature; and his top was among the thick boughs.
shrubs (1)
	Genesis 21.15 And the water was spent in the bottle, and she cast the child under one of the shrubs.
shuham (1)
	Numbers 26.42 These are the sons of Dan after their families: of Shuham, the family of the Shuhamites. These are the families of Dan after their families.
shumathites (1)
	1 Chronicles 2.53 And the families of Kirjathjearim; the Ithrites, and the Puhites, and the Shumathites, and the Mishraites; of them came the Zareathites, and the Eshtaulites,
shun (1)
	2 Timothy 2.16 But shun profane and vain babblings: for they will increase unto more ungodliness.
shunites (1)
	Numbers 26.15 The children of Gad after their families: of Zephon, the family of the Zephonites: of Haggi, the family of the Haggites: of Shuni, the family of the Shunites:
shunned (1)
	Acts 20.27 For I have not shunned to declare unto you all the counsel of God.
shupham (1)
	Numbers 26.39 Of Shupham, the family of the Shuphamites: of Hupham, the family of the Huphamites.
shuphamites (1)
	Numbers 26.39 Of Shupham, the family of the Shuphamites: of Hupham, the family of the Huphamites.
shuthalhites (1)
	Numbers 26.35 These are the sons of Ephraim after their families: of Shuthelah, the family of the Shuthalhites: of Becher, the family of the Bachrites: of Tahan, the family of the Tahanites.
shutting (1)
	Joshua 2.5 And it came to pass about the time of shutting of the gate, when it was dark, that the men went out: whither the men went I wot not: pursue after them quickly; for ye shall overtake them.
shuttle (1)
	Job 7.6 My days are swifter than a weaver's shuttle, and are spent without hope.
sia (1)
	Nehemiah 7.47 The children of Keros, the children of Sia, the children of Padon,
siaha (1)
	Ezra 2.44 The children of Keros, the children of Siaha, the children of Padon,
sibboleth (1)
	Judges 12.6 Then said they unto him, Say now Shibboleth: and he said Sibboleth: for he could not frame to pronounce it right. Then they took him, and slew him at the passages of Jordan: and there fell at that time of the Ephraimites forty and two thousand.
sibraim (1)
	Ezekiel 47.16 Hamath, Berothah, Sibraim, which is between the border of Damascus and the border of Hamath; Hazarhatticon, which is by the coast of Hauran.
sichem (1)
	Genesis 12.6 And Abram passed through the land unto the place of Sichem, unto the plain of Moreh. And the Canaanite was then in the land.
sickly (1)
	1 Corinthians 11.30 For this cause many are weak and sickly among you, and many sleep.
sifted (1)
	Amos 9.9 For, lo, I will command, and I will sift the house of Israel among all nations, like as corn is sifted in a sieve, yet shall not the least grain fall upon the earth.
sighest (1)
	Ezekiel 21.7 And it shall be, when they say unto thee, Wherefore sighest thou? that thou shalt answer, For the tidings; because it cometh: and every heart shall melt, and all hands shall be feeble, and every spirit shall faint, and all knees shall be weak as water: behold, it cometh, and shall be brought to pass, saith the Lord GOD.
sigheth (1)
	Lamentations 1.8 Jerusalem hath grievously sinned; therefore she is removed: all that honoured her despise her, because they have seen her nakedness: yea, she sigheth, and turneth backward.
sighs (1)
	Lamentations 1.22 Let all their wickedness come before thee; and do unto them, as thou hast done unto me for all my transgressions: for my sighs are many, and my heart is faint.
sights (1)
	Luke 21.11 And great earthquakes shall be in divers places, and famines, and pestilences; and fearful sights and great signs shall there be from heaven.
signets (1)
	Exodus 39.6 And they wrought onyx stones inclosed in ouches of gold, graven, as signets are graven, with the names of the children of Israel.
signification (1)
	1 Corinthians 14.10 There are, it may be, so many kinds of voices in the world, and none of them is without signification.
signifieth (1)
	Hebrews 12.27 And this word, Yet once more, signifieth the removing of those things that are shaken, as of things that are made, that those things which cannot be shaken may remain.
silla (1)
	2 Kings 12.20 And his servants arose, and made a conspiracy, and slew Joash in the house of Millo, which goeth down to Silla.
siloah (1)
	Nehemiah 3.15 But the gate of the fountain repaired Shallun the son of Colhozeh, the ruler of part of Mizpah; he built it, and covered it, and set up the doors thereof, the locks thereof, and the bars thereof, and the wall of the pool of Siloah by the king's garden, and unto the stairs that go down from the city of David.
silverlings (1)
	Isaiah 7.23 And it shall come to pass in that day, that every place shall be, where there were a thousand vines at a thousand silverlings, it shall even be for briers and thorns.
silversmith (1)
	Acts 19.24 For a certain man named Demetrius, a silversmith, which made silver shrines for Diana, brought no small gain unto the craftsmen;
similitudes (1)
	Hosea 12.10 I have also spoken by the prophets, and I have multiplied visions, and used similitudes, by the ministry of the prophets.
simri (1)
	1 Chronicles 26.10 Also Hosah, of the children of Merari, had sons; Simri the chief, (for though he was not the firstborn, yet his father made him the chief;)
singed (1)
	Daniel 3.27 And the princes, governors, and captains, and the king's counsellors, being gathered together, saw these men, upon whose bodies the fire had no power, nor was an hair of their head singed, neither were their coats changed, nor the smell of fire had passed on them.
singeth (1)
	Proverbs 25.20 As he that taketh away a garment in cold weather, and as vinegar upon nitre, so is he that singeth songs to an heavy heart.
singular (1)
	Leviticus 27.2 Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, When a man shall make a singular vow, the persons shall be for the LORD by thy estimation.
sinim (1)
	Isaiah 49.12 Behold, these shall come from far: and, lo, these from the north and from the west; and these from the land of Sinim.
sinnest (1)
	Job 35.6 If thou sinnest, what doest thou against him? or if thy transgressions be multiplied, what doest thou unto him?
siphmoth (1)
	1 Samuel 30.28 And to them which were in Aroer, and to them which were in Siphmoth, and to them which were in Eshtemoa,
sippai (1)
	1 Chronicles 20.4 And it came to pass after this, that there arose war at Gezer with the Philistines; at which time Sibbechai the Hushathite slew Sippai, that was of the children of the giant: and they were subdued.
sirah (1)
	2 Samuel 3.26 And when Joab was come out from David, he sent messengers after Abner, which brought him again from the well of Sirah: but David knew it not.
sith (1)
	Ezekiel 35.6 Therefore, as I live, saith the Lord GOD, I will prepare thee unto blood, and blood shall pursue thee: sith thou hast not hated blood, even blood shall pursue thee.
sitnah (1)
	Genesis 26.21 And they digged another well, and strove for that also: and he called the name of it Sitnah.
sivan (1)
	Esther 8.9 Then were the king's scribes called at that time in the third month, that is, the month Sivan, on the three and twentieth day thereof; and it was written according to all that Mordecai commanded unto the Jews, and to the lieutenants, and the deputies and rulers of the provinces which are from India unto Ethiopia, an hundred twenty and seven provinces, unto every province according to the writing thereof, and unto every people after their language, and to the Jews according to their writing, and according to their language.
sixtyfold (1)
	Matthew 13.8 But other fell into good ground, and brought forth fruit, some an hundredfold, some sixtyfold, some thirtyfold.
skilfully (1)
	Psalms (prose) 33.3 Sing unto him a new song; play skilfully with a loud noise.
skilfulness (1)
	Psalms (prose) 78.72 So he fed them according to the integrity of his heart; and guided them by the skilfulness of his hands.
skip (1)
	Psalms (prose) 29.6 He maketh them also to skip like a calf; Lebanon and Sirion like a young unicorn.
skippedst (1)
	Jeremiah 48.27 For was not Israel a derision unto thee? was he found among thieves?  for since thou spakest of him, thou skippedst for joy.
skipping (1)
	Song of Songs 2.8 The voice of my beloved! behold, he cometh leaping upon the mountains, skipping upon the hills.
slacked (1)
	Habakkuk 1.4 Therefore the law is slacked, and judgment doth never go forth: for the wicked doth compass about the righteous; therefore wrong judgment proceedeth.
slackness (1)
	2 Peter 3.9 The Lord is not slack concerning his promise, as some men count slackness; but is longsuffering to us-ward, not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance.
slandered (1)
	2 Samuel 19.27 And he hath slandered thy servant unto my lord the king; but my lord the king is as an angel of God: do therefore what is good in thine eyes.
slanderers (1)
	1 Timothy 3.11 Even so must their wives be grave, not slanderers, sober, faithful in all things.
slanderest (1)
	Psalms (prose) 50.20 Thou sittest and speakest against thy brother; thou slanderest thine own mother's son.
slandereth (1)
	Psalms (prose) 101.5 Whoso privily slandereth his neighbour, him will I cut off: him that hath an high look and a proud heart will not I suffer.
slanderously (1)
	Romans 3.8 And not rather, (as we be slanderously reported, and as some affirm that we say,) Let us do evil, that good may come? whose damnation is just.
slang (1)
	1 Samuel 17.49 And David put his hand in his bag, and took thence a stone, and slang it, and smote the Philistine in his forehead, that the stone sunk into his forehead; and he fell upon his face to the earth.
slave (1)
	Jeremiah 2.14 Is Israel a servant? is he a homeborn slave? why is he spoiled?
slaves (1)
	Revelation 18.13 And cinnamon, and odours, and ointments, and frankincense, and wine, and oil, and fine flour, and wheat, and beasts, and sheep, and horses, and chariots, and slaves, and souls of men.
sleeper (1)
	Jonah 1.6 So the shipmaster came to him, and said unto him, What meanest thou, O sleeper? arise, call upon thy God, if so be that God will think upon us, that we perish not.
sleight (1)
	Ephesians 4.14 That we henceforth be no more children, tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive;
slewest (1)
	1 Samuel 21.9 And the priest said, The sword of Goliath the Philistine, whom thou slewest in the valley of Elah, behold, it is here wrapped in a cloth behind the ephod: if thou wilt take that, take it: for there is no other save that here. And David said, There is none like that; give it me.
slidden (1)
	Jeremiah 8.5 Why then is this people of Jerusalem slidden back by a perpetual backsliding? they hold fast deceit, they refuse to return.
slideth (1)
	Hosea 4.16 For Israel slideth back as a backsliding heifer: now the LORD will feed them as a lamb in a large place.
slimepits (1)
	Genesis 14.10 And the vale of Siddim was full of slimepits; and the kings of Sodom and Gomorrah fled, and fell there; and they that remained fled to the mountain.
slingers (1)
	2 Kings 3.25 And they beat down the cities, and on every good piece of land cast every man his stone, and filled it; and they stopped all the wells of water, and felled all the good trees: only in Kirharaseth left they the stones thereof; howbeit the slingers went about it, and smote it.
slings (1)
	2 Chronicles 26.14 And Uzziah prepared for them throughout all the host shields, and spears, and helmets, and habergeons, and bows, and slings to cast stones.
slingstones (1)
	Job 41.28 The arrow cannot make him flee: slingstones are turned with him into stubble.
slips (1)
	Isaiah 17.10 Because thou hast forgotten the God of thy salvation, and hast not been mindful of the rock of thy strength, therefore shalt thou plant pleasant plants, and shalt set it with strange slips:
slowly (1)
	Acts 27.7 And when we had sailed slowly many days, and scarce were come over against Cnidus, the wind not suffering us, we sailed under Crete, over against Salmone;
sluices (1)
	Isaiah 19.10 And they shall be broken in the purposes thereof, all that make sluices and ponds for fish.
slumbered (1)
	Matthew 25.5 While the bridegroom tarried, they all slumbered and slept.
slumbereth (1)
	2 Peter 2.3 And through covetousness shall they with feigned words make merchandise of you: whose judgment now of a long time lingereth not, and their damnation slumbereth not.
slumberings (1)
	Job 33.15 In a dream, in a vision of the night, when deep sleep falleth upon men, in slumberings upon the bed;
smart (1)
	Proverbs 11.15 He that is surety for a stranger shall smart for it: and he that hateth suretiship is sure.
smelleth (1)
	Job 39.25 He saith among the trumpets, Ha, ha; and he smelleth the battle afar off, the thunder of the captains, and the shouting.
smiters (1)
	Isaiah 50.6 I gave my back to the smiters, and my cheeks to them that plucked off the hair: I hid not my face from shame and spitting.
smootheth (1)
	Isaiah 41.7 So the carpenter encouraged the goldsmith, and he that smootheth with the hammer him that smote the anvil, saying, It is ready for the sodering: and he fastened it with nails, that it should not be moved.
smotest (1)
	Exodus 17.5 And the LORD said unto Moses, Go on before the people, and take with thee of the elders of Israel; and thy rod, wherewith thou smotest the river, take in thine hand, and go.
snatch (1)
	Isaiah 9.20 And he shall snatch on the right hand, and be hungry; and he shall eat on the left hand, and they shall not be satisfied: they shall eat every man the flesh of his own arm:
sneezed (1)
	2 Kings 4.35 Then he returned, and walked in the house to and fro; and went up, and stretched himself upon him: and the child sneezed seven times, and the child opened his eyes.
snorting (1)
	Jeremiah 8.16 The snorting of his horses was heard from Dan: the whole land trembled at the sound of the neighing of his strong ones; for they are come, and have devoured the land, and all that is in it; the city, and those that dwell therein.
snout (1)
	Proverbs 11.22 As a jewel of gold in a swine's snout, so is a fair woman which is without discretion.
snowy (1)
	1 Chronicles 11.22 Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, the son of a valiant man of Kabzeel, who had done many acts; he slew two lionlike men of Moab: also he went down and slew a lion in a pit in a snowy day.
snuffeth (1)
	Jeremiah 2.24 A wild ass used to the wilderness, that snuffeth up the wind at her pleasure; in her occasion who can turn her away? all they that seek her will not weary themselves; in her month they shall find her.
soaked (1)
	Isaiah 34.7 And the unicorns shall come down with them, and the bullocks with the bulls; and their land shall be soaked with blood, and their dust made fat with fatness.
soberness (1)
	Acts 26.25 But he said, I am not mad, most noble Festus; but speak forth the words of truth and soberness.
socho (1)
	1 Chronicles 4.18 And his wife Jehudijah bare Jered the father of Gedor, and Heber the father of Socho, and Jekuthiel the father of Zanoah. And these are the sons of Bithiah the daughter of Pharaoh, which Mered took.
sochoh (1)
	1 Kings 4.10 The son of Hesed, in Aruboth; to him pertained Sochoh, and all the land of Hepher:
socket (1)
	Exodus 38.27 And of the hundred talents of silver were cast the sockets of the sanctuary, and the sockets of the vail; an hundred sockets of the hundred talents, a talent for a socket.
sodering (1)
	Isaiah 41.7 So the carpenter encouraged the goldsmith, and he that smootheth with the hammer him that smote the anvil, saying, It is ready for the sodering: and he fastened it with nails, that it should not be moved.
sodi (1)
	Numbers 13.10 Of the tribe of Zebulun, Gaddiel the son of Sodi.
sodoma (1)
	Romans 9.29 And as Esaias said before, Except the Lord of Sabaoth had left us a seed, we had been as Sodoma, and been made like unto Gomorrha.
sodomite (1)
	Deuteronomy 23.17 There shall be no whore of the daughters of Israel, nor a sodomite of the sons of Israel.
softer (1)
	Psalms (prose) 55.21 The words of his mouth were smoother than butter, but war was in his heart: his words were softer than oil, yet were they drawn swords.
soil (1)
	Ezekiel 17.8 It was planted in a good soil by great waters, that it might bring forth branches, and that it might bear fruit, that it might be a goodly vine.
solace (1)
	Proverbs 7.18 Come, let us take our fill of love until the morning: let us solace ourselves with loves.
solitarily (1)
	Micah 7.14 Feed thy people with thy rod, the flock of thine heritage, which dwell solitarily in the wood, in the midst of Carmel: let them feed in Bashan and Gilead, as in the days of old.
soothsayer (1)
	Joshua 13.22 Balaam also the son of Beor, the soothsayer, did the children of Israel slay with the sword among them that were slain by them.
soothsaying (1)
	Acts 16.16 And it came to pass, as we went to prayer, a certain damsel possessed with a spirit of divination met us, which brought her masters much gain by soothsaying:
sopater (1)
	Acts 20.4 And there accompanied him into Asia Sopater of Berea; and of the Thessalonians, Aristarchus and Secundus; and Gaius of Derbe, and Timotheus; and of Asia, Tychicus and Trophimus.
sorceress (1)
	Isaiah 57.3 But draw near hither, ye sons of the sorceress, the seed of the adulterer and the whore.
sorcery (1)
	Acts 8.9 But there was a certain man, called Simon, which beforetime in the same city used sorcery, and bewitched the people of Samaria, giving out that himself was some great one:
sorek (1)
	Judges 16.4 And it came to pass afterward, that he loved a woman in the valley of Sorek, whose name was Delilah.
sorer (1)
	Hebrews 10.29 Of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, who hath trodden under foot the Son of God, and hath counted the blood of the covenant, wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy thing, and hath done despite unto the Spirit of grace?
sorroweth (1)
	1 Samuel 10.2 When thou art departed from me to day, then thou shalt find two men by Rachel's sepulchre in the border of Benjamin at Zelzah; and they will say unto thee, The asses which thou wentest to seek are found: and, lo, thy father hath left the care of the asses, and sorroweth for you, saying, What shall I do for my son?
sosipater (1)
	Romans 16.21 Timotheus my workfellow, and Lucius, and Jason, and Sosipater, my kinsmen, salute you.
sottish (1)
	Jeremiah 4.22 For my people is foolish, they have not known me; they are sottish children, and they have none understanding: they are wise to do evil, but to do good they have no knowledge.
soundeth (1)
	Exodus 19.13 There shall not an hand touch it, but he shall surely be stoned, or shot through; whether it be beast or man, it shall not live: when the trumpet soundeth long, they shall come up to the mount.
sounds (1)
	1 Corinthians 14.7 And even things without life giving sound, whether pipe or harp, except they give a distinction in the sounds, how shall it be known what is piped or harped?
sowedst (1)
	Deuteronomy 11.10 For the land, whither thou goest in to possess it, is not as the land of Egypt, from whence ye came out, where thou sowedst thy seed, and wateredst it with thy foot, as a garden of herbs:
spanned (1)
	Isaiah 48.13 Mine hand also hath laid the foundation of the earth, and my right hand hath spanned the heavens: when I call unto them, they stand up together.
sparing (1)
	Acts 20.29 For I know this, that after my departing shall grievous wolves enter in among you, not sparing the flock.
sparkled (1)
	Ezekiel 1.7 And their feet were straight feet; and the sole of their feet was like the sole of a calf's foot: and they sparkled like the colour of burnished brass.
spat (1)
	John 9.6 When he had thus spoken, he spat on the ground, and made clay of the spittle, and he anointed the eyes of the blind man with the clay,
speakings (1)
	1 Peter 2.1 Wherefore laying aside all malice, and all guile, and hypocrisies, and envies, all evil speakings,
spectacle (1)
	1 Corinthians 4.9 For I think that God hath set forth us the apostles last, as it were appointed to death: for we are made a spectacle unto the world, and to angels, and to men.
sped (1)
	Judges 5.30 Have they not sped? have they not divided the prey; to every man a damsel or two; to Sisera a prey of divers colours, a prey of divers colours of needlework, of divers colours of needlework on both sides, meet for the necks of them that take the spoil?
speedy (1)
	Zephaniah 1.18 Neither their silver nor their gold shall be able to deliver them in the day of the LORD's wrath; but the whole land shall be devoured by the fire of his jealousy: for he shall make even a speedy riddance of all them that dwell in the land.
spendest (1)
	Luke 10.35 And on the morrow when he departed, he took out two pence, and gave them to the host, and said unto him, Take care of him; and whatsoever thou spendest more, when I come again, I will repay thee.
spewing (1)
	Habakkuk 2.16 Thou art filled with shame for glory: drink thou also, and let thy foreskin be uncovered: the cup of the LORD's right hand shall be turned unto thee, and shameful spewing shall be on thy glory.
spiced (1)
	Song of Songs 8.2 I would lead thee, and bring thee into my mother's house, who would instruct me: I would cause thee to drink of spiced wine of the juice of my pomegranate.
spicery (1)
	Genesis 37.25 And they sat down to eat bread: and they lifted up their eyes and looked, and, behold, a company of Ishmeelites came from Gilead with their camels bearing spicery and balm and myrrh, going to carry it down to Egypt.
spider (1)
	Proverbs 30.28 The spider taketh hold with her hands, and is in kings' palaces.
spilt (1)
	2 Samuel 14.14 For we must needs die, and are as water spilt on the ground, which cannot be gathered up again; neither doth God respect any person: yet doth he devise means, that his banished be not expelled from him.
spindle (1)
	Proverbs 31.19 She layeth her hands to the spindle, and her hands hold the distaff.
spite (1)
	Psalms (prose) 10.14 Thou hast seen it; for thou beholdest mischief and spite, to requite it with thy hand: the poor committeth himself unto thee; thou art the helper of the fatherless.
spitted (1)
	Luke 18.32 For he shall be delivered unto the Gentiles, and shall be mocked, and spitefully entreated, and spitted on:
spitting (1)
	Isaiah 50.6 I gave my back to the smiters, and my cheeks to them that plucked off the hair: I hid not my face from shame and spitting.
spoilest (1)
	Isaiah 33.1 Woe to thee that spoilest, and thou wast not spoiled; and dealest treacherously, and they dealt not treacherously with thee! when thou shalt cease to spoil, thou shalt be spoiled; and when thou shalt make an end to deal treacherously, they shall deal treacherously with thee.
spokes (1)
	1 Kings 7.33 And the work of the wheels was like the work of a chariot wheel: their axletrees, and their naves, and their felloes, and their spokes, were all molten.
spokesman (1)
	Exodus 4.16 And he shall be thy spokesman unto the people: and he shall be, even he shall be to thee instead of a mouth, and thou shalt be to him instead of God.
spreadest (1)
	Ezekiel 27.7 Fine linen with broidered work from Egypt was that which thou spreadest forth to be thy sail; blue and purple from the isles of Elishah was that which covered thee.
spreadings (1)
	Job 36.29 Also can any understand the spreadings of the clouds, or the noise of his tabernacle?
sprout (1)
	Job 14.7 For there is hope of a tree, if it be cut down, that it will sprout again, and that the tender branch thereof will not cease.
spued (1)
	Leviticus 18.28 That the land spue not you out also, when ye defile it, as it spued out the nations that were before you.
squared (1)
	Ezekiel 41.21 The posts of the temple were squared, and the face of the sanctuary; the appearance of the one as the appearance of the other.
stability (1)
	Isaiah 33.6 And wisdom and knowledge shall be the stability of thy times, and strength of salvation: the fear of the LORD is his treasure.
stachys (1)
	Romans 16.9 Salute Urbane, our helper in Christ, and Stachys my beloved.
stacks (1)
	Exodus 22.6 If fire break out, and catch in thorns, so that the stacks of corn, or the standing corn, or the field, be consumed therewith; he that kindled the fire shall surely make restitution.
stacte (1)
	Exodus 30.34 And the LORD said unto Moses, Take unto thee sweet spices, stacte, and onycha, and galbanum; these sweet spices with pure frankincense: of each shall there be a like weight:
staggered (1)
	Romans 4.20 He staggered not at the promise of God through unbelief; but was strong in faith, giving glory to God;
staggereth (1)
	Isaiah 19.14 The LORD hath mingled a perverse spirit in the midst thereof: and they have caused Egypt to err in every work thereof, as a drunken man staggereth in his vomit.
stalks (1)
	Joshua 2.6 But she had brought them up to the roof of the house, and hid them with the stalks of flax, which she had laid in order upon the roof.
stalled (1)
	Proverbs 15.17 Better is a dinner of herbs where love is, than a stalled ox and hatred therewith.
stammerers (1)
	Isaiah 32.4 The heart also of the rash shall understand knowledge, and the tongue of the stammerers shall be ready to speak plainly.
stamping (1)
	Jeremiah 47.3 At the noise of the stamping of the hoofs of his strong horses, at the rushing of his chariots, and at the rumbling of his wheels, the fathers shall not look back to their children for feebleness of hands;
stanched (1)
	Luke 8.44 Came behind him, and touched the border of his garment: and immediately her issue of blood stanched.
standardbearer (1)
	Isaiah 10.18 And shall consume the glory of his forest, and of his fruitful field, both soul and body: and they shall be as when a standard-bearer fainteth.
stare (1)
	Psalms (prose) 22.17 I may tell all my bones: they look and stare upon me.
stargazers (1)
	Isaiah 47.13 Thou art wearied in the multitude of thy counsels. Let now the astrologers, the stargazers, the monthly prognosticators, stand up, and save thee from these things that shall come upon thee.
stately (1)
	Ezekiel 23.41 And satest upon a stately bed, and a table prepared before it, whereupon thou hast set mine incense and mine oil.
station (1)
	Isaiah 22.19 And I will drive thee from thy station, and from thy state shall he pull thee down.
stayeth (1)
	Isaiah 27.8 In measure, when it shooteth forth, thou wilt debate with it: he stayeth his rough wind in the day of the east wind.
steads (1)
	1 Chronicles 5.22 For there fell down many slain, because the war was of God. And they dwelt in their steads until the captivity.
steady (1)
	Exodus 17.12 But Moses hands were heavy; and they took a stone, and put it under him, and he sat thereon; and Aaron and Hur stayed up his hands, the one on the one side, and the other on the other side; and his hands were steady until the going down of the sun.
stealth (1)
	2 Samuel 19.3 And the people gat them by stealth that day into the city, as people being ashamed steal away when they flee in battle.
stem (1)
	Isaiah 11.1 And there shall come forth a rod out of the stem of Jesse, and a Branch shall grow out of his roots:
stepped (1)
	John 5.4 For an angel went down at a certain season into the pool, and troubled the water: whosoever then first after the troubling of the water stepped in was made whole of whatsoever disease he had.
steppeth (1)
	John 5.7 The impotent man answered him, Sir, I have no man, when the water is troubled, to put me into the pool: but while I am coming, another steppeth down before me.
stern (1)
	Acts 27.29 Then fearing lest we should have fallen upon rocks, they cast four anchors out of the stern, and wished for the day.
sticketh (1)
	Proverbs 18.24 A man that hath friends must shew himself friendly: and there is a friend that sticketh closer than a brother.
stiffened (1)
	2 Chronicles 36.13 And he also rebelled against king Nebuchadnezzar, who had made him swear by God: but he stiffened his neck, and hardened his heart from turning unto the LORD God of Israel.
stiffhearted (1)
	Ezekiel 2.4 For they are impudent children and stiffhearted. I do send thee unto them; and thou shalt say unto them, Thus saith the Lord GOD.
stillest (1)
	Psalms (prose) 89.9 Thou rulest the raging of the sea: when the waves thereof arise, thou stillest them.
stilleth (1)
	Psalms (prose) 65.7 Which stilleth the noise of the seas, the noise of their waves, and the tumult of the people.
stingeth (1)
	Proverbs 23.32 At the last it biteth like a serpent, and stingeth like an adder.
stings (1)
	Revelation 9.10 And they had tails like unto scorpions, and there were stings in their tails: and their power was to hurt men five months.
stinking (1)
	Ecclesiastes 10.1 Dead flies cause the ointment of the apothecary to send forth a stinking savour: so doth a little folly him that is in reputation for wisdom and honour.
stirs (1)
	Isaiah 22.2 Thou that art full of stirs, a tumultuous city, joyous city: thy slain men are not slain with the sword, nor dead in battle.
stoicks (1)
	Acts 17.18 Then certain philosophers of the Epicureans, and of the Stoicks, encountered him. And some said, What will this babbler say? other some, He seemeth to be a setter forth of strange gods: because he preached unto them Jesus, and the resurrection.
stomacher (1)
	Isaiah 3.24 And it shall come to pass, that instead of sweet smell there shall be stink; and instead of a girdle a rent; and instead of well set hair baldness; and instead of a stomacher a girding of sackcloth; and burning instead of beauty.
stomachs (1)
	1 Timothy 5.23 Drink no longer water, but use a little wine for thy stomach's sake and thine often infirmities.
stonesquarers (1)
	1 Kings 5.18 And Solomon's builders and Hiram's builders did hew them, and the stonesquarers: so they prepared timber and stones to build the house.
stoning (1)
	1 Samuel 30.6 And David was greatly distressed; for the people spake of stoning him, because the soul of all the people was grieved, every man for his sons and for his daughters: but David encouraged himself in the LORD his God.
stool (1)
	2 Kings 4.10 Let us make a little chamber, I pray thee, on the wall; and let us set for him there a bed, and a table, and a stool, and a candlestick: and it shall be, when he cometh to us, that he shall turn in thither.
stools (1)
	Exodus 1.16 And he said, When ye do the office of a midwife to the Hebrew women, and see them upon the stools; if it be a son, then ye shall kill him: but if it be a daughter, then she shall live.
stoopeth (1)
	Isaiah 46.1 Bel boweth down, Nebo stoopeth, their idols were upon the beasts, and upon the cattle: your carriages were heavy loaden; they are a burden to the weary beast.
stoutness (1)
	Isaiah 9.9 And all the people shall know, even Ephraim and the inhabitant of Samaria, that say in the pride and stoutness of heart,
strain (1)
	Matthew 23.24 Ye blind guides, which strain at a gnat, and swallow a camel.
straiten (1)
	Jeremiah 19.9 And I will cause them to eat the flesh of their sons and the flesh of their daughters, and they shall eat every one the flesh of his friend in the siege and straitness, wherewith their enemies, and they that seek their lives, shall straiten them.
straiteneth (1)
	Job 12.23 He increaseth the nations, and destroyeth them: he enlargeth the nations, and straiteneth them again.
straitest (1)
	Acts 26.5 Which knew me from the beginning, if they would testify, that after the most straitest sect of our religion I lived a Pharisee.
strake (1)
	Acts 27.17 Which when they had taken up, they used helps, undergirding the ship; and, fearing lest they should fall into the quicksands, strake sail, and so were driven.
strangely (1)
	Deuteronomy 32.27 Were it not that I feared the wrath of the enemy, lest their adversaries should behave themselves strangely, and lest they should say, Our hand is high, and the LORD hath not done all this.
strangling (1)
	Job 7.15 So that my soul chooseth strangling, and death rather than my life.
strengthenedst (1)
	Psalms (prose) 138.3 In the day when I cried thou answeredst me, and strengthenedst me with strength in my soul.
stretchedst (1)
	Exodus 15.12 Thou stretchedst out thy right hand, the earth swallowed them.
stretchest (1)
	Psalms (prose) 104.2 Who coverest thyself with light as with a garment: who stretchest out the heavens like a curtain:
stripling (1)
	1 Samuel 17.56 And the king said, Enquire thou whose son the stripling is.
stript (1)
	Genesis 37.23 And it came to pass, when Joseph was come unto his brethren, that they stript Joseph out of his coat, his coat of many colours that was on him;
strived (1)
	Romans 15.20 Yea, so have I strived to preach the gospel, not where Christ was named, lest I should build upon another man's foundation:
striven (1)
	Jeremiah 50.24 I have laid a snare for thee, and thou art also taken, O Babylon, and thou wast not aware: thou art found, and also caught, because thou hast striven against the LORD.
strokes (1)
	Proverbs 18.6 A fool's lips enter into contention, and his mouth calleth for strokes.
strongest (1)
	Proverbs 30.30 A lion which is strongest among beasts, and turneth not away for any;
strongly (1)
	Ezra 6.3 In the first year of Cyrus the king the same Cyrus the king made a decree concerning the house of God at Jerusalem, Let the house be builded, the place where they offered sacrifices, and let the foundations thereof be strongly laid; the height thereof threescore cubits, and the breadth thereof threescore cubits;
strowed (1)
	2 Chronicles 34.4 And they brake down the altars of Baalim in his presence; and the images, that were on high above them, he cut down; and the groves, and the carved images, and the molten images, he brake in pieces, and made dust of them, and strowed it upon the graves of them that had sacrificed unto them.
struggled (1)
	Genesis 25.22 And the children struggled together within her; and she said, If it be so, why am I thus? And she went to enquire of the LORD.
studs (1)
	Song of Songs 1.11 We will make thee borders of gold with studs of silver.
stumblingblocks (1)
	Jeremiah 6.21 Therefore thus saith the LORD, Behold, I will lay stumblingblocks before this people, and the fathers and the sons together shall fall upon them; the neighbour and his friend shall perish.
suah (1)
	1 Chronicles 7.36 The sons of Zophah; Suah, and Harnepher, and Shual, and Beri, and Imrah,
subduedst (1)
	Nehemiah 9.24 So the children went in and possessed the land, and thou subduedst before them the inhabitants of the land, the Canaanites, and gavest them into their hands, with their kings, and the people of the land, that they might do with them as they would.
subjected (1)
	Romans 8.20 For the creature was made subject to vanity, not willingly, but by reason of him who hath subjected the same in hope,
submitting (1)
	Ephesians 5.21 Submitting yourselves one to another in the fear of God.
suborned (1)
	Acts 6.11 Then they suborned men, which said, We have heard him speak blasphemous words against Moses, and against God.
subverted (1)
	Titus 3.11 Knowing that he that is such is subverted, and sinneth, being condemned of himself.
succeed (1)
	Deuteronomy 25.6 And it shall be, that the firstborn which she beareth shall succeed in the name of his brother which is dead, that his name be not put out of Israel.
success (1)
	Joshua 1.8 This book of the law shall not depart out of thy mouth; but thou shalt meditate therein day and night, that thou mayest observe to do according to all that is written therein: for then thou shalt make thy way prosperous, and then thou shalt have good success.
succothbenoth (1)
	2 Kings 17.30 And the men of Babylon made Succothbenoth, and the men of Cuth made Nergal, and the men of Hamath made Ashima,
succourer (1)
	Romans 16.2 That ye receive her in the Lord, as becometh saints, and that ye assist her in whatsoever business she hath need of you: for she hath been a succourer of many, and of myself also.
suchathites (1)
	1 Chronicles 2.55 And the families of the scribes which dwelt at Jabez; the Tirathites, the Shimeathites, and Suchathites. These are the Kenites that came of Hemath, the father of the house of Rechab.
sue (1)
	Matthew 5.40 And if any man will sue thee at the law, and take away thy coat, let him have thy cloak also.
sufferest (1)
	Revelation 2.20 Notwithstanding I have a few things against thee, because thou sufferest that woman Jezebel, which calleth herself a prophetess, to teach and to seduce my servants to commit fornication, and to eat things sacrificed unto idols.
sufficeth (1)
	John 14.8 Philip saith unto him, Lord, shew us the Father, and it sufficeth us.
suits (1)
	Isaiah 3.22 The changeable suits of apparel, and the mantles, and the wimples, and the crisping pins,
sukkiims (1)
	2 Chronicles 12.3 With twelve hundred chariots, and threescore thousand horsemen: and the people were without number that came with him out of Egypt; the Lubims, the Sukkiims, and the Ethiopians.
sumptuously (1)
	Luke 16.19 There was a certain rich man, which was clothed in purple and fine linen, and fared sumptuously every day:
sundered (1)
	Job 41.17 They are joined one to another, they stick together, that they cannot be sundered.
sundry (1)
	Hebrews 1.1 God, who at sundry times and in divers manners spake in time past unto the fathers by the prophets,
superfluity (1)
	James 1.21 Wherefore lay apart all filthiness and superfluity of naughtiness, and receive with meekness the engrafted word, which is able to save your souls.
superstition (1)
	Acts 25.19 But had certain questions against him of their own superstition, and of one Jesus, which was dead, whom Paul affirmed to be alive.
superstitious (1)
	Acts 17.22 Then Paul stood in the midst of Mars' hill, and said, Ye men of Athens, I perceive that in all things ye are too superstitious.
supped (1)
	1 Corinthians 11.25 After the same manner also he took the cup, when he had supped, saying, This cup is the new testament in my blood: this do ye, as oft as ye drink it, in remembrance of me.
supplant (1)
	Jeremiah 9.4 Take ye heed every one of his neighbour, and trust ye not in any brother: for every brother will utterly supplant, and every neighbour will walk with slanders.
supplanted (1)
	Genesis 27.36 And he said, Is not he rightly named Jacob? for he hath supplanted me these two times: he took away my birthright; and, behold, now he hath taken away my blessing. And he said, Hast thou not reserved a blessing for me?
supple (1)
	Ezekiel 16.4 And as for thy nativity, in the day thou wast born thy navel was not cut, neither wast thou washed in water to supple thee; thou wast not salted at all, nor swaddled at all.
suppliants (1)
	Zephaniah 3.10 From beyond the rivers of Ethiopia my suppliants, even the daughter of my dispersed, shall bring mine offering.
supreme (1)
	1 Peter 2.13 Submit yourselves to every ordinance of man for the Lord's sake: whether it be to the king, as supreme;
sur (1)
	2 Kings 11.6 And a third part shall be at the gate of Sur; and a third part at the gate behind the guard: so shall ye keep the watch of the house, that it be not broken down.
sureties (1)
	Proverbs 22.26 Be not thou one of them that strike hands, or of them that are sureties for debts.
suretiship (1)
	Proverbs 11.15 He that is surety for a stranger shall smart for it: and he that hateth suretiship is sure.
surfeiting (1)
	Luke 21.34 And take heed to yourselves, lest at any time your hearts be overcharged with surfeiting, and drunkenness, and cares of this life, and so that day come upon you unawares.
surmisings (1)
	1 Timothy 6.4 He is proud, knowing nothing, but doting about questions and strifes of words, whereof cometh envy, strife, railings, evil surmisings,
susanchites (1)
	Ezra 4.9 Then wrote Rehum the chancellor, and Shimshai the scribe, and the rest of their companions; the Dinaites, the Apharsathchites, the Tarpelites, the Apharsites, the Archevites, the Babylonians, the Susanchites, the Dehavites, and the Elamites,
susanna (1)
	Luke 8.3 And Joanna the wife of Chuza Herod's steward, and Susanna, and many others, which ministered unto him of their substance.
susi (1)
	Numbers 13.11 Of the tribe of Joseph, namely, of the tribe of Manasseh, Gaddi the son of Susi.
swaddlingband (1)
	Job 38.9 When I made the cloud the garment thereof, and thick darkness a swaddlingband for it,
swearers (1)
	Malachi 3.5 And I will come near to you to judgment; and I will be a swift witness against the sorcerers, and against the adulterers, and against false swearers, and against those that oppress the hireling in his wages, the widow, and the fatherless, and that turn aside the stranger from his right, and fear not me, saith the LORD of hosts.
sweeping (1)
	Proverbs 28.3 A poor man that oppresseth the poor is like a sweeping rain which leaveth no food.
sweetsmelling (1)
	Ephesians 5.2 And walk in love, as Christ also hath loved us, and hath given himself for us an offering and a sacrifice to God for a sweetsmelling savour.
swelled (1)
	Nehemiah 9.21 Yea, forty years didst thou sustain them in the wilderness, so that they lacked nothing; their clothes waxed not old, and their feet swelled not.
swellings (1)
	2 Corinthians 12.20 For I fear, lest, when I come, I shall not find you such as I would, and that I shall be found unto you such as ye would not: lest there be debates, envyings, wraths, strifes, backbitings, whisperings, swellings, tumults:
swerved (1)
	1 Timothy 1.6 From which some having swerved have turned aside unto vain jangling;
swimmest (1)
	Ezekiel 32.6 I will also water with thy blood the land wherein thou swimmest, even to the mountains; and the rivers shall be full of thee.
swimmeth (1)
	Isaiah 25.11 And he shall spread forth his hands in the midst of them, as he that swimmeth spreadeth forth his hands to swim: and he shall bring down their pride together with the spoils of their hands.
swollen (1)
	Acts 28.6 Howbeit they looked when he should have swollen, or fallen down dead suddenly: but after they had looked a great while, and saw no harm come to him, they changed their minds, and said that he was a god.
swoon (1)
	Lamentations 2.11 Mine eyes do fail with tears, my bowels are troubled, my liver is poured upon the earth, for the destruction of the daughter of my people; because the children and the sucklings swoon in the streets of the city.
swooned (1)
	Lamentations 2.12 They say to their mothers, Where is corn and wine? when they swooned as the wounded in the streets of the city, when their soul was poured out into their mothers' bosom.
sycamine (1)
	Luke 17.6 And the Lord said, If ye had faith as a grain of mustard seed, ye might say unto this sycamine tree, Be thou plucked up by the root, and be thou planted in the sea; and it should obey you.
sychar (1)
	John 4.5 Then cometh he to a city of Samaria, which is called Sychar, near to the parcel of ground that Jacob gave to his son Joseph.
sycomores (1)
	Isaiah 9.10 The bricks are fallen down, but we will build with hewn stones: the sycomores are cut down, but we will change them into cedars.
syntyche (1)
	Philippians 4.2 I beseech Euodias, and beseech Syntyche, that they be of the same mind in the Lord.
syracuse (1)
	Acts 28.12 And landing at Syracuse, we tarried there three days.
syriack (1)
	Daniel 2.4 Then spake the Chaldeans to the king in Syriack, O king, live for ever: tell thy servants the dream, and we will shew the interpretation.
syriadamascus (1)
	1 Chronicles 18.6 Then David put garrisons in Syriadamascus; and the Syrians became David's servants, and brought gifts. Thus the LORD preserved David whithersoever he went.
syriamaachah (1)
	1 Chronicles 19.6 And when the children of Ammon saw that they had made themselves odious to David, Hanun and the children of Ammon sent a thousand talents of silver to hire them chariots and horsemen out of Mesopotamia, and out of Syriamaachah, and out of Zobah.
syrophenician (1)
	Mark 7.26 The woman was a Greek, a Syrophenician by nation; and she besought him that he would cast forth the devil out of her daughter.
taanathshiloh (1)
	Joshua 16.6 And the border went out toward the sea to Michmethah on the north side; and the border went about eastward unto Taanathshiloh, and passed by it on the east to Janohah;
tabbath (1)
	Judges 7.22 And the three hundred blew the trumpets, and the LORD set every man's sword against his fellow, even throughout all the host: and the host fled to Bethshittah in Zererath, and to the border of Abelmeholah, unto Tabbath.
tabeal (1)
	Isaiah 7.6 Let us go up against Judah, and vex it, and let us make a breach therein for us, and set a king in the midst of it, even the son of Tabeal:
tabeel (1)
	Ezra 4.7 And in the days of Artaxerxes wrote Bishlam, Mithredath, Tabeel, and the rest of their companions, unto Artaxerxes king of Persia; and the writing of the letter was written in the Syrian tongue, and interpreted in the Syrian tongue.
tabering (1)
	Nahum 2.7 And Huzzab shall be led away captive, she shall be brought up, and her maids shall lead her as with the voice of doves, tabering upon their breasts.
tabrimon (1)
	1 Kings 15.18 Then Asa took all the silver and the gold that were left in the treasures of the house of the LORD, and the treasures of the king's house, and delivered them into the hand of his servants: and king Asa sent them to Benhadad, the son of Tabrimon, the son of Hezion, king of Syria, that dwelt at Damascus, saying,
tachmonite (1)
	2 Samuel 23.8 These be the names of the mighty men whom David had: The Tachmonite that sat in the seat, chief among the captains; the same was Adino the Eznite: he lift up his spear against eight hundred, whom he slew at one time.
tackling (1)
	Acts 27.19 And the third day we cast out with our own hands the tackling of the ship.
tacklings (1)
	Isaiah 33.23 Thy tacklings are loosed; they could not well strengthen their mast, they could not spread the sail: then is the prey of a great spoil divided; the lame take the prey.
tahanites (1)
	Numbers 26.35 These are the sons of Ephraim after their families: of Shuthelah, the family of the Shuthalhites: of Becher, the family of the Bachrites: of Tahan, the family of the Tahanites.
tahapanes (1)
	Jeremiah 2.16 Also the children of Noph and Tahapanes have broken the crown of thy head.
tahrea (1)
	1 Chronicles 9.41 And the sons of Micah were, Pithon, and Melech, and Tahrea, and Ahaz.
tahtimhodshi (1)
	2 Samuel 24.6 Then they came to Gilead, and to the land of Tahtimhodshi; and they came to Danjaan, and about to Zidon,
taker (1)
	Isaiah 24.2 And it shall be, as with the people, so with the priest; as with the servant, so with his master; as with the maid, so with her mistress; as with the buyer, so with the seller; as with the lender, so with the borrower; as with the taker of usury, so with the giver of usury to him.
talitha (1)
	Mark 5.41 And he took the damsel by the hand, and said unto her, Talitha cumi; which is, being interpreted, Damsel, I say unto thee, arise.
taller (1)
	Deuteronomy 1.28 Whither shall we go up? our brethren have discouraged our heart, saying, The people is greater and taller than we; the cities are great and walled up to heaven; and moreover we have seen the sons of the Anakims there.
tamah (1)
	Nehemiah 7.55 The children of Barkos, the children of Sisera, the children of Tamah,
tammuz (1)
	Ezekiel 8.14 Then he brought me to the door of the gate of the LORD's house which was toward the north; and, behold, there sat women weeping for Tammuz.
tanach (1)
	Joshua 21.25 And out of the half tribe of Manasseh, Tanach with her suburbs, and Gathrimmon with her suburbs; two cities.
taphath (1)
	1 Kings 4.11 The son of Abinadab, in all the region of Dor; which had Taphath the daughter of Solomon to wife:
taralah (1)
	Joshua 18.27 And Rekem, and Irpeel, and Taralah,
tarea (1)
	1 Chronicles 8.35 And the sons of Micah were, Pithon, and Melech, and Tarea, and Ahaz.
tarpelites (1)
	Ezra 4.9 Then wrote Rehum the chancellor, and Shimshai the scribe, and the rest of their companions; the Dinaites, the Apharsathchites, the Tarpelites, the Apharsites, the Archevites, the Babylonians, the Susanchites, the Dehavites, and the Elamites,
tarriest (1)
	Acts 22.16 And now why tarriest thou? arise, and be baptized, and wash away thy sins, calling on the name of the Lord.
tartak (1)
	2 Kings 17.31 And the Avites made Nibhaz and Tartak, and the Sepharvites burnt their children in fire to Adrammelech and Anammelech, the gods of Sepharvaim.
tasks (1)
	Exodus 5.13 And the taskmasters hasted them, saying, Fulfil your works, your daily tasks, as when there was straw.
tasteth (1)
	Job 34.3 For the ear trieth words, as the mouth tasteth meat.
tattlers (1)
	1 Timothy 5.13 And withal they learn to be idle, wandering about from house to house; and not only idle, but tattlers also and busybodies, speaking things which they ought not.
taunting (1)
	Habakkuk 2.6 Shall not all these take up a parable against him, and a taunting proverb against him, and say, Woe to him that increaseth that which is not his! how long? and to him that ladeth himself with thick clay!
taverns (1)
	Acts 28.15 And from thence, when the brethren heard of us, they came to meet us as far as Appii forum, and The three taverns: whom when Paul saw, he thanked God, and took courage.
taxation (1)
	2 Kings 23.35 And Jehoiakim gave the silver and the gold to Pharaoh; but he taxed the land to give the money according to the commandment of Pharaoh: he exacted the silver and the gold of the people of the land, of every one according to his taxation, to give it unto Pharaohnechoh.
taxes (1)
	Daniel 11.20 Then shall stand up in his estate a raiser of taxes in the glory of the kingdom: but within few days he shall be destroyed, neither in anger, nor in battle.
tebah (1)
	Genesis 22.24 And his concubine, whose name was Reumah, she bare also Tebah, and Gaham, and Thahash, and Maachah.
tebaliah (1)
	1 Chronicles 26.11 Hilkiah the second, Tebaliah the third, Zechariah the fourth: all the sons and brethren of Hosah were thirteen.
tebeth (1)
	Esther 2.16 So Esther was taken unto king Ahasuerus into his house royal in the tenth month, which is the month Tebeth, in the seventh year of his reign.
tedious (1)
	Acts 24.4 Notwithstanding, that I be not further tedious unto thee, I pray thee that thou wouldest hear us of thy clemency a few words.
tehaphnehes (1)
	Ezekiel 30.18 At Tehaphnehes also the day shall be darkened, when I shall break there the yokes of Egypt: and the pomp of her strength shall cease in her: as for her, a cloud shall cover her, and her daughters shall go into captivity.
tehinnah (1)
	1 Chronicles 4.12 And Eshton begat Bethrapha, and Paseah, and Tehinnah the father of Irnahash. These are the men of Rechah.
teil (1)
	Isaiah 6.13 But yet in it shall be a tenth, and it shall return, and shall be eaten: as a teil tree, and as an oak, whose substance is in them, when they cast their leaves: so the holy seed shall be the substance thereof.
telabib (1)
	Ezekiel 3.15 Then I came to them of the captivity at Telabib, that dwelt by the river of Chebar, and I sat where they sat, and remained there astonished among them seven days.
telah (1)
	1 Chronicles 7.25 And Rephah was his son, also Resheph, and Telah his son, and Tahan his son.
telaim (1)
	1 Samuel 15.4 And Saul gathered the people together, and numbered them in Telaim, two hundred thousand footmen, and ten thousand men of Judah.
telassar (1)
	Isaiah 37.12 Have the gods of the nations delivered them which my fathers have destroyed, as Gozan, and Haran, and Rezeph, and the children of Eden which were in Telassar?
telharesha (1)
	Nehemiah 7.61 And these were they which went up also from Telmelah, Telharesha, Cherub, Addon, and Immer: but they could not shew their father's house, nor their seed, whether they were of Israel.
telharsa (1)
	Ezra 2.59 And these were they which went up from Telmelah, Telharsa, Cherub, Addan, and Immer: but they could not shew their father's house, and their seed, whether they were of Israel:
tellest (1)
	Psalms (prose) 56.8 Thou tellest my wanderings: put thou my tears into thy bottle: are they not in thy book?
temani (1)
	Genesis 36.34 And Jobab died, and Husham of the land of Temani reigned in his stead.
temanites (1)
	1 Chronicles 1.45 And when Jobab was dead, Husham of the land of the Temanites reigned in his stead.
temeni (1)
	1 Chronicles 4.6 And Naarah bare him Ahuzam, and Hepher, and Temeni, and Haahashtari. These were the sons of Naarah.
temper (1)
	Ezekiel 46.14 And thou shalt prepare a meat offering for it every morning, the sixth part of an ephah, and the third part of an hin of oil, to temper with the fine flour; a meat offering continually by a perpetual ordinance unto the LORD.
temporal (1)
	2 Corinthians 4.18 While we look not at the things which are seen, but at the things which are not seen: for the things which are seen are temporal; but the things which are not seen are eternal.
tempteth (1)
	James 1.13 Let no man say when he is tempted, I am tempted of God: for God cannot be tempted with evil, neither tempteth he any man:
tend (1)
	Proverbs 21.5 The thoughts of the diligent tend only to plenteousness; but of every one that is hasty only to want.
tenderness (1)
	Deuteronomy 28.56 The tender and delicate woman among you, which would not adventure to set the sole of her foot upon the ground for delicateness and tenderness, her eye shall be evil toward the husband of her bosom, and toward her son, and toward her daughter,
tentmakers (1)
	Acts 18.3 And because he was of the same craft, he abode with them, and wrought: for by their occupation they were tentmakers.
terraces (1)
	2 Chronicles 9.11 And the king made of the algum trees terraces to the house of the LORD, and to the king's palace, and harps and psalteries for singers: and there were none such seen before in the land of Judah.
terrifiest (1)
	Job 7.14 Then thou scarest me with dreams, and terrifiest me through visions:
tertius (1)
	Romans 16.22 I Tertius, who wrote this epistle, salute you in the Lord.
thahash (1)
	Genesis 22.24 And his concubine, whose name was Reumah, she bare also Tebah, and Gaham, and Thahash, and Maachah.
thamah (1)
	Ezra 2.53 The children of Barkos, the children of Sisera, the children of Thamah,
thamar (1)
	Matthew 1.3 And Judas begat Phares and Zara of Thamar; and Phares begat Esrom; and Esrom begat Aram;
thankfulness (1)
	Acts 24.3 We accept it always, and in all places, most noble Felix, with all thankfulness.
thanking (1)
	2 Chronicles 5.13 It came even to pass, as the trumpeters and singers were as one, to make one sound to be heard in praising and thanking the LORD; and when they lifted up their voice with the trumpets and cymbals and instruments of musick, and praised the LORD, saying, For he is good; for his mercy endureth for ever: that then the house was filled with a cloud, even the house of the LORD;
thankworthy (1)
	1 Peter 2.19 For this is thankworthy, if a man for conscience toward God endure grief, suffering wrongfully.
thara (1)
	Luke 3.34 Which was the son of Jacob, which was the son of Isaac, which was the son of Abraham, which was the son of Thara, which was the son of Nachor,
theeward (1)
	1 Samuel 19.4 And Jonathan spake good of David unto Saul his father, and said unto him, Let not the king sin against his servant, against David; because he hath not sinned against thee, and because his works have been to thee-ward very good:
thelasar (1)
	2 Kings 19.12 Have the gods of the nations delivered them which my fathers have destroyed; as Gozan, and Haran, and Rezeph, and the children of Eden which were in Thelasar?
thereabout (1)
	Luke 24.4 And it came to pass, as they were much perplexed thereabout, behold, two men stood by them in shining garments:
thereinto (1)
	Luke 21.21 Then let them which are in Judaea flee to the mountains; and let them which are in the midst of it depart out; and let not them that are in the countries enter thereinto.
therin (1)
	Deuteronomy 7.25 The graven images of their gods shall ye burn with fire: thou shalt not desire the silver or gold that is on them, nor take it unto thee, lest thou be snared therin: for it is an abomination to the LORD thy God.
therof (1)
	Ezekiel 22.21 Yea, I will gather you, and blow upon you in the fire of my wrath, and ye shall be melted in the midst therof.
theudas (1)
	Acts 5.36 For before these days rose up Theudas, boasting himself to be somebody; to whom a number of men, about four hundred, joined themselves: who was slain; and all, as many as obeyed him, were scattered, and brought to nought.
thimnathah (1)
	Joshua 19.43 And Elon, and Thimnathah, and Ekron,
thirdly (1)
	1 Corinthians 12.28 And God hath set some in the church, first apostles, secondarily prophets, thirdly teachers, after that miracles, then gifts of healings, helps, governments, diversities of tongues.
thongs (1)
	Acts 22.25 And as they bound him with thongs, Paul said unto the centurion that stood by, Is it lawful for you to scourge a man that is a Roman, and uncondemned?
thoughtest (1)
	Psalms (prose) 50.21 These things hast thou done, and I kept silence; thou thoughtest that I was altogether such an one as thyself: but I will reprove thee, and set them in order before thine eyes.
threaten (1)
	Acts 4.17 But that it spread no further among the people, let us straitly threaten them, that they speak henceforth to no man in this name.
threatening (1)
	Ephesians 6.9 And, ye masters, do the same things unto them, forbearing threatening: knowing that your Master also is in heaven; neither is there respect of persons with him.
threefold (1)
	Ecclesiastes 4.12 And if one prevail against him, two shall withstand him; and a threefold cord is not quickly broken.
thresheth (1)
	1 Corinthians 9.10 Or saith he it altogether for our sakes? For our sakes, no doubt, this is written: that he that ploweth should plow in hope; and that he that thresheth in hope should be partaker of his hope.
threshingplace (1)
	2 Samuel 24.16 And when the angel stretched out his hand upon Jerusalem to destroy it, the LORD repented him of the evil, and said to the angel that destroyed the people, It is enough: stay now thine hand. And the angel of the LORD was by the threshingplace of Araunah the Jebusite.
threwest (1)
	Nehemiah 9.11 And thou didst divide the sea before them, so that they went through the midst of the sea on the dry land; and their persecutors thou threwest into the deeps, as a stone into the mighty waters.
thronging (1)
	Mark 5.31 And his disciples said unto him, Thou seest the multitude thronging thee, and sayest thou, Who touched me?
throwing (1)
	Numbers 35.17 And if he smite him with throwing a stone, wherewith he may die, and he die, he is a murderer: the murderer shall surely be put to death.
thrusteth (1)
	Job 32.13 Lest ye should say, We have found out wisdom: God thrusteth him down, not man.
thunderbolts (1)
	Psalms (prose) 78.48 He gave up their cattle also to the hail, and their flocks to hot thunderbolts.
thyine (1)
	Revelation 18.12 The merchandise of gold, and silver, and precious stones, and of pearls, and fine linen, and purple, and silk, and scarlet, and all thyine wood, and all manner vessels of ivory, and all manner vessels of most precious wood, and of brass, and iron, and marble,
tiberius (1)
	Luke 3.1 Now in the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius Caesar, Pontius Pilate being governor of Judaea, and Herod being tetrarch of Galilee, and his brother Philip tetrarch of Ituraea and of the region of Trachonitis, and Lysanias the tetrarch of Abilene,
tibhath (1)
	1 Chronicles 18.8 Likewise from Tibhath, and from Chun, cities of Hadarezer, brought David very much brass, wherewith Solomon made the brasen sea, and the pillars, and the vessels of brass.
tikvath (1)
	2 Chronicles 34.22 And Hilkiah, and they that the king had appointed, went to Huldah the prophetess, the wife of Shallum the son of Tikvath, the son of Hasrah, keeper of the wardrobe; (now she dwelt in Jerusalem in the college:) and they spake to her to that effect.
tile (1)
	Ezekiel 4.1 Thou also, son of man, take thee a tile, and lay it before thee, and pourtray upon it the city, even Jerusalem:
tiling (1)
	Luke 5.19 And when they could not find by what way they might bring him in because of the multitude, they went upon the housetop, and let him down through the tiling with his couch into the midst before Jesus.
tiller (1)
	Genesis 4.2 And she again bare his brother Abel. And Abel was a keeper of sheep, but Cain was a tiller of the ground.
tillest (1)
	Genesis 4.12 When thou tillest the ground, it shall not henceforth yield unto thee her strength; a fugitive and a vagabond shalt thou be in the earth.
tilon (1)
	1 Chronicles 4.20 And the sons of Shimon were, Amnon, and Rinnah, Benhanan, and Tilon. And the sons of Ishi were, Zoheth, and Benzoheth.
timaeus (1)
	Mark 10.46 And they came to Jericho: and as he went out of Jericho with his disciples and a great number of people, blind Bartimaeus, the son of Timaeus, sat by the highway side begging.
timnathheres (1)
	Judges 2.9 And they buried him in the border of his inheritance in Timnathheres, in the mount of Ephraim, on the north side of the hill Gaash.
timnite (1)
	Judges 15.6 Then the Philistines said, Who hath done this? And they answered, Samson, the son in law of the Timnite, because he had taken his wife, and given her to his companion. And the Philistines came up, and burnt her and her father with fire.
timon (1)
	Acts 6.5 And the saying pleased the whole multitude: and they chose Stephen, a man full of faith and of the Holy Ghost, and Philip, and Prochorus, and Nicanor, and Timon, and Parmenas, and Nicolas a proselyte of Antioch:
tirathites (1)
	1 Chronicles 2.55 And the families of the scribes which dwelt at Jabez; the Tirathites, the Shimeathites, and Suchathites. These are the Kenites that came of Hemath, the father of the house of Rechab.
tire (1)
	Ezekiel 24.17 Forbear to cry, make no mourning for the dead, bind the tire of thine head upon thee, and put on thy shoes upon thy feet, and cover not thy lips, and eat not the bread of men.
tired (1)
	2 Kings 9.30 And when Jehu was come to Jezreel, Jezebel heard of it; and she painted her face, and tired her head, and looked out at a window.
tirhanah (1)
	1 Chronicles 2.48 Maachah, Caleb's concubine, bare Sheber, and Tirhanah.
tiria (1)
	1 Chronicles 4.16 And the sons of Jehaleleel; Ziph, and Ziphah, Tiria, and Asareel.
tizite (1)
	1 Chronicles 11.45 Jediael the son of Shimri, and Joha his brother, the Tizite,
toah (1)
	1 Chronicles 6.34 The son of Elkanah, the son of Jeroham, the son of Eliel, the son of Toah,
tobadonijah (1)
	2 Chronicles 17.8 And with them he sent Levites, even Shemaiah, and Nethaniah, and Zebadiah, and Asahel, and Shemiramoth, and Jehonathan, and Adonijah, and Tobijah, and Tobadonijah, Levites; and with them Elishama and Jehoram, priests.
tochen (1)
	1 Chronicles 4.32 And their villages were, Etam, and Ain, Rimmon, and Tochen, and Ashan, five cities:
tohu (1)
	1 Samuel 1.1 Now there was a certain man of Ramathaimzophim, of mount Ephraim, and his name was Elkanah, the son of Jeroham, the son of Elihu, the son of Tohu, the son of Zuph, an Ephrathite:
toiled (1)
	Luke 5.5 And Simon answering said unto him, Master, we have toiled all the night, and have taken nothing: nevertheless at thy word I will let down the net.
toiling (1)
	Mark 6.48 And he saw them toiling in rowing; for the wind was contrary unto them: and about the fourth watch of the night he cometh unto them, walking upon the sea, and would have passed by them.
tolad (1)
	1 Chronicles 4.29 And at Bilhah, and at Ezem, and at Tolad,
tolaites (1)
	Numbers 26.23 Of the sons of Issachar after their families: of Tola, the family of the Tolaites: of Pua, the family of the Punites:
tomorrow (1)
	Numbers 14.25 (Now the Amalekites and the Canaanites dwelt in the valley.) Tomorrow turn you, and get you into the wilderness by the way of the Red sea.
tooths (1)
	Exodus 21.27 And if he smite out his manservant's tooth, or his maidservant's tooth; he shall let him go free for his tooth's sake.
tophel (1)
	Deuteronomy 1.1 These be the words which Moses spake unto all Israel on this side Jordan in the wilderness, in the plain over against the Red sea, between Paran, and Tophel, and Laban, and Hazeroth, and Dizahab.
topheth (1)
	2 Kings 23.10 And he defiled Topheth, which is in the valley of the children of Hinnom, that no man might make his son or his daughter to pass through the fire to Molech.
torch (1)
	Zechariah 12.6 In that day will I make the governors of Judah like an hearth of fire among the wood, and like a torch of fire in a sheaf; and they shall devour all the people round about, on the right hand and on the left: and Jerusalem shall be inhabited again in her own place, even in Jerusalem.
tormentors (1)
	Matthew 18.34 And his lord was wroth, and delivered him to the tormentors, till he should pay all that was due unto him.
tortoise (1)
	Leviticus 11.29 These also shall be unclean unto you among the creeping things that creep upon the earth; the weasel, and the mouse, and the tortoise after his kind,
tortured (1)
	Hebrews 11.35 Women received their dead raised to life again: and others were tortured, not accepting deliverance; that they might obtain a better resurrection:
tossings (1)
	Job 7.4 When I lie down, I say, When shall I arise, and the night be gone? and I am full of tossings to and fro unto the dawning of the day.
tottering (1)
	Psalms (prose) 62.3 How long will ye imagine mischief against a man? ye shall be slain all of you: as a bowing wall shall ye be, and as a tottering fence.
townclerk (1)
	Acts 19.35 And when the townclerk had appeased the people, he said, Ye men of Ephesus, what man is there that knoweth not how that the city of the Ephesians is a worshipper of the great goddess Diana, and of the image which fell down from Jupiter?
trachonitis (1)
	Luke 3.1 Now in the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius Caesar, Pontius Pilate being governor of Judaea, and Herod being tetrarch of Galilee, and his brother Philip tetrarch of Ituraea and of the region of Trachonitis, and Lysanias the tetrarch of Abilene,
trading (1)
	Luke 19.15 And it came to pass, that when he was returned, having received the kingdom, then he commanded these servants to be called unto him, to whom he had given the money, that he might know how much every man had gained by trading.
traffickers (1)
	Isaiah 23.8 Who hath taken this counsel against Tyre, the crowning city, whose merchants are princes, whose traffickers are the honourable of the earth?
trained (1)
	Genesis 14.14 And when Abram heard that his brother was taken captive, he armed his trained servants, born in his own house, three hundred and eighteen, and pursued them unto Dan.
traitor (1)
	Luke 6.16 And Judas the brother of James, and Judas Iscariot, which also was the traitor.
traitors (1)
	2 Timothy 3.4 Traitors, heady, highminded, lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God;
tranquillity (1)
	Daniel 4.27 Wherefore, O king, let my counsel be acceptable unto thee, and break off thy sins by righteousness, and thine iniquities by shewing mercy to the poor; if it may be a lengthening of thy tranquillity.
transferred (1)
	1 Corinthians 4.6 And these things, brethren, I have in a figure transferred to myself and to Apollos for your sakes; that ye might learn in us not to think of men above that which is written, that no one of you be puffed up for one against another.
transforming (1)
	2 Corinthians 11.13 For such are false apostles, deceitful workers, transforming themselves into the apostles of Christ.
transgressest (1)
	Esther 3.3 Then the king's servants, which were in the king's gate, said unto Mordecai, Why transgressest thou the king's commandment?
translate (1)
	2 Samuel 3.10 To translate the kingdom from the house of Saul, and to set up the throne of David over Israel and over Judah, from Dan even to Beersheba.
translation (1)
	Hebrews 11.5 By faith Enoch was translated that he should not see death; and was not found, because God had translated him: for before his translation he had this testimony, that he pleased God.
transparent (1)
	Revelation 21.21 And the twelve gates were twelve pearls: every several gate was of one pearl: and the street of the city was pure gold, as it were transparent glass.
traps (1)
	Joshua 23.13 Know for a certainty that the LORD your God will no more drive out any of these nations from before you; but they shall be snares and traps unto you, and scourges in your sides, and thorns in your eyes, until ye perish from off this good land which the LORD your God hath given you.
travailest (1)
	Galatians 4.27 For it is written, Rejoice, thou barren that bearest not; break forth and cry, thou that travailest not: for the desolate hath many more children than she which hath an husband.
travelled (1)
	Acts 11.19 Now they which were scattered abroad upon the persecution that arose about Stephen travelled as far as Phenice, and Cyprus, and Antioch, preaching the word to none but unto the Jews only.
travellers (1)
	Judges 5.6 In the days of Shamgar the son of Anath, in the days of Jael, the highways were unoccupied, and the travellers walked through byways.
traversing (1)
	Jeremiah 2.23 How canst thou say, I am not polluted, I have not gone after Baalim?  see thy way in the valley, know what thou hast done: thou art a swift dromedary traversing her ways;
treachery (1)
	2 Kings 9.23 And Joram turned his hands, and fled, and said to Ahaziah, There is treachery, O Ahaziah.
treader (1)
	Amos 9.13 Behold, the days come, saith the LORD, that the plowman shall overtake the reaper, and the treader of grapes him that soweth seed; and the mountains shall drop sweet wine, and all the hills shall melt.
treaders (1)
	Isaiah 16.10 And gladness is taken away, and joy out of the plentiful field; and in the vineyards there shall be no singing, neither shall there be shouting: the treaders shall tread out no wine in their presses; I have made their vintage shouting to cease.
treasured (1)
	Isaiah 23.18 And her merchandise and her hire shall be holiness to the LORD: it shall not be treasured nor laid up; for her merchandise shall be for them that dwell before the LORD, to eat sufficiently, and for durable clothing.
treasurest (1)
	Romans 2.5 But after thy hardness and impenitent heart treasurest up unto thyself wrath against the day of wrath and revelation of the righteous judgment of God;
treatise (1)
	Acts 1.1 The former treatise have I made, O Theophilus, of all that Jesus began both to do and teach,
tributary (1)
	Lamentations 1.1 How doth the city sit solitary, that was full of people! how is she become as a widow! she that was great among the nations, and princess among the provinces, how is she become tributary!
trickleth (1)
	Lamentations 3.49 Mine eye trickleth down, and ceaseth not, without any intermission.
trimmest (1)
	Jeremiah 2.33 Why trimmest thou thy way to seek love? therefore hast thou also taught the wicked ones thy ways.
trogyllium (1)
	Acts 20.15 And we sailed thence, and came the next day over against Chios; and the next day we arrived at Samos, and tarried at Trogyllium; and the next day we came to Miletus.
troubledst (1)
	Ezekiel 32.2 Son of man, take up a lamentation for Pharaoh king of Egypt, and say unto him, Thou art like a young lion of the nations, and thou art as a whale in the seas: and thou camest forth with thy rivers, and troubledst the waters with thy feet, and fouledst their rivers.
troubler (1)
	1 Chronicles 2.7 And the sons of Carmi; Achar, the troubler of Israel, who transgressed in the thing accursed.
troublest (1)
	Mark 5.35 While he yet spake, there came from the ruler of the synagogue's house certain which said, Thy daughter is dead: why troublest thou the Master any further?
troublous (1)
	Daniel 9.25 Know therefore and understand, that from the going forth of the commandment to restore and to build Jerusalem unto the Messiah the Prince shall be seven weeks, and threescore and two weeks: the street shall be built again, and the wall, even in troublous times.
trough (1)
	Genesis 24.20 And she hasted, and emptied her pitcher into the trough, and ran again unto the well to draw water, and drew for all his camels.
trow (1)
	Luke 17.9 Doth he thank that servant because he did the things that were commanded him? I trow not.
trucebreakers (1)
	2 Timothy 3.3 Without natural affection, trucebreakers, false accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are good,
trusting (1)
	Psalms (prose) 112.7 He shall not be afraid of evil tidings: his heart is fixed, trusting in the LORD.
trusty (1)
	Job 12.20 He removeth away the speech of the trusty, and taketh away the understanding of the aged.
trying (1)
	James 1.3 Knowing this, that the trying of your faith worketh patience.
tryphena (1)
	Romans 16.12 Salute Tryphena and Tryphosa, who labour in the Lord. Salute the beloved Persis, which laboured much in the Lord.
tryphosa (1)
	Romans 16.12 Salute Tryphena and Tryphosa, who labour in the Lord. Salute the beloved Persis, which laboured much in the Lord.
tumbled (1)
	Judges 7.13 And when Gideon was come, behold, there was a man that told a dream unto his fellow, and said, Behold, I dreamed a dream, and, lo, a cake of barley bread tumbled into the host of Midian, and came unto a tent, and smote it that it fell, and overturned it, that the tent lay along.
tutors (1)
	Galatians 4.2 But is under tutors and governors until the time appointed of the father.
twentys (1)
	Genesis 18.31 And he said, Behold now, I have taken upon me to speak unto the LORD: Peradventure there shall be twenty found there. And he said, I will not destroy it for twenty's sake.
twinkling (1)
	1 Corinthians 15.52 In a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trump: for the trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised incorruptible, and we shall be changed.
twofold (1)
	Matthew 23.15 Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye compass sea and land to make one proselyte, and when he is made, ye make him twofold more the child of hell than yourselves.
tyrannus (1)
	Acts 19.9 But when divers were hardened, and believed not, but spake evil of that way before the multitude, he departed from them, and separated the disciples, disputing daily in the school of one Tyrannus.
ucal (1)
	Proverbs 30.1 The words of Agur the son of Jakeh, even the prophecy: the man spake unto Ithiel, even unto Ithiel and Ucal,
uel (1)
	Ezra 10.34 Of the sons of Bani; Maadai, Amram, and Uel,
ulla (1)
	1 Chronicles 7.39 And the sons of Ulla; Arah, and Haniel, and Rezia.
ummah (1)
	Joshua 19.30 Ummah also, and Aphek, and Rehob: twenty and two cities with their villages.
unaccustomed (1)
	Jeremiah 31.18 I have surely heard Ephraim bemoaning himself thus; Thou hast chastised me, and I was chastised, as a bullock unaccustomed to the yoke: turn thou me, and I shall be turned; for thou art the LORD my God.
unadvisedly (1)
	Psalms (prose) 106.33 Because they provoked his spirit, so that he spake unadvisedly with his lips.
unblameably (1)
	1 Thessalonians 2.10 Ye are witnesses, and God also, how holily and justly and unblameably we behaved ourselves among you that believe:
uncertainly (1)
	1 Corinthians 9.26 I therefore so run, not as uncertainly; so fight I, not as one that beateth the air:
unchangeable (1)
	Hebrews 7.24 But this man, because he continueth ever, hath an unchangeable priesthood.
uncleannesses (1)
	Ezekiel 36.29 I will also save you from all your uncleannesses: and I will call for the corn, and will increase it, and lay no famine upon you.
unclothed (1)
	2 Corinthians 5.4 For we that are in this tabernacle do groan, being burdened: not for that we would be unclothed, but clothed upon, that mortality might be swallowed up of life.
uncorruptible (1)
	Romans 1.23 And changed the glory of the uncorruptible God into an image made like to corruptible man, and to birds, and fourfooted beasts, and creeping things.
uncorruptness (1)
	Titus 2.7 In all things shewing thyself a pattern of good works: in doctrine shewing uncorruptness, gravity, sincerity,
unction (1)
	1 John 2.20 But ye have an unction from the Holy One, and ye know all things.
undergirding (1)
	Acts 27.17 Which when they had taken up, they used helps, undergirding the ship; and, fearing lest they should fall into the quicksands, strake sail, and so were driven.
undertake (1)
	Isaiah 38.14 Like a crane or a swallow, so did I chatter: I did mourn as a dove: mine eyes fail with looking upward: O LORD, I am oppressed; undertake for me.
undertook (1)
	Esther 9.23 And the Jews undertook to do as they had begun, and as Mordecai had written unto them;
unequally (1)
	2 Corinthians 6.14 Be ye not unequally yoked together with unbelievers: for what fellowship hath righteousness with unrighteousness? and what communion hath light with darkness?
unfaithful (1)
	Proverbs 25.19 Confidence in an unfaithful man in time of trouble is like a broken tooth, and a foot out of joint.
unfaithfully (1)
	Psalms (prose) 78.57 But turned back, and dealt unfaithfully like their fathers: they were turned aside like a deceitful bow.
ungirded (1)
	Genesis 24.32 And the man came into the house: and he ungirded his camels, and gave straw and provender for the camels, and water to wash his feet, and the men's feet that were with him.
unite (1)
	Psalms (prose) 86.11 Teach me thy way, O LORD; I will walk in thy truth: unite my heart to fear thy name.
united (1)
	Genesis 49.6 O my soul, come not thou into their secret; unto their assembly, mine honour, be not thou united: for in their anger they slew a man, and in their selfwill they digged down a wall.
unlade (1)
	Acts 21.3 Now when we had discovered Cyprus, we left it on the left hand, and sailed into Syria, and landed at Tyre: for there the ship was to unlade her burden.
unmerciful (1)
	Romans 1.31 Without understanding, covenantbreakers, without natural affection, implacable, unmerciful:
unmindful (1)
	Deuteronomy 32.18 Of the Rock that begat thee thou art unmindful, and hast forgotten God that formed thee.
unoccupied (1)
	Judges 5.6 In the days of Shamgar the son of Anath, in the days of Jael, the highways were unoccupied, and the travellers walked through byways.
unperfect (1)
	Psalms (prose) 139.16 Thine eyes did see my substance, yet being unperfect; and in thy book all my members were written, which in continuance were fashioned, when as yet there was none of them.
unprepared (1)
	2 Corinthians 9.4 Lest haply if they of Macedonia come with me, and find you unprepared, we (that we say not, ye) should be ashamed in this same confident boasting.
unprofitableness (1)
	Hebrews 7.18 For there is verily a disannulling of the commandment going before for the weakness and unprofitableness thereof.
unrebukable (1)
	1 Timothy 6.14 That thou keep this commandment without spot, unrebukable, until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ:
unreproveable (1)
	Colossians 1.22  In the body of his flesh through death, to present you holy and unblameable and unreproveable in his sight:
unrighteously (1)
	Deuteronomy 25.16 For all that do such things, and all that do unrighteously, are an abomination unto the LORD thy God.
unripe (1)
	Job 15.33 He shall shake off his unripe grape as the vine, and shall cast off his flower as the olive.
unsatiable (1)
	Ezekiel 16.28 Thou hast played the whore also with the Assyrians, because thou wast unsatiable; yea, thou hast played the harlot with them, and yet couldest not be satisfied.
unshod (1)
	Jeremiah 2.25 Withhold thy foot from being unshod, and thy throat from thirst: but thou saidst, There is no hope: no; for I have loved strangers, and after them will I go.
unskilful (1)
	Hebrews 5.13 For every one that useth milk is unskilful in the word of righteousness: for he is a babe.
unspotted (1)
	James 1.27 Pure religion and undefiled before God and the Father is this, To visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction, and to keep himself unspotted from the world.
unstopped (1)
	Isaiah 35.5 Then the eyes of the blind shall be opened, and the ears of the deaf shall be unstopped.
untaken (1)
	2 Corinthians 3.14 But their minds were blinded: for until this day remaineth the same vail untaken away in the reading of the old testament; which vail is done away in Christ.
untoward (1)
	Acts 2.40 And with many other words did he testify and exhort, saying, Save yourselves from this untoward generation.
unweighed (1)
	1 Kings 7.47 And Solomon left all the vessels unweighed, because they were exceeding many: neither was the weight of the brass found out.
upbraided (1)
	Mark 16.14 Afterward he appeared unto the eleven as they sat at meat, and upbraided them with their unbelief and hardness of heart, because they believed not them which had seen him after he was risen.
upbraideth (1)
	James 1.5 If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him.
upharsin (1)
	Daniel 5.25 And this is the writing that was written, MENE, MENE, TEKEL, UPHARSIN.
upheld (1)
	Isaiah 63.5 And I looked, and there was none to help; and I wondered that there was none to uphold: therefore mine own arm brought salvation unto me; and my fury, it upheld me.
upholdest (1)
	Psalms (prose) 41.12 And as for me, thou upholdest me in mine integrity, and settest me before thy face for ever.
upholding (1)
	Hebrews 1.3 Who being the brightness of his glory, and the express image of his person, and upholding all things by the word of his power, when he had by himself purged our sins, sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high:
uprising (1)
	Psalms (prose) 139.2 Thou knowest my downsitting and mine uprising, thou understandest my thought afar off.
urbane (1)
	Romans 16.9 Salute Urbane, our helper in Christ, and Stachys my beloved.
urge (1)
	Luke 11.53 And as he said these things unto them, the scribes and the Pharisees began to urge him vehemently, and to provoke him to speak of many things:
uriahs (1)
	2 Samuel 12.15 And Nathan departed unto his house. And the LORD struck the child that Uriah's wife bare unto David, and it was very sick.
urias (1)
	Matthew 1.6 And Jesse begat David the king; and David the king begat Solomon of her that had been the wife of Urias;
uses (1)
	Titus 3.14 And let our's also learn to maintain good works for necessary uses, that they be not unfruitful.
usest (1)
	Psalms (prose) 119.132 Look thou upon me, and be merciful unto me, as thou usest to do unto those that love thy name.
usurer (1)
	Exodus 22.25 If thou lend money to any of my people that is poor by thee, thou shalt not be to him as an usurer, neither shalt thou lay upon him usury.
usurp (1)
	1 Timothy 2.12 But I suffer not a woman to teach, nor to usurp authority over the man, but to be in silence.
uttering (1)
	Isaiah 59.13 In transgressing and lying against the LORD, and departing away from our God, speaking oppression and revolt, conceiving and uttering from the heart words of falsehood.
uzai (1)
	Nehemiah 3.25 Palal the son of Uzai, over against the turning of the wall, and the tower which lieth out from the king's high house, that was by the court of the prison. After him Pedaiah the son of Parosh.
uzzensherah (1)
	1 Chronicles 7.24 (And his daughter was Sherah, who built Bethhoron the nether, and the upper, and Uzzensherah.)
uzzia (1)
	1 Chronicles 11.44 Uzzia the Ashterathite, Shama and Jehiel the sons of Hothan the Aroerite,
vagabonds (1)
	Psalms (prose) 109.10 Let his children be continually vagabonds, and beg: let them seek their bread also out of their desolate places.
vails (1)
	Isaiah 3.23 The glasses, and the fine linen, and the hoods, and the vails.
vainglory (1)
	Philippians 2.3 Let nothing be done through strife or vainglory; but in lowliness of mind let each esteem other better than themselves.
vainly (1)
	Colossians 2.18  Let no man beguile you of your reward in a voluntary humility and worshipping of angels, intruding into those things which he hath not seen, vainly puffed up by his fleshly mind,
vajezatha (1)
	Esther 9.9 And Parmashta, and Arisai, and Aridai, and Vajezatha,
valiantest (1)
	Judges 21.10 And the congregation sent thither twelve thousand men of the valiantest, and commanded them, saying, Go and smite the inhabitants of Jabeshgilead with the edge of the sword, with the women and the children.
valuest (1)
	Leviticus 27.12 And the priest shall value it, whether it be good or bad: as thou valuest it, who art the priest, so shall it be.
vaniah (1)
	Ezra 10.36 Vaniah, Meremoth, Eliashib,
variableness (1)
	James 1.17 Every good gift and every perfect gift is from above, and cometh down from the Father of lights, with whom is no variableness, neither shadow of turning.
vashni (1)
	1 Chronicles 6.28 And the sons of Samuel; the firstborn Vashni, and Abiah.
vats (1)
	Joel 2.24 And the floors shall be full of wheat, and the vats shall overflow with wine and oil.
vaunt (1)
	Judges 7.2 And the LORD said unto Gideon, The people that are with thee are too many for me to give the Midianites into their hands, lest Israel vaunt themselves against me, saying, Mine own hand hath saved me.
vaunteth (1)
	1 Corinthians 13.4 Charity suffereth long, and is kind; charity envieth not; charity vaunteth not itself, is not puffed up,
vein (1)
	Job 28.1 Surely there is a vein for the silver, and a place for gold where they fine it.
venom (1)
	Deuteronomy 32.33 Their wine is the poison of dragons, and the cruel venom of asps.
venomous (1)
	Acts 28.4 And when the barbarians saw the venomous beast hang on his hand, they said among themselves, No doubt this man is a murderer, whom, though he hath escaped the sea, yet vengeance suffereth not to live.
vent (1)
	Job 32.19 Behold, my belly is as wine which hath no vent; it is ready to burst like new bottles.
vestry (1)
	2 Kings 10.22 And he said unto him that was over the vestry, Bring forth vestments for all the worshippers of Baal. And he brought them forth vestments.
vestures (1)
	Genesis 41.42 And Pharaoh took off his ring from his hand, and put it upon Joseph's hand, and arrayed him in vestures of fine linen, and put a gold chain about his neck;
vexations (1)
	2 Chronicles 15.5 And in those times there was no peace to him that went out, nor to him that came in, but great vexations were upon all the inhabitants of the countries.
vilely (1)
	2 Samuel 1.21 Ye mountains of Gilboa, let there be no dew, neither let there be rain, upon you, nor fields of offerings: for there the shield of the mighty is vilely cast away, the shield of Saul, as though he had not been anointed with oil.
viler (1)
	Job 30.8 They were children of fools, yea, children of base men: they were viler than the earth.
vilest (1)
	Psalms (prose) 12.8 The wicked walk on every side, when the vilest men are exalted.
violated (1)
	Ezekiel 22.26 Her priests have violated my law, and have profaned mine holy things: they have put no difference between the holy and profane, neither have they shewed difference between the unclean and the clean, and have hid their eyes from my sabbaths, and I am profaned among them.
virtuously (1)
	Proverbs 31.29 Many daughters have done virtuously, but thou excellest them all.
visible (1)
	Colossians 1.16  For by him were all things created, that are in heaven, and that are in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or powers: all things were created by him, and for him:
visiteth (1)
	Job 31.14 What then shall I do when God riseth up? and when he visiteth, what shall I answer him?
vocation (1)
	Ephesians 4.1 I therefore, the prisoner of the Lord, beseech you that ye walk worthy of the vocation wherewith ye are called,
voluntarily (1)
	Ezekiel 46.12 Now when the prince shall prepare a voluntary burnt offering or peace offerings voluntarily unto the LORD, one shall then open him the gate that looketh toward the east, and he shall prepare his burnt offering and his peace offerings, as he did on the sabbath day: then he shall go forth; and after his going forth one shall shut the gate.
vomited (1)
	Jonah 2.10 And the LORD spake unto the fish, and it vomited out Jonah upon the dry land.
vomiteth (1)
	Leviticus 18.25 And the land is defiled: therefore I do visit the iniquity thereof upon it, and the land itself vomiteth out her inhabitants.
vophsi (1)
	Numbers 13.14 Of the tribe of Naphtali, Nahbi the son of Vophsi.
vowedst (1)
	Genesis 31.13 I am the God of Bethel, where thou anointedst the pillar, and where thou vowedst a vow unto me: now arise, get thee out from this land, and return unto the land of thy kindred.
voweth (1)
	Malachi 1.14 But cursed be the deceiver, which hath in his flock a male, and voweth, and sacrificeth unto the LORD a corrupt thing: for I am a great King, saith the LORD of hosts, and my name is dreadful among the heathen.
voyage (1)
	Acts 27.10 And said unto them, Sirs, I perceive that this voyage will be with hurt and much damage, not only of the lading and ship, but also of our lives.
wagon (1)
	Numbers 7.3 And they brought their offering before the LORD, six covered wagons, and twelve oxen; a wagon for two of the princes, and for each one an ox: and they brought them before the tabernacle.
wailed (1)
	Mark 5.38 And he cometh to the house of the ruler of the synagogue, and seeth the tumult, and them that wept and wailed greatly.
waked (1)
	Zechariah 4.1 And the angel that talked with me came again, and waked me, as a man that is wakened out of his sleep.
waking (1)
	Psalms (prose) 77.4 Thou holdest mine eyes waking: I am so troubled that I cannot speak.
walkedst (1)
	John 21.18 Verily, verily, I say unto thee, When thou wast young, thou girdest thyself, and walkedst whither thou wouldest: but when thou shalt be old, thou shalt stretch forth thy hands, and another shall gird thee, and carry thee whither thou wouldest not.
wallowing (1)
	2 Peter 2.22 But it is happened unto them according to the true proverb, The dog is turned to his own vomit again; and the sow that was washed to her wallowing in the mire.
wanderest (1)
	Jeremiah 2.20 For of old time I have broken thy yoke, and burst thy bands; and thou saidst, I will not transgress; when upon every high hill and under every green tree thou wanderest, playing the harlot.
wanderings (1)
	Psalms (prose) 56.8 Thou tellest my wanderings: put thou my tears into thy bottle: are they not in thy book?
warming (1)
	Mark 14.67 And when she saw Peter warming himself, she looked upon him, and said, And thou also wast with Jesus of Nazareth.
warreth (1)
	2 Timothy 2.4 No man that warreth entangleth himself with the affairs of this life; that he may please him who hath chosen him to be a soldier.
warrior (1)
	Isaiah 9.5 For every battle of the warrior is with confused noise, and garments rolled in blood; but this shall be with burning and fuel of fire.
washest (1)
	Job 14.19 The waters wear the stones: thou washest away the things which grow out of the dust of the earth; and thou destroyest the hope of man.
washings (1)
	Hebrews 9.10 Which stood only in meats and drinks, and divers washings, and carnal ordinances, imposed on them until the time of reformation.
wasteness (1)
	Zephaniah 1.15 That day is a day of wrath, a day of trouble and distress, a day of wasteness and desolation, a day of darkness and gloominess, a day of clouds and thick darkness,
watchful (1)
	Revelation 3.2 Be watchful, and strengthen the things which remain, that are ready to die: for I have not found thy works perfect before God.
watchmans (1)
	Ezekiel 33.6 But if the watchman see the sword come, and blow not the trumpet, and the people be not warned; if the sword come, and take any person from among them, he is taken away in his iniquity; but his blood will I require at the watchman's hand.
wateredst (1)
	Deuteronomy 11.10 For the land, whither thou goest in to possess it, is not as the land of Egypt, from whence ye came out, where thou sowedst thy seed, and wateredst it with thy foot, as a garden of herbs:
waterflood (1)
	Psalms (prose) 69.15 Let not the waterflood overflow me, neither let the deep swallow me up, and let not the pit shut her mouth upon me.
waterpot (1)
	John 4.28 The woman then left her waterpot, and went her way into the city, and saith to the men,
waterspouts (1)
	Psalms (prose) 42.7 Deep calleth unto deep at the noise of thy waterspouts: all thy waves and thy billows are gone over me.
wavereth (1)
	James 1.6 But let him ask in faith, nothing wavering. For he that wavereth is like a wave of the sea driven with the wind and tossed.
waxing (1)
	Philippians 1.14 And many of the brethren in the Lord, waxing confident by my bonds, are much more bold to speak the word without fear.
waymarks (1)
	Jeremiah 31.21 Set thee up waymarks, make thee high heaps: set thine heart toward the highway, even the way which thou wentest: turn again, O virgin of Israel, turn again to these thy cities.
weaken (1)
	Isaiah 14.12 How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer, son of the morning! how art thou cut down to the ground, which didst weaken the nations!
weareth (1)
	James 2.3 And ye have respect to him that weareth the gay clothing, and say unto him, Sit thou here in a good place; and say to the poor, Stand thou there, or sit here under my footstool:
wearisome (1)
	Job 7.3 So am I made to possess months of vanity, and wearisome nights are appointed to me.
weasel (1)
	Leviticus 11.29 These also shall be unclean unto you among the creeping things that creep upon the earth; the weasel, and the mouse, and the tortoise after his kind,
weavest (1)
	Judges 16.13 And Delilah said unto Samson, Hitherto thou hast mocked me, and told me lies: tell me wherewith thou mightest be bound. And he said unto her, If thou weavest the seven locks of my head with the web.
webs (1)
	Isaiah 59.6 Their webs shall not become garments, neither shall they cover themselves with their works: their works are works of iniquity, and the act of violence is in their hands.
wedlock (1)
	Ezekiel 16.38 And I will judge thee, as women that break wedlock and shed blood are judged; and I will give thee blood in fury and jealousy.
weeds (1)
	Jonah 2.5 The waters compassed me about, even to the soul: the depth closed me round about, the weeds were wrapped about my head.
weightier (1)
	Matthew 23.23 Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye pay tithe of mint and anise and cummin, and have omitted the weightier matters of the law, judgment, mercy, and faith: these ought ye to have done, and not to leave the other undone.
wellfavoured (1)
	Nahum 3.4 Because of the multitude of the whoredoms of the wellfavoured harlot, the mistress of witchcrafts, that selleth nations through her whoredoms, and families through her witchcrafts.
wen (1)
	Leviticus 22.22 Blind, or broken, or maimed, or having a wen, or scurvy, or scabbed, ye shall not offer these unto the LORD, nor make an offering by fire of them upon the altar unto the LORD.
wench (1)
	2 Samuel 17.17 Now Jonathan and Ahimaaz stayed by Enrogel; for they might not be seen to come into the city: and a wench went and told them; and they went and told king David.
western (1)
	Numbers 34.6 And as for the western border, ye shall even have the great sea for a border: this shall be your west border.
wheaten (1)
	Exodus 29.2 And unleavened bread, and cakes unleavened tempered with oil, and wafers unleavened anointed with oil: of wheaten flour shalt thou make them.
whereabout (1)
	1 Samuel 21.2 And David said unto Ahimelech the priest, The king hath commanded me a business, and hath said unto me, Let no man know any thing of the business whereabout I send thee, and what I have commanded thee: and I have appointed my servants to such and such a place.
whereinsoever (1)
	2 Corinthians 11.21 I speak as concerning reproach, as though we had been weak. Howbeit whereinsoever any is bold, (I speak foolishly,) I am bold also.
whirleth (1)
	Ecclesiastes 1.6 The wind goeth toward the south, and turneth about unto the north; it whirleth about continually, and the wind returneth again according to his circuits.
whispered (1)
	2 Samuel 12.19 But when David saw that his servants whispered, David perceived that the child was dead: therefore David said unto his servants, Is the child dead? And they said, He is dead.
whisperer (1)
	Proverbs 16.28 A froward man soweth strife: and a whisperer separateth chief friends.
whisperers (1)
	Romans 1.29 Being filled with all unrighteousness, fornication, wickedness, covetousness, maliciousness; full of envy, murder, debate, deceit, malignity; whisperers,
whisperings (1)
	2 Corinthians 12.20 For I fear, lest, when I come, I shall not find you such as I would, and that I shall be found unto you such as ye would not: lest there be debates, envyings, wraths, strifes, backbitings, whisperings, swellings, tumults:
whoever (1)
	2 Samuel 14.10 And the king said, Whoever saith ought unto thee, bring him to me, and he shall not touch thee any more.
whoremonger (1)
	Ephesians 5.5 For this ye know, that no whoremonger, nor unclean person, nor covetous man, who is an idolater, hath any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of God.
wideness (1)
	Ezekiel 41.10 And between the chambers was the wideness of twenty cubits round about the house on every side.
wilfully (1)
	Hebrews 10.26 For if we sin wilfully after that we have received the knowledge of the truth, there remaineth no more sacrifice for sins,
wilily (1)
	Joshua 9.4 They did work wilily, and went and made as if they had been ambassadors, and took old sacks upon their asses, and wine bottles, old, and rent, and bound up;
willeth (1)
	Romans 9.16 So then it is not of him that willeth, nor of him that runneth, but of God that sheweth mercy.
willow (1)
	Ezekiel 17.5 He took also of the seed of the land, and planted it in a fruitful field; he placed it by great waters, and set it as a willow tree.
wimples (1)
	Isaiah 3.22 The changeable suits of apparel, and the mantles, and the wimples, and the crisping pins,
windy (1)
	Psalms (prose) 55.8 I would hasten my escape from the windy storm and tempest.
winebibbers (1)
	Proverbs 23.20 Be not among winebibbers; among riotous eaters of flesh:
winked (1)
	Acts 17.30 And the times of this ignorance God winked at; but now commandeth all men every where to repent:
winneth (1)
	Proverbs 11.30 The fruit of the righteous is a tree of life; and he that winneth souls is wise.
winnowed (1)
	Isaiah 30.24 The oxen likewise and the young asses that ear the ground shall eat clean provender, which hath been winnowed with the shovel and with the fan.
winnoweth (1)
	Ruth 3.2 And now is not Boaz of our kindred, with whose maidens thou wast?  Behold, he winnoweth barley to night in the threshingfloor.
wintered (1)
	Acts 28.11 And after three months we departed in a ship of Alexandria, which had wintered in the isle, whose sign was Castor and Pollux.
winterhouse (1)
	Jeremiah 36.22 Now the king sat in the winterhouse in the ninth month: and there was a fire on the hearth burning before him.
wiping (1)
	2 Kings 21.13 And I will stretch over Jerusalem the line of Samaria, and the plummet of the house of Ahab: and I will wipe Jerusalem as a man wipeth a dish, wiping it, and turning it upside down.
wires (1)
	Exodus 39.3 And they did beat the gold into thin plates, and cut it into wires, to work it in the blue, and in the purple, and in the scarlet, and in the fine linen, with cunning work.
wishing (1)
	Job 31.30 Neither have I suffered my mouth to sin by wishing a curse to his soul.
withdrawest (1)
	Psalms (prose) 74.11 Why withdrawest thou thy hand, even thy right hand? pluck it out of thy bosom.
withdraweth (1)
	Job 36.7 He withdraweth not his eyes from the righteous: but with kings are they on the throne; yea, he doth establish them for ever, and they are exalted.
withersoever (1)
	Joshua 1.7 Only be thou strong and very courageous, that thou mayest observe to do according to all the law, which Moses my servant commanded thee: turn not from it to the right hand or to the left, that thou mayest prosper withersoever thou goest.
withheldest (1)
	Nehemiah 9.20 Thou gavest also thy good spirit to instruct them, and withheldest not thy manna from their mouth, and gavest them water for their thirst.
witnessing (1)
	Acts 26.22 Having therefore obtained help of God, I continue unto this day, witnessing both to small and great, saying none other things than those which the prophets and Moses did say should come:
wits (1)
	Psalms (prose) 107.27 They reel to and fro, and stagger like a drunken man, and are at their wit's end.
wittingly (1)
	Genesis 48.14 And Israel stretched out his right hand, and laid it upon Ephraim's head, who was the younger, and his left hand upon Manasseh's head, guiding his hands wittingly; for Manasseh was the firstborn.
witty (1)
	Proverbs 8.12 I wisdom dwell with prudence, and find out knowledge of witty inventions.
woeful (1)
	Jeremiah 17.16 As for me, I have not hastened from being a pastor to follow thee: neither have I desired the woeful day; thou knowest: that which came out of my lips was right before thee.
woes (1)
	Revelation 9.12 One woe is past; and, behold, there come two woes more hereafter.
womankind (1)
	Leviticus 18.22 Thou shalt not lie with mankind, as with womankind: it is abomination.
womens (1)
	Esther 2.11 And Mordecai walked every day before the court of the women's house, to know how Esther did, and what should become of her.
wonderously (1)
	Judges 13.19 So Manoah took a kid with a meat offering, and offered it upon a rock unto the LORD: and the angel did wonderously; and Manoah and his wife looked on.
wondrously (1)
	Joel 2.26 And ye shall eat in plenty, and be satisfied, and praise the name of the LORD your God, that hath dealt wondrously with you: and my people shall never be ashamed.
woods (1)
	Ezekiel 34.25 And I will make with them a covenant of peace, and will cause the evil beasts to cease out of the land: and they shall dwell safely in the wilderness, and sleep in the woods.
worker (1)
	1 Kings 7.14 He was a widow's son of the tribe of Naphtali, and his father was a man of Tyre, a worker in brass: and he was filled with wisdom, and understanding, and cunning to work all works in brass. And he came to king Solomon, and wrought all his work.
workfellow (1)
	Romans 16.21 Timotheus my workfellow, and Lucius, and Jason, and Sosipater, my kinsmen, salute you.
workmens (1)
	Judges 5.26 She put her hand to the nail, and her right hand to the workmen's hammer; and with the hammer she smote Sisera, she smote off his head, when she had pierced and stricken through his temples.
worst (1)
	Ezekiel 7.24 Wherefore I will bring the worst of the heathen, and they shall possess their houses: I will also make the pomp of the strong to cease; and their holy places shall be defiled.
worthies (1)
	Nahum 2.5 He shall recount his worthies: they shall stumble in their walk; they shall make haste to the wall thereof, and the defence shall be prepared.
worthily (1)
	Ruth 4.11 And all the people that were in the gate, and the elders, said, We are witnesses. The LORD make the woman that is come into thine house like Rachel and like Leah, which two did build the house of Israel: and do thou worthily in Ephratah, and be famous in Bethlehem:
wotteth (1)
	Genesis 39.8 But he refused, and said unto his master's wife, Behold, my master wotteth not what is with me in the house, and he hath committed all that he hath to my hand;
woundedst (1)
	Habakkuk 3.13 Thou wentest forth for the salvation of thy people, even for salvation with thine anointed; thou woundedst the head out of the house of the wicked, by discovering the foundation unto the neck. Selah.
woundeth (1)
	Job 5.18 For he maketh sore, and bindeth up: he woundeth, and his hands make whole.
wounding (1)
	Genesis 4.23 And Lamech said unto his wives, Adah and Zillah, Hear my voice; ye wives of Lamech, hearken unto my speech: for I have slain a man to my wounding, and a young man to my hurt.
wove (1)
	2 Kings 23.7 And he brake down the houses of the sodomites, that were by the house of the LORD, where the women wove hangings for the grove.
wraths (1)
	2 Corinthians 12.20 For I fear, lest, when I come, I shall not find you such as I would, and that I shall be found unto you such as ye would not: lest there be debates, envyings, wraths, strifes, backbitings, whisperings, swellings, tumults:
wreath (1)
	2 Chronicles 4.13 And four hundred pomegranates on the two wreaths; two rows of pomegranates on each wreath, to cover the two pommels of the chapiters which were upon the pillars.
wreathed (1)
	Lamentations 1.14 The yoke of my transgressions is bound by his hand: they are wreathed, and come up upon my neck: he hath made my strength to fall, the LORD hath delivered me into their hands, from whom I am not able to rise up.
wrestle (1)
	Ephesians 6.12 For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places.
wrestlings (1)
	Genesis 30.8 And Rachel said, With great wrestlings have I wrestled with my sister, and I have prevailed: and she called his name Naphtali.
wretchedness (1)
	Numbers 11.15 And if thou deal thus with me, kill me, I pray thee, out of hand, if I have found favour in thy sight; and let me not see my wretchedness.
wringed (1)
	Judges 6.38 And it was so: for he rose up early on the morrow, and thrust the fleece together, and wringed the dew out of the fleece, a bowl full of water.
wringing (1)
	Proverbs 30.33 Surely the churning of milk bringeth forth butter, and the wringing of the nose bringeth forth blood: so the forcing of wrath bringeth forth strife.
wrinkle (1)
	Ephesians 5.27 That he might present it to himself a glorious church, not having spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing; but that it should be holy and without blemish.
wrinkles (1)
	Job 16.8 And thou hast filled me with wrinkles, which is a witness against me: and my leanness rising up in me beareth witness to my face.
writeth (1)
	Psalms (prose) 87.6 The LORD shall count, when he writeth up the people, that this man was born there. Selah.
writings (1)
	John 5.47 But if ye believe not his writings, how shall ye believe my words?
wrongeth (1)
	Proverbs 8.36 But he that sinneth against me wrongeth his own soul: all they that hate me love death.
wroughtest (1)
	Ruth 2.19 And her mother in law said unto her, Where hast thou gleaned to day?  and where wroughtest thou? blessed be he that did take knowledge of thee. And she shewed her mother in law with whom she had wrought, and said, The man's name with whom I wrought to day is Boaz.
yearn (1)
	Genesis 43.30 And Joseph made haste; for his bowels did yearn upon his brother: and he sought where to weep; and he entered into his chamber, and wept there.
yearned (1)
	1 Kings 3.26 Then spake the woman whose the living child was unto the king, for her bowels yearned upon her son, and she said, O my lord, give her the living child, and in no wise slay it. But the other said, Let it be neither mine nor thine, but divide it.
yell (1)
	Jeremiah 51.38 They shall roar together like lions: they shall yell as lions' whelps.
yelled (1)
	Jeremiah 2.15 The young lions roared upon him, and yelled, and they made his land waste: his cities are burned without inhabitant.
yoked (1)
	2 Corinthians 6.14 Be ye not unequally yoked together with unbelievers: for what fellowship hath righteousness with unrighteousness? and what communion hath light with darkness?
yokefellow (1)
	Philippians 4.3 And I intreat thee also, true yokefellow, help those women which laboured with me in the gospel, with Clement also, and with other my fellowlabourers, whose names are in the book of life.
youthful (1)
	2 Timothy 2.22 Flee also youthful lusts: but follow righteousness, faith, charity, peace, with them that call on the Lord out of a pure heart.
zaanaim (1)
	Judges 4.11 Now Heber the Kenite, which was of the children of Hobab the father in law of Moses, had severed himself from the Kenites, and pitched his tent unto the plain of Zaanaim, which is by Kedesh.
zaanan (1)
	Micah 1.11 Pass ye away, thou inhabitant of Saphir, having thy shame naked: the inhabitant of Zaanan came not forth in the mourning of Bethezel; he shall receive of you his standing.
zaanannim (1)
	Joshua 19.33 And their coast was from Heleph, from Allon to Zaanannim, and Adami, Nekeb, and Jabneel, unto Lakum; and the outgoings thereof were at Jordan:
zaavan (1)
	Genesis 36.27 The children of Ezer are these; Bilhan, and Zaavan, and Akan.
zabbud (1)
	Ezra 8.14 Of the sons also of Bigvai; Uthai, and Zabbud, and with them seventy males.
zabud (1)
	1 Kings 4.5 And Azariah the son of Nathan was over the officers: and Zabud the son of Nathan was principal officer, and the king's friend:
zacchur (1)
	1 Chronicles 4.26 And the sons of Mishma; Hamuel his son, Zacchur his son, Shimei his son.
zacher (1)
	1 Chronicles 8.31 And Gedor, and Ahio, and Zacher.
zadoks (1)
	2 Samuel 15.36 Behold, they have there with them their two sons, Ahimaaz Zadok's son, and Jonathan Abiathar's son; and by them ye shall send unto me every thing that ye can hear.
zaham (1)
	2 Chronicles 11.19 Which bare him children; Jeush, and Shamariah, and Zaham.
zair (1)
	2 Kings 8.21 So Joram went over to Zair, and all the chariots with him: and he rose by night, and smote the Edomites which compassed him about, and the captains of the chariots: and the people fled into their tents.
zalaph (1)
	Nehemiah 3.30 After him repaired Hananiah the son of Shelemiah, and Hanun the sixth son of Zalaph, another piece. After him repaired Meshullam the son of Berechiah over against his chamber.
zamzummims (1)
	Deuteronomy 2.20 (That also was accounted a land of giants: giants dwelt therein in old time; and the Ammonites call them Zamzummims;
zaphnathpaaneah (1)
	Genesis 41.45 And Pharaoh called Joseph's name Zaphnathpaaneah; and he gave him to wife Asenath the daughter of Potipherah priest of On. And Joseph went out over all the land of Egypt.
zaphon (1)
	Joshua 13.27 And in the valley, Betharam, and Bethnimrah, and Succoth, and Zaphon, the rest of the kingdom of Sihon king of Heshbon, Jordan and his border, even unto the edge of the sea of Chinnereth on the other side Jordan eastward.
zara (1)
	Matthew 1.3 And Judas begat Phares and Zara of Thamar; and Phares begat Esrom; and Esrom begat Aram;
zareah (1)
	Nehemiah 11.29 And at Enrimmon, and at Zareah, and at Jarmuth,
zareathites (1)
	1 Chronicles 2.53 And the families of Kirjathjearim; the Ithrites, and the Puhites, and the Shumathites, and the Mishraites; of them came the Zareathites, and the Eshtaulites,
zared (1)
	Numbers 21.12 From thence they removed, and pitched in the valley of Zared.
zaretan (1)
	Joshua 3.16 That the waters which came down from above stood and rose up upon an heap very far from the city Adam, that is beside Zaretan: and those that came down toward the sea of the plain, even the salt sea, failed, and were cut off: and the people passed over right against Jericho.
zarethshahar (1)
	Joshua 13.19 And Kirjathaim, and Sibmah, and Zarethshahar in the mount of the valley,
zartanah (1)
	1 Kings 4.12 Baana the son of Ahilud; to him pertained Taanach and Megiddo, and all Bethshean, which is by Zartanah beneath Jezreel, from Bethshean to Abelmeholah, even unto the place that is beyond Jokneam:
zarthan (1)
	1 Kings 7.46 In the plain of Jordan did the king cast them, in the clay ground between Succoth and Zarthan.
zatthu (1)
	Nehemiah 10.14 The chief of the people; Parosh, Pahathmoab, Elam, Zatthu, Bani,
zavan (1)
	1 Chronicles 1.42 The sons of Ezer; Bilhan, and Zavan, and Jakan. The sons of Dishan; Uz, and Aran.
zaza (1)
	1 Chronicles 2.33 And the sons of Jonathan; Peleth, and Zaza. These were the sons of Jerahmeel.
zebina (1)
	Ezra 10.43 Of the sons of Nebo; Jeiel, Mattithiah, Zabad, Zebina, Jadau, and Joel, Benaiah.
zebudah (1)
	2 Kings 23.36 Jehoiakim was twenty and five years old when he began to reign; and he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Zebudah, the daughter of Pedaiah of Rumah.
zebulunites (1)
	Numbers 26.27 These are the families of the Zebulunites according to those that were numbered of them, threescore thousand and five hundred.
zedekiahs (1)
	Jeremiah 39.7 Moreover he put out Zedekiah's eyes, and bound him with chains, to carry him to Babylon.
zelzah (1)
	1 Samuel 10.2 When thou art departed from me to day, then thou shalt find two men by Rachel's sepulchre in the border of Benjamin at Zelzah; and they will say unto thee, The asses which thou wentest to seek are found: and, lo, thy father hath left the care of the asses, and sorroweth for you, saying, What shall I do for my son?
zemira (1)
	1 Chronicles 7.8 And the sons of Becher; Zemira, and Joash, and Eliezer, and Elioenai, and Omri, and Jerimoth, and Abiah, and Anathoth, and Alameth. All these are the sons of Becher.
zenan (1)
	Joshua 15.37 Zenan, and Hadashah, and Migdalgad,
zenas (1)
	Titus 3.13 Bring Zenas the lawyer and Apollos on their journey diligently, that nothing be wanting unto them.
zephath (1)
	Judges 1.17 And Judah went with Simeon his brother, and they slew the Canaanites that inhabited Zephath, and utterly destroyed it. And the name of the city was called Hormah.
zephathah (1)
	2 Chronicles 14.10 Then Asa went out against him, and they set the battle in array in the valley of Zephathah at Mareshah.
zephi (1)
	1 Chronicles 1.36 The sons of Eliphaz; Teman, and Omar, Zephi, and Gatam, Kenaz, and Timna, and Amalek.
zephon (1)
	Numbers 26.15 The children of Gad after their families: of Zephon, the family of the Zephonites: of Haggi, the family of the Haggites: of Shuni, the family of the Shunites:
zephonites (1)
	Numbers 26.15 The children of Gad after their families: of Zephon, the family of the Zephonites: of Haggi, the family of the Haggites: of Shuni, the family of the Shunites:
zer (1)
	Joshua 19.35 And the fenced cities are Ziddim, Zer, and Hammath, Rakkath, and Chinnereth,
zereda (1)
	1 Kings 11.26 And Jeroboam the son of Nebat, an Ephrathite of Zereda, Solomon's servant, whose mother's name was Zeruah, a widow woman, even he lifted up his hand against the king.
zeredathah (1)
	2 Chronicles 4.17 In the plain of Jordan did the king cast them, in the clay ground between Succoth and Zeredathah.
zererath (1)
	Judges 7.22 And the three hundred blew the trumpets, and the LORD set every man's sword against his fellow, even throughout all the host: and the host fled to Bethshittah in Zererath, and to the border of Abelmeholah, unto Tabbath.
zereth (1)
	1 Chronicles 4.7 And the sons of Helah were, Zereth, and Jezoar, and Ethnan.
zeri (1)
	1 Chronicles 25.3 Of Jeduthun: the sons of Jeduthun; Gedaliah, and Zeri, and Jeshaiah, Hashabiah, and Mattithiah, six, under the hands of their father Jeduthun, who prophesied with a harp, to give thanks and to praise the LORD.
zeror (1)
	1 Samuel 9.1 Now there was a man of Benjamin, whose name was Kish, the son of Abiel, the son of Zeror, the son of Bechorath, the son of Aphiah, a Benjamite, a mighty man of power.
zeruah (1)
	1 Kings 11.26 And Jeroboam the son of Nebat, an Ephrathite of Zereda, Solomon's servant, whose mother's name was Zeruah, a widow woman, even he lifted up his hand against the king.
zethan (1)
	1 Chronicles 7.10 The sons also of Jediael; Bilhan: and the sons of Bilhan; Jeush, and Benjamin, and Ehud, and Chenaanah, and Zethan, and Tharshish, and Ahishahar.
zethar (1)
	Esther 1.10 On the seventh day, when the heart of the king was merry with wine, he commanded Mehuman, Biztha, Harbona, Bigtha, and Abagtha, Zethar, and Carcas, the seven chamberlains that served in the presence of Ahasuerus the king,
zia (1)
	1 Chronicles 5.13 And their brethren of the house of their fathers were, Michael, and Meshullam, and Sheba, and Jorai, and Jachan, and Zia, and Heber, seven.
zibia (1)
	1 Chronicles 8.9 And he begat of Hodesh his wife, Jobab, and Zibia, and Mesha, and Malcham,
ziddim (1)
	Joshua 19.35 And the fenced cities are Ziddim, Zer, and Hammath, Rakkath, and Chinnereth,
zidkijah (1)
	Nehemiah 10.1 Now those that sealed were, Nehemiah, the Tirshatha, the son of Hachaliah, and Zidkijah,
zina (1)
	1 Chronicles 23.10 And the sons of Shimei were, Jahath, Zina, and Jeush, and Beriah. These four were the sons of Shimei.
zions (1)
	Isaiah 62.1 For Zion's sake will I not hold my peace, and for Jerusalem's sake I will not rest, until the righteousness thereof go forth as brightness, and the salvation thereof as a lamp that burneth.